Source: /Users/amitverma/Downloads/Freelance/Quantify/quantify/market_data/Psychological_Books/Jean-Jacques Rousseau_ Gustave Le Bon_ Sigmund Freud_ Charles Ma - CROWD PSYCHOLOGY_ Understanding the Phenomenon and Its Causes (10 Books in One Volume)_ Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the (2017, e-art.pdf
Book: Jean-Jacques Rousseau_ Gustave Le Bon_ Sigmund Freud_ Charles Ma - CROWD PSYCHOLOGY_ Understanding the Phenomenon and Its Causes (10 Books in One Volume)_ Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Gustave Le Bon, Sigmund Freud, Charles Mackay, Wilfred
Trotter, Everett Dean Martin, Walter Lippmann, Gerald Stanley Lee and William
McDougall
CROWD PSYCHOLOGY:
Understanding the Phenomenon
and Its Causes
(10 Books in One Volume)
The Social Contract, The Crowd, Psychology of Revolution, Group
Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, Extraordinary Popular
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, Instincts of the Herd...
Translator: G. D. H. Cole and James Strachey e-artnow, 2017
Contact: info@e-artnow.org
ISBN 978-80-268-7986-2
Table of Contents
The Social Contract (Jean-Jacques Rousseau)
The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind (Gustave Le Bon)
The Psychology of Revolution (Gustave Le Bon)
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (Sigmund Freud)
Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (Charles
Mackay)
Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War (Wilfred Trotter)
The Behavior of Crowds: A Psychological Study (Everett Dean Martin)
Public Opinion (Walter Lippmann)
Crowds: A Moving-Picture of Democracy (Gerald Stanley Lee)
The Group Mind: A Sketch of the Principles of Collective Psychology
(William McDougall)
The Social Contract
(Jean-Jacques Rousseau)
Table of Contents
Translated with Introduction
by G. D. H. Cole
Table of Contents
Introduction
Foreword
Book I
Chapter I. Subject of the First Book
Chapter II. The First Societies
Chapter III. The Right of the Strongest
Chapter IV. Slavery
Chapter V. That We Must Always Go Back to a First Convention
Chapter VI. The Social Compact
Chapter VII. The Sovereign
Chapter VIII. The Civil State
Chapter IX. Real Property
Book II
Chapter I. That Sovereignty is Inalienable
Chapter II. That Sovereignty is Indivisible
Chapter III. Whether the General Will is Fallible
Chapter IV. The Limits of the Sovereign Power
Chapter V. The Right of Life and Death
Chapter VI. Law
Chapter VII. The Legislator
Chapter VIII. The People
Chapter IX. The People (continued)
Chapter X. The People (continued)
Chapter XI. The Various Systems of Legislation
Chapter XII. The Division of the Laws
Book III
Chapter I. Government in General
Chapter II. The Constituent Principle in the Various Forms of
Government
Chapter III. The Division of Governments
Chapter IV. Democracy
Chapter V. Aristocracy
Chapter VI. Monarchy
Chapter VII. Mixed Governments
Chapter VIII. That All Forms of Government Do Not Suit All
Countries
Chapter IX. The Marks of a Good Government
Chapter X. The Abuse of Government and Its Tendency to
Degenerate
Chapter XI. The Death of the Body Politic
Chapter XII. How the Sovereign Authority Maintains Itself
Chapter XIII. The Same (continued)
Chapter XIV. The Same (continued)
Chapter XV. Deputies or Representatives
Chapter XVI. That the Institution of Government is Not a Contract
Chapter XVII. The Institution of Government
Chapter XVIII. How to Check the Usurpations of Government
Book IV
Chapter I. That the General Will is Indestructible
Chapter II. Voting
Chapter III. Elections
Chapter IV. The Roman Comitia
Chapter V. The Tribunate
Chapter VI. The Dictatorship
Chapter VII. The Censorship
Chapter VIII. Civil Religion
Chapter IX. Conclusion
A Discourse on the Arts and Sciences
A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality
Appendix
A Discourse on Political Economy
Introduction
Table of Contents
For the study of the great writers and thinkers of the past, historical
imagination is the first necessity. Without mentally referring to the
environment in which they lived, we cannot hope to penetrate below the
inessential and temporary to the absolute and permanent value of their
thought. Theory, no less than action, is subject to these necessities; the form
in which men cast their speculations, no less than the ways in which they
behave, are the result of the habits of thought and action which they find
around them. Great men make, indeed, individual contributions to the
knowledge of their times; but they can never transcend the age in which
they live. The questions they try to answer will always be those their
contemporaries are asking; their statement of fundamental problems will
always be relative to the traditional statements that have been handed down
to them. When they are stating what is most startlingly new, they will be
most likely to put it in an old-fashioned form, and to use the inadequate
ideas and formulae of tradition to express the deeper truths towards which
they are feeling their way. They will be most the children of their age, when
they are rising most above it.
Rousseau has suffered as much as any one from critics without a sense
of history. He has been cried up and cried down by democrats and
oppressors with an equal lack of understanding and imagination. His name,
a hundred and fifty years after the publication of the Social Contract, is still
a controversial watchword and a party cry. He is accepted as one of the
greatest writers France has produced; but even now men are inclined, as
political bias prompts them, to accept or reject his political doctrines as a
whole, without sifting them or attempting to understand and discriminate.
He is still revered or hated as the author who, above all others, inspired the
French Revolution.
At the present day, his works possess a double significance. They are
important historically, alike as giving us an insight into the mind of the
eighteenth century, and for the actual influence they have had on the course
of events in Europe. Certainly no other writer of the time has exercised such
an influence as his. He may fairly be called the parent of the romantic
movement in art, letters and life; he affected profoundly the German
romantics and Goethe himself; he set the fashion of a new introspection
which has permeated nineteenth century literature; he began modern
educational theory; and, above all, in political thought he represents the
passage from a traditional theory rooted in the Middle Ages to the modern
philosophy of the State. His influence on Kant's moral philosophy and on
Hegel's philosophy of Right are two sides of the same fundamental
contribution to modern thought. He is, in fact, the great forerunner of
German and English Idealism.
It would not be possible, in the course of a short introduction, to deal
both with the positive content of Rousseau's thought and with the actual
influence he has had on practical affairs. The statesmen of the French
Revolution, from Robespierre downwards, were throughout profoundly
affected by the study of his works. Though they seem often to have
misunderstood him, they had on the whole studied him with the attention he
demands. In the nineteenth century, men continued to appeal to Rousseau,
without, as a rule, knowing him well or penetrating deeply into his
meaning. "The Social Contract," says M. Dreyfus-Brisac, "is the book of all
books that is most talked of and least read." But with the great revival of
interest in political philosophy there has come a desire for the better
understanding of Rousseau's work. He is again being studied more as a
thinker and less as an ally or an opponent; there is more eagerness to sift the
true from the false, and to seek in the Social Contract the "principles of
political right," rather than the great revolutionary's ipse dixit in favour of
some view about circumstances which he could never have; contemplated.
The Social Contract, then, may be regarded either as a document of the
French Revolution, or as one of the greatest books dealing with political
philosophy. It is in the second capacity, as a work of permanent value
containing truth, that it finds a place among the world's great books. It is in
that capacity also that it will be treated in this introduction. Taking it in this
aspect, we have no less need of historical insight than if we came to it as
historians pure and simple. To understand—its value we must grasp its
limitations; when the questions it answers seem unnaturally put, we must
not conclude that they are meaningless; we must see if the answer still holds
when the question is put in a more up-to-date form.
First, then, we must always remember that Rousseau is writing in the
eighteenth century, and for the most part in France. Neither the French
monarchy nor the Genevese aristocracy loved outspoken criticism, and
Rousseau had always to be very careful what he said. This may seem a
curious statement to make about a man who suffered continual persecution
on account of his subversive doctrines; but, although Rousseau was one of
the most daring writers of his time, he was forced continually to moderate
his language and, as a rule, to confine himself to generalisation instead of
attacking particular abuses. Rousseau's theory has often been decried as too
abstract and metaphysical. This is in many ways its great strength; but
where it is excessively so, the accident of time is to blame. In the eighteenth
century it was, broadly speaking, safe to generalise and unsafe to
particularise. Scepticism and discontent were the prevailing temper of the
intellectual classes, and a short-sighted despotism held that, as long as they
were confined to these, they would do little harm. Subversive doctrines
were only regarded as dangerous when they were so put as to appeal to the
masses; philosophy was regarded as impotent. The intellectuals of the
eighteenth century therefore generalised to their hearts' content, and as a
rule suffered little for their lèse-majesté: Voltaire is the typical example of
such generalisation. The spirit of the age favoured such methods, and it was
therefore natural for Rousseau to pursue them. But his general remarks had
such a way of bearing very obvious particular applications, and were so
obviously inspired by a particular attitude towards the government of his
day, that even philosophy became in his hands unsafe, and he was attacked
for what men read between the lines of his works. It is owing to this faculty
of giving his generalisations content and actuality that Rousseau has
become the father of modern political philosophy. He uses the method of
his time only to transcend it; out of the abstract and general he creates the
concrete and universal.
Secondly, we must not forget that Rousseau's theories are to be studied
in a wider historical environment. If he is the first of modern political
theorists, he is also the last of a long line of Renaissance theorists, who in
turn inherit and transform the concepts of mediæval thought. So many
critics have spent so much wasted time in proving that Rousseau was not
original only because they began by identifying originality with isolation:
they studied first the Social Contract by itself, out of relation to earlier
works, and then, having discovered that these earlier works resembled it,
decided that everything it had to say was borrowed. Had they begun their
study in a truly historical spirit, they would have seen that Rousseau's
importance lies just in the new use he makes of old ideas, in the transition
he makes from old to new in the general conception of politics. No mere
innovator could have exercised such an influence or hit on so much truth.
Theory makes no great leaps; it proceeds to new concepts by the adjustment
and renovation of old ones. Just as theological writers on politics, from
Hooker to Bossuet, make use of Biblical terminology and ideas; just as
more modern writers, from Hegel to Herbert Spencer, make use of the
concept of evolution, Rousseau uses the ideas and terms of the Social
Contract theory. We should feel, throughout his work, his struggle to free
himself from what is lifeless and outworn in that theory, while he develops
out of it fruitful conceptions that go beyond its scope. A too rigid literalism
in the interpretation of Rousseau's thought may easily reduce it to the
possession of a merely "historical interest": if we approach it in a truly
historical spirit, we shall be able to appreciate at once its temporary and its
lasting value, to see how it served his contemporaries, and at the same time
to disentangle from it what may be serviceable to us and for all time.
Rousseau's Emile, the greatest of all works on education, has already
been issued in this series. In this volume are contained the most important
of his political works. Of these the Social Contract, by far the most
significant, is the latest in date. It represents the maturity of his thought,
while the other works only illustrate his development. Born in 1712, he
issued no work of importance till 1750; but he tells us, in the Confessions,
that in 1743, when he was attached to the Embassy at Venice, he had
already conceived the idea of a great work on Political Institutions, "which
was to put the seal on his reputation." He seems, however, to have made
little progress with this work, until in 1749 he happened to light on the
announcement of a prize offered by the Academy of Dijon for an answer to
the question, "Has the progress of the arts and sciences tended to the
purification or to the corruption of morality?" His old ideas came thronging
back, and sick at heart of the life he had been leading among the Paris
lumières, he composed a violent and rhetorical diatribe against civilisation
generally. In the following year, this work, having been awarded the prize
by the Academy, was published by its author. His success was
instantaneous; he became at once a famous man, the "lion" of Parisian
literary circles. Refutations of his work were issued by professors,
scribblers, outraged theologians and even by the King of Poland. Rousseau
endeavoured to answer them all, and in the course of argument his thought
developed. From 1750 to the publication of the Social Contract and Emile
in 1762 he gradually evolved his views: in those twelve years he made his
unique contribution to political thought.
The Discourse on the Arts and Sciences, the earliest of the works
reproduced in this volume, is not in itself of very great importance.
Rousseau has given his opinion of it in the Confessions. "Full of warmth
and force, it is wholly without logic or order; of all my works it is the
weakest in argument and the least harmonious. But whatever gifts a man
may be born with, he cannot learn the art of writing in a moment." This
criticism is just. The first Discourse neither is, nor attempts to be, a
reasoned or a balanced production. It is the speech of an advocate, wholly
one-sided and arbitrary, but so obviously and naively one-sided, that it is
difficult for us to believe in its entire seriousness. At the most, it is only a
rather brilliant but flimsy rhetorical effort, a sophistical improvisation, but
not a serious contribution to thought. Yet it is certain that this declamation
made Rousseau's name, and established his position as a great writer in
Parisian circles. D'Alembert even devoted the preface of the Encyclopædia
to a refutation. The plan of the first Discourse is essentially simple: it sets
out from the badness, immorality and misery of modern nations, traces all
these ills to the departure from a "natural" state, and then credits the
progress of the arts and sciences with being the cause of that departure. In
it, Rousseau is already in possession of his idea of "nature" as an ideal; but
he has at present made no attempt to discriminate, in what is unnatural,
between good and bad. He is merely using a single idea, putting it as
strongly as he can, and neglecting all its limitations. The first Discourse is
important not for any positive doctrine it contains, but as a key to the
development of Rousseau's mind. Here we see him at the beginning of the
long journey which was to lead on at last to the theory of the Social
Contract.
In 1755 appeared the Discourse on the Origin and Foundation of
Inequality among Men, which is the second of the works given in this
volume. With this essay, Rousseau had unsuccessfully competed in 1753 for
a second prize offered by the Academy of Dijon, and he now issued it
prefaced by a long Dedication to the Republic of Geneva. In this work,
which Voltaire, in thanking him for a presentation copy, termed his "second
book against the human race," his style and his ideas have made a great
advance; he is no longer content merely to push a single idea to extremes:
while preserving the broad opposition between the state of nature and the
state of society, which runs through all his work, he is concerned to present
a rational justification of his views and to admit that a little at any rate may
be said on the other side. Moreover, the idea of "nature" has already
undergone a great development; it is no longer an empty opposition to the
evils of society; it possesses a positive content. Thus half the Discourse on
Inequality is occupied by an imaginary description of the state of nature, in
which man is shown with ideas limited within the narrowest range, with
little need of his fellows, and little care beyond provision for the necessities
of the moment. Rousseau declares explicitly that he does not suppose the
"state of nature" ever to have existed: it is a pure "idea of reason," a
working concept reached by abstraction from the "state of society." The
"natural man," as opposed to "man's man," is man stripped of all that
society confers upon him, a creature formed by a process of abstraction, and
never intended for a historical portrait. The conclusion of the Discourse
favours not this purely abstract being, but a state of savagery intermediate
between the "natural" and the "social" conditions, in which men may
preserve the simplicity and the advantages of nature and at the same time
secure the rude comforts and assurances of early society. In one of the long
notes appended to the Discourse, Rousseau further explains his position. He
does not wish, he says, that modern corrupt society should return to a state
of nature: corruption has gone too far for that; he only desires now that men
should palliate, by wiser use of the fatal arts, the mistake of their
introduction. He recognises society as inevitable and is already feeling his
way towards a justification of it. The second Discourse represents a second
stage in his political thought: the opposition between the state of nature and
the state of society is still presented in naked contrast; but the picture of the
former has already filled out, and it only remains for Rousseau to take a
nearer view of the fundamental implications of the state of society for his
thought to reach maturity.
Rousseau is often blamed, by modern critics, for pursuing in the
Discourses a method apparently that of history, but in reality wholly
unhistorical. But it must be remembered that he himself lays no stress on
the historical aspect of his work; he gives himself out as constructing a
purely ideal picture, and not as depicting any actual stages in human
history. The use of false historical concepts is characteristic of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and Rousseau is more to be
congratulated on having escaped from giving them too much importance
than criticised for employing them at all.
It is doubtful whether the Discourse on Political Economy, first printed
in the great Encyclopædia in 1755, was composed before or after the
Discourse on Inequality. At first sight the former seems to be far more in
the manner of the Social Contract and to contain views belonging
essentially to Rousseau's constructive period. It would not, however, be safe
to conclude from this that its date is really later. The Discourse on
Inequality still has about it much of the rhetorical looseness of the prize
essay; it aims not so much at close reasoning as at effective and popular
presentation of a case. But, by reading between the lines, an attentive
student can detect in it a great deal of the positive doctrine afterwards
incorporated in the Social Contract. Especially in the closing section, which
lays down the plan of a general treatment of the fundamental questions of
politics, we are already to some extent in the atmosphere of the later works.
It is indeed almost certain that Rousseau never attempted to put into either
of the first two Discourses any of the positive content of his political theory.
They were intended, not as final expositions of his point of view, but as
partial and preliminary studies, in which his aim was far more destructive
than constructive. It is clear that in first conceiving the plan of a work on
Political Institutions, Rousseau cannot have meant to regard all society as
in essence bad. It is indeed evident that he meant, from the first, to study
human society and institutions in their rational aspect, and that he was
rather diverted from his main purpose by the Academy of Dijon's
competition than first induced by it to think about political questions. It
need, therefore, cause no surprise that a work probably written before the
Discourse on Inequality should contain the germs of the theory given in full
in the Social Contract. The Discourse on Political Economy is important as
giving the first sketch of the theory of the "General Will." It will readily be
seen that Rousseau does not mean by "political economy" exactly what we
mean nowadays. He begins with a discussion of the fundamental nature of
the State, and the possibility of reconciling its existence with human liberty,
and goes on with an admirable short study of the principles of taxation. He
is thinking throughout of "political" in the sense of "public" economy, of the
State as the public financier, and not of the conditions governing industry.
He conceives the State as a body aiming at the well-being of all its
members and subordinates all his views of taxation to that end. He who has
only necessaries should not be taxed at all; superfluities should be
supertaxed; there should be heavy imposts on every sort of luxury. The first
part of the article is still more interesting. Rousseau begins by demolishing
the exaggerated parallel so often drawn between the State and the family;
he shows that the State is not, and cannot be, patriarchal in nature, and goes
on to lay down his view that its real being consists in the General Will of its
members. The essential features of the Social Contract are present in this
Discourse almost as if they were commonplaces, certainly not as if they
were new discoveries on which the author had just hit by some happy
inspiration. There is every temptation, after reading the Political Economy,
to suppose that Rousseau's political ideas really reached maturity far earlier
than has generally been allowed.
The Social Contract finally appeared, along with Emile, in 1762. This
year, therefore, represents in every respect the culmination of Rousseau's
career. Henceforth, he was to write only controversial and confessional
works; his theories were now developed, and, simultaneously, he gave to
the world his views on the fundamental problems of politics and education.
It is now time to ask what Rousseau's system, in its maturity, finally
amounted to The Social Contract contains practically the whole of his
constructive political theory; it requires to be read, for full understanding, in
connection with his other works, especially Emile and the Letters on the
Mount (1764), but in the main it is self-contained and complete. The title
sufficiently defines its scope. It is called The Social Contract or Principles
of Political Right, and the second title explains the first. Rousseau's object
is not to deal, in a general way, like Montesquieu, with the actual
institutions of existing States, but to lay down the essential principles which
must form the basis of every legitimate society. Rousseau himself, in the
fifth book of the Emile, has stated the difference clearly. "Montesquieu," he
says, "did not intend to treat of the principles of political right; he was
content to treat of the positive right (or law) of established governments;
and no two studies could be more different than these." Rousseau then
conceives his object as being something very different from that of the
Spirit of the Laws, and it is a wilful error to misconstrue his purpose. When
he remarks that "the facts," the actual history of political societies, "do not
concern him," he is not contemptuous of facts; he is merely asserting the
sure principle that a fact can in no case give rise to a right. His desire is to
establish society on a basis of pure right, so as at once to disprove his attack
on society generally and to reinforce his criticism of existing societies.
Round this point centres the whole dispute about the methods proper to
political theory. There are, broadly speaking, two schools of political
theorists, if we set aside the psychologists. One school, by collecting facts,
aims at reaching broad generalisations about what actually happens in
human societies! the other tries to penetrate to the universal principles at the
root of all human combination. For the latter purpose facts may be useful,
but in themselves they can prove nothing. The question is not one of fact,
but one of right.
Rousseau belongs essentially to this philosophical school. He is not, as
his less philosophic critics seem to suppose, a purely abstract thinker
generalising from imaginary historical instances; he is a concrete thinker
trying to get beyond they inessential and changing to the permanent and
invariable basis of human society. Like Green, he is in search of the
principle of political obligation, and beside this quest all others fall into
their place as secondary and derivative. It is required to find a form of
association able to defend and protect with the whole common force the
person and goods of every associate, and of such a nature, that each, uniting
himself with all, may still obey only himself, and remain as free as before.
This is the fundamental problem of which the Social Contract provides the
solution. The problem of political obligation is seen as including all other
political problems, which fall into place in a system based upon it. How,
Rousseau asks, can the will of the State help being for me a merely external
will, imposing itself upon my own? How can the existence of the State be
reconciled with human freedom? How can man, who is born free, rightly
come to be everywhere in chains?
No-one could help understanding the central problem of the Social
Contract immediately, were it not that its doctrines often seem to be
strangely formulated. We have seen that this strangeness is due to
Rousseau's historical position, to his use of the political concepts current in
his own age, and to his natural tendency to build on the foundations laid by
his predecessors. There are a great many people whose idea of Rousseau
consists solely of the first words of the opening chapter of the Social
Contract, "Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains." But, they tell
you, man is not born free, even if he is everywhere in chains. Thus at the
very outset we are faced with the great difficulty in appreciating Rousseau.
When we should naturally say "man ought to be free," or perhaps "man is
born for freedom," he prefers to say "man is born free," by which he means
exactly the same thing. There is doubtless, in his way of putting it, an
appeal to a "golden age"; but this golden age is admittedly as imaginary as
the freedom to which men are born is bound, for most of them, to be.
Elsewhere Rousseau puts the point much as we might put it ourselves.
"Nothing is more certain than that every man born in slavery is born for
slavery.... But if there are slaves by nature, it is because there have been
slaves against nature" (Social Contract, Book I, chap. ii).
We have seen that the contrast between the "state of nature" and the
"state of society" runs through all Rousseau's work. The Emile is a plea for
"natural" education; the Discourses are a plea for a "naturalisation" of
society; the New Héloïse is the romantic's appeal for more "nature" in
human relationships. What then is the position of this contrast in Rousseau's
mature political thought? It is clear that the position is not merely that of the
Discourses. In them, he envisaged only the faults of actual societies; now,
he is concerned with the possibility of a rational society. His aim is to
justify the change from "nature" to "society," although it has left men in
chains. He is in search of the true society, which leaves men "as free as
before." Altogether, the space occupied by the idea of nature in the Social
Contract is very small. It is used of necessity in the controversial chapters,
in which Rousseau is refuting false theories of social obligation; but when
once he has brushed aside the false prophets, he lets the idea of nature go
with them, and concerns himself solely with giving society the rational
sanction he has promised. It becomes clear that, in political matters at any
rate, the "state of nature" is for him only a term of controversy. He has in
effect abandoned, in so far as he ever held it, the theory of a human golden
age; and where, as in the Emile, he makes use of the idea of nature, it is
broadened and deepened out of all recognition. Despite many passages in
which the old terminology cleaves to him, he means by "nature" in this
period not the original state of a thing, nor even its reduction to the simplest
terms: he is passing over to the conception of "nature" as identical with the
full development of capacity, with the higher! idea of human freedom. This
view may be seen in germ even in the Discourse on Inequality, where,
distinguishing self-respect (amour de soi) from egoism (amour-propre),
Rousseau makes the former, the property of the "natural" man, consist not
in the desire for self-aggrandisement, but in the seeking of satisfaction for
reasonable desire accompanied by benevolence; whereas egoism is the
preference of our own interests to those of others, self-respect merely puts
us on an equal footing with our fellows. It is true that in the Discourse
Rousseau is pleading against the development of many human faculties; but
he is equally advocating the fullest development of those he regards as
"natural," by which he means merely "good." The "state of society," as
envisaged in the Social Contract, is no longer in contradiction to the "state
of nature" upheld in the Emile, where indeed the social environment is of
the greatest importance, and, though the pupil is screened from it, he is
none the less being trained for it. Indeed the views given in the Social
Contract are summarised in the fifth book of the Emile, and by this
summary the essential unity of Rousseau's system is emphasised.
Rousseau's object, then, in the first words of the Social Contract, "is to
inquire if, in the civil order, there can be any sure and certain, rule of
administration, taking men as they are and laws as they might be."
Montesquieu took laws as they were, and saw what sort of men they made:
Rousseau, founding his whole system on human freedom, takes man as the
basis, and regards him as giving himself what laws he pleases. He takes his
stand on the nature of human freedom: on this he bases his whole system,
making the will of the members the sole basis of every society.
In working out his theory, Rousseau makes use throughout of three
general and, to some extent, alternative conceptions. These are the Social
Contract, Sovereignty and the General Will. We shall now have to examine
each of these in turn.
The Social Contract theory is as old as the sophists of Greece (see Plato,
Republic, Book II and the Gorgias), and as I elusive. It has been adapted to
the most opposite points of view, and used, in different forms, on both sides
of every question to which it could conceivably be applied. It is frequent in
mediæval writers, a commonplace with the theorists of the Renaissance,
and in the eighteenth century already nearing its fall before a wider
conception. It would be a long, as well as a thankless, task to trace its
history over again: it may be followed best in D. G. Ritchie's admirable
essay on it in Darwin and Hegel and Other Studies. For us, it is important
only to regard it in its most general aspect, before studying the special use
made of it by Rousseau. Obviously, in one form or another, it is a theory
very easily arrived at. Wherever any form of government apart from the
merest tyranny exists, reflection on the basis of the State cannot but lead to
the notion that, in one sense or another, it is based on the consent, tacit or
expressed, past or present, of its members. In this alone, the greater part of
the Social Contract theory is already latent. Add the desire to find actual
justification for a theory in facts, and, especially in an age possessed only of
the haziest historical sense, this doctrine of consent will inevitably be given
a historical setting. If in addition there is a tendency to regard society as
something unnatural to humanity, the tendency will become irresistible. By
writers of almost all schools, the State will be represented as having arisen,
in some remote age, out of a compact or, in more legal phrase, contract
between two or more parties. The only class that will be able to resist the
doctrine is that which maintains the divine right of kings, and holds that all
existing governments were were imposed on the people by the direct
interposition of God. All who are not prepared to maintain that will be
partisans of some form or other of the Social Contract theory.
It is, therefore, not surprising that we find among its advocates writers
of the most opposite points of view. Barely stated, it is a mere formula,
which may be filled in with any content from absolutism to pure
republicanism. And, in the hands of some at least of its supporters, it turns
out to be a weapon that cuts both ways. We shall be in a better position to
judge of its usefulness when we have seen its chief varieties at work.
All Social Contract theories that are at all definite fall under one or
other of two heads. They represent society as based on an original contract
either between the people and the government, or between all the
individuals composing the State. Historically, modern theory passes from
the first to the second of these forms.
The doctrine that society is founded on a contract between the people
and the government is of mediæval origin. It was often supported by
references to the Old Testament, which contains a similar view in an
unreflective form. It is found in most of the great political writers of the
sixteenth century; in Buchanan, and in the writings of James I: it persists
into the seventeenth in the works of Grotius and Puffendorf. Grotius is
sometimes held to have stated the theory so as to admit both forms of
contract; but it is clear that he is only thinking of the first form as admitting
democratic as well as monarchical government. We find it put very clearly
by the Convention Parliament of 1688, which accuses James II of having
"endeavoured to subvert the constitution of the kingdom by breaking the
original contract between king and people." While Hobbes, on the side of
the royalists, is maintaining the contract theory in its second form, the
Parliamentarian Algernon Sidney adheres to the idea of a contract between
the people and the government.
In this form, the theory clearly admits of opposite interpretations. It may
be held that the people, having given itself up once for all to its rulers, has
nothing more to ask of them, and is bound to submit to any usage they may
choose to inflict. This, however, is not the implication most usually drawn
from it. The theory, in this form, originated with theologians who were also
lawyers. Their view of a contract implied mutual obligations; they regarded
the ruler as bound, by its terms, to govern constitutionally. The old idea that
a king must not violate the sacred customs of the realm passes easily into
the doctrine that he must not violate the terms of the original contract
between himself and his people. Just as in the days of the Norman kings,
every appeal on the part of the people for more liberties was couched in the
form of a demand that the customs of the "good old times" of Edward the
Confessor should be respected, so in the seventeenth century every act of
popular assertion or resistance was stated as an appeal to the king not to
violate the contract. The demand was a good popular cry, and it seemed to
have the theorists behind it. Rousseau gives his refutation of this view,
which he had, in the Discourse on Inequality, maintained in passing, in the
sixteenth chapter of the third book of the Social Contract. (See also Book I,
chap, iv, init.) His attack is really concerned also with the theory of Hobbes,
which in some respects resembles, as we shall see, this first view; but, in
form at least, it is directed against this form of contract. It will be possible
to examine it more closely, when the second view has been considered.
The second view, which may be called the Social Contract theory
proper, regards society as originating in, or based on, an agreement between
the individuals composing it. It seems to be found first, rather vaguely, in
Richard Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, from which Locke largely
borrowed: and it reappears, in varying forms, in Milton's Tenure of Kings
and Magistrates, in Hobbes's Leviathan, in Locke's Treatises on Civil
Government, and in Rousseau. The best-known instance of its actual use is
by the Pilgrim Fathers on the Mayflower in 1620, in whose declaration
occurs the phrase, "We do solemnly and mutually, in the presence of God
and of one another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a civil
body politic." The natural implication of this view would seem to be the
corollary of complete popular Sovereignty which Rousseau draws. But
before Rousseau's time it had been used to support views as diverse as those
which rested on the first form. We saw that, in Grotius's great work, De Jure
Belli et Pacis, it was already possible to doubt which of the two theories
was being advocated. The first theory was, historically, a means of popular
protest against royal aggression. As soon as popular government was taken
into account, the act of contract between people and government became in
effect merely a contract between the individuals composing the society, and
readily passed over into the second form.
The second theory, in its ordinary form, expresses only the view that the
people is everywhere Sovereign, and that, in the phrase of Milton's treatise,
"the power of kings and magistrates is only derivative." Before, however,
this view had been worked up into a philosophical theory, it had already
been used by Hobbes to support precisely opposite principles. Hobbes
agrees that the original contract is one between all the individuals
composing the State, and that the government is no party to it; but he
regards the people as agreeing, not merely to form a State, but to invest a
certain person or certain persons with the government of it. He agrees that
the people is naturally supreme, but regards it as alienating its Sovereignty
by the contract itself, and delegating its power, wholly and for ever, to the
government. As soon, therefore, as the State is set up, the government
becomes for Hobbes the Sovereign; there is no more question of popular
Sovereignty, but only of passive obedience: the people is bound, by the
contract, to obey its ruler, no matter whether he governs well or ill. It has
alienated all its rights to the Sovereign, who is, therefore, absolute master.
Hobbes, living in a time of civil wars, regards the worst government as
better than anarchy, and is, therefore, at pains to find arguments in support
of any form of absolutism. It is easy to pick holes in this system, and to see
into what difficulties a conscientious Hobbist might be led by a revolution.
For as soon as the revolutionaries get the upper hand, he will have to
sacrifice one of his principles: he will have to side against either the actual
or the legitimate Sovereign. It is easy also to see that alienation of liberty,
even if possible for an individual, which Rousseau denies, cannot bind his
posterity. But, with all its faults, the view of Hobbes is on the whole
admirably, if ruthlessly, logical, and to it Rousseau owes a great deal.
The special shape given to the second Social Contract theory by Hobbes
looks, at first sight, much like a combination, into a single act, of both the
contracts. This, however, is not the view he adopts. The theory of a contract
between government and people had, as we have seen, been used mainly as
a support for popular liberties, a means of assertion against the government.
Hobbes, whose whole aim is to make his government Sovereign, can only
do this by leaving the government outside the contract: he thus avoids the
necessity of submitting it to any obligation whatsoever, and leaves it
absolute and irresponsible. He secures, in fact, not merely a State which has
unbounded rights against the individual, but a determinate authority with
the right to enforce those rights. His theory is not merely Statism (étatisme);
it is pure despotism.
It is clear that, if such a theory is to be upheld, it can stand only by the
view, which Hobbes shares with Grotius, that a man can alienate not merely
his own liberty, but also that of his descendants, and that, consequently, a
people as a whole can do the same. This is the point at which both Locke
and Rousseau attack it. Locke, whose aim is largely to justify the
Revolution of 1688, makes government depend, not merely at its institution,
but always, on the consent of the governed, and regards all rulers as liable
to be displaced if they govern tyrannically. He omits, however, to provide
any machinery short of revolution for the expression of popular opinion,
and, on the whole, seems to regard the popular consent as something
essentially tacit and assumed. He regards the State as existing mainly to
protect life and property, and is, in all his assertions of popular rights, so
cautious as to reduce them almost to nothing. It is not till we come to
Rousseau that the second form of the contract theory is stated in its purest
and most logical form.
Rousseau sees clearly the necessity, if popular consent in government is
to be more than a name, of giving it some constitutional means of
expression. For Locke's theory of tacit consent, he substitutes an active
agreement periodically renewed. He looks back with admiration to the city-
states of ancient Greece and, in his own day, reserves his admiration for the
Swiss free cities, Berne and, above all, Geneva, his native place. Seeing in
the Europe of his day no case in which representative government was
working at all democratically, he was unable to conceive that means might
be found of giving effect to this active agreement in a nation-state; he
therefore held that self-government was impossible except for a city. He
wished to break up the nation-states of Europe, and create instead federative
leagues of independent city-states.
It matters, however, comparatively little, for the appreciation of
Rousseau's political theory in general, that he failed to become the theorist
of the modern State. By taking the State, which must have, in essentials,
everywhere the same basis, at its simplest, he was able, far better than his
predecessors, to bring out the real nature of the "social tie," an alternative
name which he often uses for the Social Contract. His doctrine I of the
underlying principle of political obligation is that of all great modern
writers, from Kant to Mr. Bosanquet. This fundamental unity has been
obscured only because critics have failed to put the Social Contract theory
in its proper place in Rousseau's system.
This theory was, we have seen, a commonplace. The amount of
historical authenticity assigned to the contract almost universally
presupposed varied enormously. Generally, the weaker a writer's rational
basis, the more he appealed to history—and invented it. It was, therefore,
almost inevitable that Rousseau should cast his theory into the contractual
form. There were, indeed, writers of his time who laughed at the contract,
but they were not writers who constructed a general system of political
philosophy. From Cromwell to Montesquieu and Bentham, it was the
practically minded man, impatient of unactual hypotheses, who refused to
accept the idea of contract. The theorists were as unanimous in its favour as
the Victorians were in favour of the "organic" theory. But we, criticising
them in the light of later events, are in a better position for estimating the
position the Social Contract really took in their political system. We see that
Locke's doctrine of tacit consent made popular control so unreal that he was
forced, if the State was to have any hold, to make his contract historical and
actual, binding posterity for all time, and that he was also led to admit a
quasi-contract between people and government, as a second vindication of
popular liberties. Rousseau, on the other hand, bases no vital argument on
the historical nature of the contract, in which, indeed, he clearly does not
believe. "How," he asks, "did this change [from nature to society] come
about?" And he answers that he does not know. Moreover, his aim is to find
"a sure and legitimate rule of administration, taking men as they are and
laws as they might be"; that is to say, his Social Contract is something
which will be found at work in every legitimate society, but which will be
in abeyance in all forms of despotism. He clearly means by it no more and
no less than the fundamental principle of political association, the basis of
the unity which enables us, in the State, to realise political liberty by giving
up lawlessness and license. The presentation of this doctrine in the quasi-
historical form of the Social Contract theory is due to the accident of the
time and place in which Rousseau wrote. At the same time, the importance
of the conception is best to be seen in the hard death it dies. Though no-one,
for a hundred years or so, has thought of regarding it as historical, it has
been found so hard to secure any other phrase explaining as well or better
the basis of political union that, to this day, the phraseology of the contract
theory largely persists. A conception so vital cannot have been barren.
It is indeed, in Rousseau's own thought, only one of the three different
ways in which the basis of political union is stated, according to the
preoccupation of his mind. When he is thinking quasi-historically, he
describes his doctrine as that of the Social Contract. Modern anthropology,
in its attempts to explain the complex by means of the simple, often strays
further from the straight paths of history and reason. In a semi-legal aspect,
using the terminology, if not the standpoint, of jurisprudence, he restates the
same doctrine in the form of popular Sovereignty. This use tends
continually to pass over into the more philosophical form which comes
third. "Sovereignty is the exercise of the general will." Philosophically,
Rousseau's doctrine finds its expression in the view that the State is based
not on any original convention, not on, any determinate power, but on the
living and sustaining rational will of its members. We have now to examine
first Sovereignty and then the General Will, which is ultimately Rousseau's
guiding conception.
Sovereignty is, first and foremost, a legal term, and it has often been
held that its use in political philosophy merely leads to confusion. In
jurisprudence, we are told, it has the perfectly plain meaning given to it in
Austin's famous definition. The Sovereign is "a determinate human
superior, not in a habit of obedience to a like superior, but receiving
habitual obedience from the bulk of a given society." Where Sovereignty is
placed is, on this view, a question purely of fact, and never of right. We
have only to seek out the determinate human superior in a given society,
and we shall have the Sovereign. In answer to this theory, it is not enough,
though it is a valuable point, to show that such a determinate superior is
rarely to be found. Where, for instance, is the Sovereign of England or of
the British Empire? Is it the King, who is called the Sovereign? Or is it the
Parliament, which is the legislature (for Austin's Sovereign is regarded as
the source of law)? Or is it the electorate, or the whole mass of the
population, with or without the right of voting? Clearly all these exercise a
certain influence in the making of laws. Or finally, is it now the Cabinet?
For Austin, one of these bodies would be ruled out as indeterminate (the
mass of the population) and another as responsible (the Cabinet). But are
we to regard the House of Commons or those who elect it as forming part of
the Sovereign? The search for a determinate Sovereign may be a valuable
legal conception; but it has evidently nothing to do with political theory.
It is, therefore, essential to distinguish between the legal Sovereign of
jurisprudence, and the political Sovereign of political science and
philosophy. Even so, it does not at once become clear what this political
Sovereign may be. Is it the body or bodies of persons in whom political
power in a State actually resides? Is it merely the complex of actual
institutions regarded as embodying the will of the society? This would leave
us still in the realm of mere fact, outside both right and philosophy. The
Sovereign, in the philosophical sense, is neither the nominal Sovereign, nor
the legal Sovereign, nor the political Sovereign of fact and common sense:
it is the consequence of the fundamental bond of union, the restatement of
the doctrine of Social Contract, the foreshadowing of that of General Will.
The Sovereign is that body in the State in which political power ought
always to reside, and in which the right to such power does always reside.
The idea at the back of the philosophical conception of Sovereignty is,
therefore, essentially the same as that we found to underlie the Social
Contract theory. It is the view that the people, whether it can alienate its
right or not, is the ultimate director of its own destinies, the final power
from which there is no appeal. In a sense, this is recognised even by
Hobbes, who makes the power of his absolute Sovereign, the predecessor of
Austin's "determinate human superior," issue first of all from the Social
Contract, which is essentially a popular act. The difference between Hobbes
and Rousseau on this point is solely that Rousseau regards as inalienable a
supreme power which Hobbes makes the people alienate in its first
corporate action. That is to say, Hobbes in fact accepts the theory of popular
supremacy in name only to destroy it in fact; Rousseau asserts the theory in
its only logical form, and is under no temptation to evade it by means of
false historical assumptions. In Locke, a distinction is already drawn
between the legal and the actual Sovereign, which Locke calls "supreme
power"; Rousseau unites the absolute Sovereignty of Hobbes and the
"popular consent" of Locke into the philosophic doctrine of popular
Sovereignty, which has since been the established form of the theory. His
final view represents a return from the perversions of Hobbes to a doctrine
already familiar to mediæval and Renaissance writers; but it is not merely a
return. In its passage the view has fallen into its place in a complete system
of political philosophy.
In a second important respect Rousseau differentiates himself from
Hobbes. For Hobbes, the Sovereign is identical with the government. He is
so hot for absolutism largely because he regards revolution, the overthrow
of the existing government, as at the same time the dissolution of the body
politic, and a return to complete anarchy or to the "state of nature."
Rousseau and, to some extent, Locke meet this view by sharp division
between the supreme power and the government. For Rousseau, they are so
clearly distinct that even a completely democratic government is not at the
same time the Sovereign; its members are sovereign only in a different
capacity and as a different corporate body, just as two different societies
may exist for different purposes with exactly the same members. Pure
democracy, however, the government of the State by all the people in every
detail, is not, as Rousseau says, a possible human institution. All
governments are really mixed in character; and what we call a democracy is
only a more or less democratic government. Government, therefore, will
always be to some extent in the hands of selected persons. Sovereignty, on
the other hand, is in his view absolute, inalienable, indivisible, and
indestructible. It cannot be limited, abandoned, shared or destroyed. It is an
essential part of all social life that the right to control the destinies of the
State belongs in the last resort to the whole people. There clearly must in
the end be somewhere in the society an ultimate court of appeal, whether
determinate or not; but, unless Sovereignty is distinguished from
government, the government, passing under the name of Sovereign, will
inevitably be regarded as absolute. The only way to avoid the conclusions
of Hobbes is, therefore, to establish a clear separation between them.
Rousseau tries to do this by an adaptation of the doctrine of the "three
powers." But instead of three independent powers sharing the supreme
authority, he gives only two, and makes one of these wholly dependent on
the other. He substitutes for the co-ordination of the legislative, the
executive, and the judicial authorities, a system in which the legislative
power, or Sovereign, is always supreme, the executive, or government,
always secondary and derivative, and the judicial power merely a function
of government. This division he makes, naturally, one of will and power.
The government is merely to carry out the decrees, or acts of will, of the
Sovereign people. Just as the human will transfers a command to its
members for execution, so the body politic may give its decisions force by
setting up authority which, like the brain, may command its members. In
delegating the power necessary for the execution of its will, it is abandoning
none of its supreme authority. It remains Sovereign, and can at any moment
recall the grants it has made. Government, therefore, exists only at the
Sovereign's pleasure, and is always revocable by the sovereign will.
It will be seen, when we come to discuss the nature of the General Will,
that this doctrine really contains the most valuable part of Rousseau's
theory. Here, we are concerned rather with its limitations. The distinction
between legislative and executive functions is in practice very hard to draw.
In Rousseau's case, it is further complicated by the presence of a second
distinction. The legislative power, the Sovereign, is concerned only with
what is general, the executive only with what is particular. This distinction,
the full force of which can only be seen in connection with the General
Will, means roughly that a matter is general when it concerns the whole
community equally, and makes no mention of any particular class; as soon
as it refers to any class or person, it becomes particular, and can no longer
form the subject matter of an act of Sovereignty. However just this
distinction may seem in the abstract, it is clear that its effect is to place all
the power in the hands of the executive: modern legislation is almost
always concerned with particular classes and interests. It is not, therefore, a
long step from the view of Rousseau to the modern theory of democratic
government, in which the people has little power beyond that of removing
its rulers if they displease it. As long, however, as we confine our view to
the city-state of which Rousseau is thinking, his distinction is capable of
preserving for the people a greater actual exercise of will. A city can often
generalise where a nation must particularise.
It is in the third book of the Social Contract, where Rousseau is
discussing the problem of government, that it is most essential to remember
that his discussion has in view mainly the city-state and not the nation.
Broadly put, his principle of government is that democracy is possible only
in small States, aristocracy in those of medium extent, and monarchy in
great States (Book III, chap. iii). In considering this view, we have to take
into account two things. First, he rejects representative government; will
being, in his theory, inalienable, representative Sovereignty is impossible.
But, as he regards all general acts as functions of Sovereignty, this means
that no general act can be within the competence of a representative
assembly. In judging this theory, we must take into account all the
circumstances of Rousseau's time. France, Geneva and England were the
three States he took most into account. In France, representative
government was practically non-existent; in Geneva, it was only partially
necessary; in England, it was a mockery, used to support a corrupt oligarchy
against a debased monarchy. Rousseau may well be pardoned for not taking
the ordinary modern view of it. Nor indeed is it, even in the modern world,
so satisfactory an instrument of the popular will that we can afford wholly
to discard his criticism. It is one of the problems of the day to find some
means of securing effective popular control over a weakened Parliament
and a despotic Cabinet.
The second factor is the immense development of local government. It
seemed to Rousseau that, in the nation-state, all authority must necessarily
pass, as it had in France, to the central power. Devolution was hardly
dreamed of; and Rousseau saw the only means of securing effective popular
government in a federal system, starting from the small unit as Sovereign.
The nineteenth century has proved the falsehood of much of his theory of
government; but there are still many wise comments and fruitful
suggestions to be found in the third book of the Social Contract and in the
treatise on the Government of Poland, as well as in his adaptation and
criticism of the Polysynodie of the Abbé de Saint-Pierre, a scheme of local
government for France, born out of its due time.
The point in Rousseau's theory of Sovereignty that offers most difficulty
is his view (Book II, chap, vii) that, for every State, a Legislator is
necessary. We shall understand the section only by realising that the
legislator is, in fact, in Rousseau's system, the spirit of institutions
personified; his place, in a developed society, is taken by the whole
complex of social custom, organisation and tradition that has grown up with
the State. This is made clearer by the fact that the legislator is not to
exercise legislative power; he is merely to submit his suggestions for
popular approval. Thus Rousseau recognises that, in the case of institutions
and traditions as elsewhere, will, and not force, is the basis of the State.
This may be seen in his treatment of law as a whole (Book II, chap, vi),
which deserves very careful attention. He defines laws as "acts of the
general will," and, agreeing with Montesquieu in making law the "condition
of civil association," goes beyond him only in tracing it more definitely to
its origin in an act of will. The Social Contract renders law necessary, and at
the same time makes it quite clear that laws can proceed only from the body
of citizens who have constituted the State. "Doubtless," says Rousseau,
"there is a universal justice emanating from reason alone; but this justice, to
be admitted among us, must be mutual. Humbly speaking, in default of
natural sanctions, the laws of justice are ineffective among men." Of the
law which set up among men this reign of mutual justice the General Will is
the source.
We thus come at last to the General Will, the most disputed, and
certainly the most fundamental, of all Rousseau's political concepts. No
critic of the Social Contract has found it easy to say either what precisely
its author meant by it, or what is its final value for political philosophy. The
difficulty is increased because Rousseau himself sometimes halts in the
sense which he assigns to it, and even seems to suggest by it two different
ideas. Of its broad meaning, however, there can be no doubt. The effect of
the Social Contract is the creation of a new individual. When it has taken
place, "at once, in place of the individual personality of each contracting
party, the act of association creates a moral and collective body, composed
of as many members as the assembly contains voters, and receiving from
the act its unity, its common identity (moi commun), its life and its will"
(Book I, chap. vi). The same doctrine had been stated earlier, in the
Political Economy, without the historical setting. "The body politic is also a
moral being, possessed of a will, and this general will, which tends always
to the preservation and welfare of the whole and of every part, and is the
source of the laws, constitutes for all the members of the State, in their
relations to one another and to it, the rule of what is just or unjust." It will
be seen at once that the second statement, which could easily be fortified by
others from the Social Contract, says more than the first. It is not apparent
that the common will, created by the institution of society, need "tend
always to the welfare of the whole." Is not the common will at least as
fallible as the will of a single individual? May it not equally be led away
from its true interests to the pursuit of pleasure or of something which is
really harmful to it? And, if the whole society may vote what conduces to
the momentary pleasure of all the members and at the same time to the
lasting damage of the State as a whole, is it not still more likely that some
of the members will try to secure their private interests in opposition to
those of the whole and of others? All these questions, and others like them,
have been asked by critics of the conception of the General Will.
Two main points are involved, to one of which Rousseau gives a clear
and definite answer. "There is often," he says, "a great deal of difference
between the will of all and the general will; the latter takes account only of
the common interest, while the former takes private interest into account,
and is no more than a sum of particular wills." "The agreement of all
interests is formed by opposition to that of each" (Book II, chap. iii). It is
indeed possible for a citizen, when an issue is presented to him, to vote not
for the good of the State, but for his own good; but, in such a case, his vote,
from the point of view of the General Will, is merely negligible. But "does
it follow that the general will is exterminated or corrupted? Not at all: it is
always constant, unalterable, and pure; but it is subordinated to other wills
which encroach upon its sphere.... The fault [each man] commits [in
detaching his interest from the common interest] is that of changing the
state of the question, and answering something different from what he is
asked. Instead of saying by his vote 'It is to the advantage of the State,' he
says, 'It is to the advantage of this or that man or party that this or that view
should prevail.' Thus the law of public order in assemblies is not so much to
maintain in them the general will as to secure that the question be always
put to it, and the answer always given by it" (Book IV, chap. i). These
passages, with many others that may be found in the text, make it quite
clear that by the General Will Rousseau means something quite distinct
from the Will of All, with which it should never have been confused. The
only excuse for such confusion lies in his view that when, in a city-state, all
particular associations are avoided, votes guided by individual self-interest
will always cancel one another, so that majority voting will always result in
the General Will. This is clearly not the case, and in this respect we may
charge him with pushing the democratic argument too far. The point,
however, can be better dealt with at a later stage. Rousseau makes no
pretence that the mere voice of a majority is infallible; he only says, at the
most, that, given his ideal conditions, it would be so.
The second main point raised by critics of the General Will is whether
in defining it as a will directed solely to the common interest, Rousseau
means to exclude acts of public immorality and short-sightedness. He
answers the questions in different ways. First, an act of public immorality
would be merely an unanimous instance of selfishness, different in no
particular, from similar acts less unanimous, and therefore forming no part
of a General Will. Secondly, a mere ignorance of our own and the State's
good, entirely unprompted by selfish desires, does not make our will anti-
social or individual. "The general will is always right and tends to the
public advantage; but it does not follow that the deliberations of the people
are always equally correct. Our will is always for our own good, but we do
not always see what that is: the people is never corrupted, but it is often
deceived, and on such occasions only does it seem to will what is bad"
(Book II, chap. iii). It is impossible to acquit Rousseau in some of the
passages in which he treats of the General Will, of something worse than
obscurity—positive contradiction. It is probable, indeed, that he never quite
succeeded in getting his view clear in his own mind; there is nearly always,
in his treatment of it, a certain amount of muddle and fluctuation. These
difficulties the student must be left to worry out for himself; it is only
possible to present, in outline, what Rousseau meant to convey.
The treatment of the General Will in the Political Economy is brief and
lucid, and furnishes the best guide to his meaning. The definition of it in
this work, which has already been quoted, is followed by a short account of
the nature of general wills as a whole. "Every political society is composed
of other smaller societies of various kinds, each of which has its interest and
rules of conduct; but those societies which everybody perceives, because
they have an external or authorised form, are not the only ones that actually
exist in the State: all individuals who are united by a common interest
compose as many others, either temporary or permanent, whose influence is
none the less real because it is less apparent.... The influence of all these
tacit or formal associations causes by the influence of their will as many
modifications of the public will. The will of these particular societies has
always two relations; for the members of the association, it is a general will;
for the great society, it is a particular will; and it is often right with regard to
the first object and wrong as to the second. The most general will is always
the most just, and the voice of the people is, in fact, the voice of God."
The General Will, Rousseau continues in substance, is always for the
common good; but it is sometimes divided into smaller general wills, which
are wrong in relation to it. The supremacy of the great General Will is "the
first principle of public economy and the fundamental rule of government."
In this passage, which differs only in clearness and simplicity from others in
the Social Contract itself, it is easy to see how far Rousseau had in his mind
a perfectly definite idea. Every association of several persons creates a new
common will; every association of a permanent character has already a
"personality" of its own, and in consequence a "general" will; the State, the
highest known form of association, is a fully developed moral and
collective being with a common will which is, in the highest sense yet
known to us, general. All such wills are general only for the members of the
associations Which exercise them; for outsiders, or rather for other
associations, they are purely particular wills. This applies even to the State;
"for, in relation to what is outside it, the State becomes a simple being, an
individual" (Social Contract, Book I. chap. vii). In certain passages in the
Social Contract, in his criticism of the Abbé de Saint-Pierre's Project of
Perpetual Peace, and in the second chapter of the original draft of the
Social Contract, Rousseau takes into account the possibility of a still higher
individual, "the federation of the world." In the Political Economy, thinking
of the nation-state, he affirms what in the Social Contract (Book II, chap,
iii) he denies of the city, and recognises that the life of a nation is made up
of the whole complex of its institutions, and that the existence of lesser
general wills is not necessarily a menace to the General Will of the State. In
the Social Contract, he only treats of these lesser wills in relation to the
government, which, he shows, has a will of its own, general for its
members, but particular for the State as a whole (Book III, chap. ii). This
governmental will he there prefers to call corporate will, and by this name
it will be convenient to distinguish the lesser general wills from the General
Will of the State that is over them all.
So far, there is no great difficulty; but in discussing the infallibility of
the General Will we are on more dangerous ground. Rousseau's treatment
here clearly oscillates between regarding it as a purely ideal conception, to
which human institutions can only approximate, and holding it to be
realised actually in every republican State, i.e. wherever the people is the
Sovereign in fact as well as in right. Book IV, chap, ii is the most startling
passage expressing the latter view. "When in the popular assembly a law is
proposed, what the people is asked is not exactly whether it accepts or
rejects the proposal, but whether it is in conformity with the general will,
which is its will.... When, therefore, the opinion that is contrary to my own
prevails, this proves neither more nor less than that I was mistaken, and that
what I thought to be the general will was not so." On his own principles laid
down elsewhere, Rousseau would have to admit that it proves nothing of
the sort, except in so far as the other voters have been guided by the general
interest. Though he sometimes affirms the opposite, there is no security on
his principles that the will of the majority will be the General Will. At the
most it can only be said that there is a greater chance of its being general
than of the will of any selected class of persons not being led away by
corporate interests. The justification of democracy is not that it is always
right, even in intention, but that it is more general than any other kind of
supreme power.
Fundamentally, however, the doctrine of the General Will is
independent of these contradictions. Apart from Kant's narrow and rigid
logic, it is essentially one with his doctrine of the autonomy of the will.
Kant takes Rousseau's political theory, and applies it to ethics as a whole.
The germ of mis application is already found in Rousseau's own work; for
he protests more than once against attempts to treat moral and political
philosophy apart, as distinct studies, and asserts their absolute unity. This is
brought out clearly in the Social Contract (Book I, chap, viii), where he is
speaking of the change brought about by the establishment of society. "The
passage from the state of nature to the civil state produces a very
remarkable change in man, by substituting justice for instinct in his
conduct, and giving his actions the morality they had hitherto lacked....
What man loses by the social contract is his natural liberty and an unlimited
right to everything he tries to get and succeeds in getting; what he gains is
civil liberty ... which is limited by the general will.... We might, over and
above all this, add to what man acquires in the civil state moral liberty,
which alone makes him truly master of himself; for the mere impulse of
appetite is slavery, while obedience to a law which we prescribe to
ourselves is liberty."
This one chapter contains the gist of the Kantian moral philosophy, and
makes it quite clear that Rousseau perceived its application to ethics as well
as to politics. The morality of our acts consists in their being directed in
accordance with universal law; acts in which we are guided merely by our
passions are not moral. Further, man can only possess freedom when his
whole being is unified in the pursuit of a single end; and, as his whole being
can be unified only in pursuit of a rational end, which alone excludes
contradiction, only moral acts, only men directing their lives by universal
law, are free. In Kantian language, the will is autonomous (i.e. prescribes to
itself its own law) only when it is directed to a universal end; when it is
guided by selfish passions, or particular considerations, it is heteronomous
(i.e. receives its law from something external to itself), and in bondage.
Rousseau, as he says (Book I, chap, viii), was not directly concerned with
the ethical sense of the word "liberty," and Kant was, therefore, left to
develop the doctrine into a system; but the phrases of this chapter prove
false the view that the doctrine of a Real Will arises first in connection with
politics, and is only transferred thence to moral philosophy. Rousseau bases
his political doctrine throughout on his view of human freedom; it is
because man is a free agent capable of being determined by a universal law
prescribed by himself that the State is in like manner capable of realising
the General Will, that is, of prescribing to itself and its members a similar
universal law.
The General Will, then, is the application of human freedom to political
institutions. Before the value of this conception can be determined, there is
a criticism to be met. The freedom which is realised in the General Will, we
are told, is the freedom of the State as a whole; but the State exists to secure
individual freedom for its members. A free State may be tyrannical; a
despot may allow his subjects every freedom. What guarantee is there that
the State, in freeing itself, will not enslave its members? This criticism has
been made with such regularity that it has to be answered in some detail.
"The problem is to find a form of association which will defend and
protect with the whole common force the person and goods of each
associate, and in which each, while uniting himself with all, may still obey
himself alone, and remain as free as before." "The clauses of the contract ...
are everywhere the same and everywhere tacitly admitted and recognised....
These clauses, properly understood, may be reduced to one—the total
alienation of each associate, together with all his rights, to the whole
community...; for, if the individuals retained certain rights, as there would
be no common superior to decide between them and the public, each, being
on one point his own judge, would ask to be so on all, and the state of
nature would continue" (Book I, chap. vi). Rousseau sees clearly that it is
impossible to place any limits upon the power of the State; when the people
combine into a State, they must in the end submit to be guided in all things
by the will of the effective majority. Limited Sovereignty is a contradiction
in terms; the Sovereign has a right to all that reason allows it, and as soon as
reason demands that the State shall interfere, no appeal to individual rights
can be made. What is best for the State must be suffered by the individual.
This, however, is very far from meaning that the ruling power ought, or has
the moral right, to interfere in every particular case. Rousseau has been
subjected to much foolish criticism because, after upholding the State's
absolute supremacy, he goes on (Book II, chap, iv) to speak of "the limits of
the sovereign power." There is no contradiction whatsoever. Wherever State
intervention is for the best, the State has a right to intervene; but it has no
moral right, though it must have a legal right, to intervene where it is not for
the best. The General Will, being always in the right, will intervene only
when intervention is proper. "The Sovereign," therefore, "cannot impose
upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the community, nor can it
even wish to do so." As, however, the infallibility of the General Will is not
enough to make the State infallible, there still remains an objection. Since
the General Will cannot always be arrived at, who is to judge whether an act
of intervention is justified? Rousseau's answer fails to satisfy many of his
critics. "Each man alienates, I admit, by the social compact, only such part
of his powers, goods and liberty as it is important for the community to
control; but it must also be granted that the Sovereign is sole judge of what
is important." This, we are told, is mere State tyranny over again. But how
is it possible to avoid such a conclusion? Rousseau has already given his
reasons for objecting to a limited Sovereignty (Book I, chap, vi): it follows
absolutely that we must take the best machinery we can find for the
execution of the State's functions. No doubt the machinery will be
imperfect; but we can only try to get as near the General Will as possible,
without hoping to realise it fully.
The answer, therefore, to the critics who hold that, in securing civil
liberty Rousseau has sacrificed the individual may be put after this fashion.
Liberty is not a merely negative conception; it does not consist solely in the
absence of restraint. The purest individualist, Herbert Spencer for example,
would grant that a certain amount of State interference is necessary to
secure liberty; but as soon as this idea of securing liberty is admitted in the
smallest degree, the whole idea has undergone profound modification. It
can no longer be claimed that every interference on the part of the State
lessens the liberty of the individual; the "liberty-fund" theory is as
untenable as that of the "wages-fund": the members of a State may be more
free when all are restrained from doing one another mutual damage than
when any one is left "free" to enslave another or be himself enslaved. This
principle once admitted, the precise amount of State interference that is
necessary to secure freedom will be always a matter for particular
discussion; every case must be decided on its own merits, and, in right, the
Sovereign will be omnipotent, or subject only to the law of reason.
It has often been held that Rousseau cannot really have inspired the
French Revolution because this view is totally inconsistent with the "rights
of man," which the revolutionaries so fervently proclaimed. If every right is
alienated in the Social Contract, what sense can there be in talking of
"natural rights" afterwards? This, however, is to misrepresent Rousseau's
position. The rights of man as they are preached by the modern
individualist, are not the rights of which Rousseau and the revolutionaries
were thinking. We have seen that the theory of the Social Contract is
founded on human freedom: this freedom carries with it, in Rousseau's
view, the guarantee of its own permanence; it is inalienable and
indestructible. When, therefore, government becomes despotic, it has no
more right over its subjects than the master has over his slave (Book I,
chap, iv); the question is then purely one of might. In such cases, appeal
may be made either to the terms of the Social Contract, or, putting the same
idea another way, to the "natural right" of human freedom. This natural
right is in no sense inconsistent with the complete alienation supposed in
the Contract; for the Contract itself reposes on it and guarantees its
maintenance. The Sovereign must, therefore, treat all its members alike;
but, so long as it does this, it remains omnipotent. If it leaves the general for
the particular, and treats one man better than another, it ceases to be
Sovereign; but equality is already presupposed in the terms of the Contract.
It is more profitable to attack Rousseau for his facile identification of
the interests of each of the citizens with those of all; but here, too, most of
the critics have abused their opportunity. He does not maintain that there
can be no opposition between a man's particular interests and the General
Will as present in him; on the contrary, he explicitly and consistently
affirms the presence of such opposition (Book I, chap. vii). What he asserts
is, first, that the Sovereign, as such, cannot have any interest contrary to the
interest of the citizens as a whole—that is obvious; and, secondly, that it
cannot have an interest contrary to that of any individual. The second point
Rousseau proves by showing that the omnipotence of the Sovereign is
essential to the preservation of society, which in turn is necessary for the
individual. His argument, however, really rests on the fundamental
character of the General Will. He would admit that, in any actual State, the
apparent interest of the many might often conflict with that of the few; but
he would contend that the real interest of State and individual alike, being
subject to universal law could not be such as to conflict with any other real
interest. The interest of the State, in so far as it is directed by the General
Will, must be the interest of every individual, in so far as he is guided by his
real will, that is, in so far as he is acting universally, rationally and
autonomously.
Thus the justification of Rousseau's theory of liberty returns to the point
from which it set out—the omnipotence of the real will in State and
individual. It is in this sense that he speaks of man in the State as "forced to
be free" by the General Will, much as Kant might speak of a man's lower
nature as forced to be free by the universal mandate of his higher, more real
and more rational will. It is in this recognition of the State as a moral being,
with powers of determination similar to the powers of the individual mind,
that the significance of the General Will ultimately lies. Even, however,
among those who have recognised its meaning, there are some who deny its
value as a conception of political philosophy. If, they say, the General Will
is not the Will of All, if it cannot be arrived at by a majority vote or by any
system of voting whatsoever, then it is nothing; it is a mere abstraction,
neither general, nor a I will. This is, of course, precisely the criticism to
which Kant's "real will" is often subjected. Clearly, it must be granted at
once that the General Will does not form the whole actual content of the
will of every citizen. Regarded as actual, it must always be qualified by "in
so far as" or its equivalent. This, however, is so far from destroying the
value of the conception that therein lies its whole value. In seeking the
universal basis of society, we are not seeking anything that is wholly
actualised in any State, though we must be seeking something which exists,
more or less perfectly, in every State.
The point of the Social Contract theory, as Rousseau states it, is that
legitimate society exists by the consent of the people, and acts by popular
will. Active will, and not force or even mere consent, is the basis of the
"republican" State, which can only possess this character because individual
wills are not really self-sufficient and separate, but complementary and
inter-dependent. The answer to the question "Why ought I to obey the
General Will?" is that the General Will exists in me and not outside me. I
am "obeying only myself," as Rousseau says. The State is not a mere
accident of human history, a mere device for the protection of life and
property; it responds to a fundamental need of human nature, and is rooted
in the character of the individuals who compose it. The whole complex of
human institutions is not a mere artificial structure; it is the expression of
the mutual dependence and fellowship of men. If it means anything, the
theory of the General Will means that the State is natural, and the "state of
nature" an abstraction. Without this basis of will and natural need, no
society could for a moment subsist; the State exists and claims our
obedience because it is a natural extension of our personality.
The problem, however, still remains of making the General Will, in any
particular State, active and conscious. It is clear that there are States in
which visible and recognised institutions hardly answer in any respect to its
requirements. Even in such States, however, there is a limit to tyranny; deep
down, in immemorial customs with which the despot dare not interfere, the
General Will is still active and important. It does not reside merely in the
outward and visible organisation of social institutions, in that complex of
formal associations which we may call the State; its roots go deeper and its
branches spread further. It is realised, in greater or less degree, in the whole
life of the community, in the entire complex of private and public relations
which, in the widest sense, may be called Society. We may recognise it not
only in a Parliament, a Church, a University or a Trade Union, but also in
the most intimate human relationships, and the most trivial, as well as the
most vital, social customs.
But, if all these things go to the making of the General Will in every
community, the General Will has, for politics, primarily a narrower sense.
The problem here is to secure its supremacy in the official institutions and
public councils of the nation. This is the question to which Rousseau chiefly
addressed himself. Here, too, we shall find the General Will the best
possible conception for the guidance of political endeavour For the General
Will is realised not when that is done which is best for the community, but
when, in addition, the community as a whole has willed the doing of it. The
General Will demands not only good government, but also self-government
—not only rational conduct, but good-will. This is what some of Rousseau's
admirers are apt to forget when they use his argument, as he himself was
sometimes inclined to use it, in support of pure aristocracy. Rousseau said
that aristocracy was the best of all governments, but he said also that it was
the worst of all usurpers of Sovereignty. Nor must it be forgotten that he
expressly specified elective aristocracy. There is no General Will unless the
people wills the good. General Will may be embodied in one man willing
universally; but it can only be embodied in the State when the mass of the
citizens so wills. The will must be "general" in two senses: in the sense in
which Rousseau used the word, it must be general in its object, i.e.
universal; but it must also be generally held, i.e. common to all or to the
majority.1
The General Will is, then, above all a universal and, in the Kantian
sense, a "rational" will. It would be possible to find in Rousseau many more
anticipations of the views of Kant; but it is better here to confine comment
to an important difference between them. It is surprising to find in Kant, the
originator of modern "intellectualism," and in Rousseau, the great apostle of
"sentiment," an essentially similar view on the nature and function of the
will. Their views, however, present a difference; for, whereas the moving
force of Kant's moral imperative is purely "rational," Rousseau finds the
sanction of his General Will in human feeling itself. As we can see from a
passage in the original draft of the Social Contract, the General Will
remains purely rational. "No-one will dispute that the General Will is in
each individual a pure act of the understanding, which reasons while the
passions are silent on what a man may demand of his neighbour and on
what his neighbour has a right to demand of him." The will remains purely
rational, but Rousseau feels that it needs an external motive power. "If
natural law," he writes, "were written only on the tablets of human reason it
would be incapable of guiding the greater part of our actions; but it is also
graven on the heart of man in characters that cannot be effaced, and it is
there it speaks to him more strongly than all the precepts of the
philosophers" (from an unfinished essay on The State of War). The nature of
this guiding sentiment is explained in the Discourse on Inequality (p. 197,
note 2), where egoism (amour-propre) is contrasted with self-respect
(amour de soi). Naturally, Rousseau holds, man does not want everything
for himself, and nothing for others. "Egoism" and "altruism" are both one-
sided qualities arising out of the perversion of man's, "natural goodness."
"Man is born good," that is, man's nature really makes him desire only to be
treated as one among others, to share equally. This natural love of equality
(amour de soi) includes love of others as well as love of self, and egoism,
loving one's self at the expense of others, is an unnatural and perverted
condition. The "rational" precepts of the General Will, therefore, find an
echo in the heart of the "natural" man, and, if we can only secure the human
being against perversion by existing societies, the General Will can be made
actual.
This is the meeting-point of Rousseau's educational with his political
theory. His view as a whole can be studied only by taking together the
Social Contract and the Emile as explained by the Letters on the Mount and
other works. The fundamental dogma of the natural goodness of man finds
no place directly in the Social Contract; but it lurks behind the whole of his
political theory, and is indeed, throughout, his master-conception. His
educational, his religious, his political and his ethical ideas are all inspired
by a single consistent attitude. Here we have been attending only to his
political theory; in the volume which is to follow, containing the Letters on
the Mount and other works, some attempt will be made to draw the various
threads together and estimate his work as a whole. The political works,
however, can be read separately, and the Social Contract itself is still by far
the best of all text-books of political philosophy. Rousseau's political
influence, so far from being dead, is every day increasing; and as new
generations and new classes of men come to the study of his work, his
conceptions, often hazy and undeveloped, but nearly always of lasting
value, will assuredly form the basis of a new political philosophy, in which
they will be taken up and transformed. This new philosophy is the work of
the future; but, rooted upon the conception of Rousseau, it will stretch far
back into the past. Of our time, it will be for all time; its solutions will be at
once relatively permanent and ceaselessly progressive.
G. D. H. COLE.
1. The term "general" will means, in Rousseau, not so much "will held by several persons," as will
having a general (universal) object. This is often misunderstood; but the mistake matters the
less, because the General Will must, in fact, be both.
Foreword
Table of Contents
This little treatise is part of a longer work which I began years ago without
realising my limitations, and long since abandoned. Of the various
fragments that might have been extracted from what I wrote, this is the
most considerable, and, I think, the least unworthy of being offered to the
public. The rest no longer exists.
Book I
Table of Contents
I mean to inquire if, in the civil order, there can be any sure and legitimate
rule of administration, men being taken as they are and laws as they might
be. In this inquiry I shall endeavour always to unite what right sanctions
with what is prescribed by interest, in order that justice and utility may in
no case be divided.
I enter upon my task without proving the importance of the subject I
shall be asked if I am a prince or a legislator, to write on politics. I answer
that I am neither, and that is why I do so. If I were a prince or a legislator, I
should not waste time in saying what wants doing; I should do it, or hold
my peace.
As I was born a citizen of a free State, and a member of the Sovereign, I
feel that, however feeble the influence my voice can have on public affairs,
the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study them: and I am happy,
when I reflect upon governments, to find my inquiries always furnish me
with new reasons for loving that of my own country.
Chapter I.
Subject of the First Book
Table of Contents
Man is born free; and everywhere he is in chains. One thinks himself the
master of others, and still remains a greater slave than they. How did this
change come about? I do not know. What can make it legitimate? That
question I think I can answer.
If I took into account only force, and the effects derived from it, I
should say: "As long as a people is compelled to obey, and obeys, it does
well; as soon as it can shake off the yoke, and shakes it off, it does still
better; for, regaining its liberty by the same right as took it away, either it is
justified in resuming it, or there was no justification for those who took it
away." But the social order is a sacred right which is the basis of all other
rights. Nevertheless, this right does not come from nature, and must
therefore be founded on conventions. Before coming to that, I have to prove
what I have just asserted.
Chapter II.
The First Societies
Table of Contents
The most ancient of all societies, and the only one that is natural is the
family: and even so the children remain attached to the father only so long
as they need him for their preservation. As soon as this need ceases, the
natural bond is dissolved. The children, released from the obedience they
owed to the father, and the father, released from the care he owed his
children, return equally to independence. If they remain united, they
continue so no longer naturally, but voluntarily; and the family itself is then
maintained only by convention.
This common liberty results from the nature of man. His first law is to
provide for his own preservation, his first cares are those which he owes to
himself; and, as soon as he reaches years of discretion, he is the sole judge
of the proper means of preserving himself, and consequently becomes his
own master.
The family then may be called the first model of political societies: the
ruler corresponds to the father, and the people to the children; and all, being
born free and equal, alienate their liberty only for their own advantage. The
whole difference is that, in the family, the love of the father for his children
repays him for the care he takes of them, while, in the State, the pleasure of
commanding takes the place of the love which the chief cannot have for the
peoples under him.
Grotius denies that all human power is established in favour of the
governed, and quotes slavery as an example. His usual method of reasoning
is constantly to establish right by fact.1 It would be possible to employ a
more logical method, but none could be more favourable to tyrants.
It is then, according to Grotius, doubtful whether the human race
belongs to a hundred men, or that hundred men to the human race: and,
throughout his book, he seems to incline to the former alternative, which is
also the view of Hobbes. On this showing, the human species is divided into
so many herds of cattle, each with its ruler, who keeps guard over them for
the purpose of devouring them.
As a shepherd is of a nature superior to that of his flock, the shepherds
of men, i.e. their rulers, are of a nature superior to that of the peoples under
them. Thus, Philo tells us, the Emperor Caligula reasoned, concluding
equally well either that kings were gods, or that men were beasts.
The reasoning of Caligula agrees with that of Hobbes and Grotius.
Aristotle, before any of them, had said that men are by no means equal
naturally, but that some are born for slavery, and others for dominion.
Aristotle was right; but he took the effect for the cause. Nothing can be
more certain than that every man born in slavery is born for slavery. Slaves
lose everything in their chains, even the desire of escaping from them: they
love their servitude, as the comrades of Ulysses loved their brutish
condition.2 If then there are slaves by nature, it is because there have been
slaves against nature. Force made the first slaves, and their cowardice
perpetuated the condition.
I have said nothing of King Adam, or Emperor Noah, father of the three
great monarchs who shared out the universe, like the children of Saturn,
whom some scholars have recognised in them. I trust to getting due thanks
for my moderation; for, being a direct descendant of one of these princes,
perhaps of the eldest branch, how do I know that a verification of titles
might not leave me the legitimate king of the human race? In any case,
there can be no doubt that Adam was sovereign of the world, as Robinson
Crusoe was of his island, as long as he was its only inhabitant; and this
empire had the advantage that the monarch, safe on his throne, had no
rebellions, wars, or conspirators to fear.
1. "Learned inquiries into public right are often only the history of past abuses; and troubling to
study them too deeply is a profitless infatuation" (Essay on the Interests of France in Relation to
its Neighbours, by the Marquis d'Argenson). This is exactly what Grotius has done.
2. See a short treatise of Plutarch's entitled "That Animals Reason."
Chapter III.
The Right of the Strongest
Table of Contents
The strongest is never strong enough to be always the master, unless he
transforms strength into right, and obedience into duty. Hence the right of
the strongest, which, though to all seeming meant ironically, is really laid
down as a fundamental principle. But are we never to have an explanation
of this phrase? Force is a physical power, and I fail to see what moral effect
it can have. To yield to force is an act of necessity, not of will—at the most,
an act of prudence. In what sense can it be a duty?
Suppose for a moment that this so-called "right" exists. I maintain that
the sole result is a mass of inexplicable nonsense. For, if force creates right,
the effect changes with the cause: every force that is greater than the first
succeeds to its right. As soon as it is possible to disobey with impunity,
disobedience is legitimate; and, the strongest being always in the right, the
only thing that matters is to act so as to become the strongest. But what kind
of right is that which perishes when force fails? If we must obey perforce,
there is no need to obey because we ought; and if we are not forced to obey,
we are under no obligation to do so. Clearly, the word "right" adds nothing
to force: in this connection, it means absolutely nothing.
Obey the powers that be. If this means yield to force, it is a good
precept, but superfluous: I can answer for its never being violated. All
power comes from God, I admit; but so does all sickness: does that mean
that we are forbidden to call in the doctor? A brigand surprises me at the
edge of a wood: must I not merely surrender my purse on compulsion; but,
even if I could withhold it, am I in conscience bound to give it up? For
certainly the pistol he holds is also a power.
Let us then admit that force does not create right, and that we are
obliged to obey only legitimate powers. In that case, my original question
recurs.
Chapter IV.
Slavery
Table of Contents
Since no man has a natural authority over his fellow, and force creates no
right, we must conclude that conventions form the basis of all legitimate
authority among men.
If an individual, says Grotius, can alienate his liberty and make himself
the slave of a master, why could not a whole people do the same and make
itself subject to a king? There are in this passage plenty of ambiguous
words which would need explaining; but let us confine ourselves to the
word alienate. To alienate is to give or to sell. Now, a man who becomes
the slave of another does not give himself; he sells himself, at the least for
his subsistence: but for what does a people sell itself? A king is so far from
furnishing his subjects with their subsistence that he gets his own only from
them; and, according to Rabelais, kings do not live on nothing. Do subjects
then give their persons on condition that the king takes their goods also? I
fail to see what they have left to preserve.
It will be said that the despot assures his subjects civil tranquillity.
Granted; but what do they gain, if the wars his ambition brings down upon
them, his insatiable avidity, and the vexatious conduct of his ministers press
harder on them than their own dissensions would have done? What do they
gain, if the very tranquillity they enjoy is one of their miseries? Tranquillity
is found also in dungeons; but is that enough to make them desirable places
to live in? The Greeks imprisoned in the cave of the Cyclops lived there
very tranquilly, while they were awaiting their turn to be devoured.
To say that a man gives himself gratuitously, is to say what is absurd
and inconceivable; such an act is null and illegitimate, from the mere fact
that he who does it is out of his mind. To say the same of a whole people is
to suppose a people of madmen; and madness creates no right.
Even if each man could alienate himself, he could not alienate his
children: they are born men and free; their liberty belongs to them, and no
one but they has the right to dispose of it. Before they come to years of
discretion, the father can, in their name, lay down conditions for their
preservation and well-being, but he cannot give them, irrevocably and
without conditions: such a gift is contrary to the ends of nature, and exceeds
the rights of paternity. It would therefore be necessary, in order to legitimise
an arbitrary government, that in every generation the people should be in a
position to accept or reject it; but, were this so, the government would be no
longer arbitrary.
To renounce liberty is to renounce being a man, to surrender the rights
of humanity and even its duties. For him who renounces everything no
indemnity is possible. Such a renunciation is incompatible with man's
nature; to remove all liberty from his will is to remove all morality from his
acts. Finally, it is an empty and contradictory convention that sets up, on the
one side, absolute authority, and, on the other, unlimited obedience. Is it not
clear that we can be under no obligation to a person from whom we have
the right to exact everything? Does not this condition alone, in the absence
of equivalence or exchange, in itself involve the nullity of the act? For what
right can my slave have against me, when all that he has belongs to me,
and, his right being mine, this right of mine against myself is a phrase
devoid of meaning?
Grotius and the rest find in war another origin for the so-called right of
slavery. The victor having, as they hold, the right of killing the vanquished,
the latter can buy back his life at the price of his liberty; and this convention
is the more legitimate because it is to the advantage of both parties.
But it is clear that this supposed right to kill the conquered is by no
means deducible from the state of war. Men, from the mere fact that, while
they are living in their primitive independence, they have no mutual
relations stable enough to constitute either the state of peace or the state of
war, cannot be naturally enemies. War is constituted by a relation between
things, and not between persons; and, as the state of war cannot arise out of
simple personal relations, but only out of real relations, private war, or war
of man with man, can exist neither in the state of nature, where there is no
constant property, nor in the social state, where everything is under the
authority of the laws.
Individual combats, duels and encounters, are acts which cannot
constitute a state; while the private wars, authorised by the Establishments
of Louis IX, King of France, and suspended by the Peace of God, are
abuses of feudalism, in itself an absurd system if ever there was one, and
contrary to the principles of natural right and to all good polity.
War then is a relation, not between man and man, but between State and
State, and individuals are enemies only accidentally, not as men, nor even
as citizens,1 but as soldiers; not as members of their country, but as its
defenders. Finally, each State can have for enemies only other States, and
not men; for between things disparate in nature there can be no real relation.
Furthermore, this principle is in conformity with the established rules of
all times and the constant practice of all civilised peoples. Declarations of
war are intimations less to powers than to their subjects. The foreigner,
whether king, individual, or people, who robs, kills or detains the subjects,
without declaring war on the prince, is not an enemy, but a brigand. Even in
real war, a just prince, while laying hands, in the enemy's country, on all
that belongs to the public, respects the lives and goods of individuals: he
respects rights on which his own are founded. The object of the war being
the destruction of the hostile State, the other side has a right to kill its
defenders, while they are bearing arms; but as soon as they lay them down
and surrender, they cease to be enemies or instruments of the enemy, and
become once more merely men, whose life no one has any right to take.
Sometimes it is possible to kill the State without killing a single one of its
members; and war gives no right which is not necessary to the gaining of its
object. These principles are not those of Grotius: they are not based on the
authority of poets, but derived from the nature of reality and based on
reason.
The right of conquest has no foundation other than the right of the
strongest. If war does not give the conqueror the right to massacre the
conquered peoples, the right to enslave them cannot be based upon a right
which does not exist No one has a right to kill an enemy except when he
cannot make him a slave, and the right to enslave him cannot therefore be
derived from the right to kill him. It is accordingly an unfair exchange to
make him buy at the price of his liberty his life, over which the victor holds
no right. Is it not clear that there is a vicious circle in founding the right of
life and death on the right of slavery, and the right of slavery on the right of
life and death?
Even if we assume this terrible right to kill everybody, I maintain that a
slave made in war, or a conquered people, is under no obligation to a
master, except to obey him as far as he is compelled to do so. By taking an
equivalent for his life, the victor has not done him a favour; instead of
killing him without profit, he has killed him usefully. So far then is he from
acquiring over him any authority in addition to that of force, that the state of
war continues to subsist between them: their mutual relation is the effect of
it, and the usage of the right of war does not imply a treaty of peace. A
convention has indeed been made; but this convention, so far from
destroying the state of war, presupposes its continuance.
So, from whatever aspect we regard the question, the right of slavery is
null and void, not only as being illegitimate, but also because it is absurd
and meaningless. The words slave and right contradict each other, and are
mutually exclusive. It will always be equally foolish for a man to say to a
man or to a people: "I make with you a convention wholly at your expense
and wholly to my advantage; I shall keep it as long as I like, and you will
keep it as long as I like."
1. The Romans, who understood and respected the right of war more than any other nation on earth,
carried their scruples on this head so far that a citizen was not allowed to serve as a volunteer
without engaging himself expressly against the enemy, and against such and such an enemy by
name. A legion in which the younger Cato was seeing his first service under Popilius having
been reconstructed, the elder Cato wrote to Popilius that, if he wished his son to continue
serving under him, he must administer to him a new military oath, because, the first having been
annulled, he was no longer able to bear arms against the enemy. The same Cato wrote to his son
telling him to take great care not to go into battle before taking this new oath. I know that the
siege of Clusium and other isolated events can be quoted against me; but I am citing laws and
customs. The Romans are the people that least often transgressed its laws; and no other people
has had such good ones.
Chapter V.
That We Must Always Go Back to a First
Convention
Table of Contents
Even if I granted all that I have been refuting, the friends of despotism
would be no better off. There will always be a great difference between
subduing a multitude and ruling a society. Even if scattered individuals
were successively enslaved by one man, however numerous they might be,
I still see no more than a master and his slaves, and certainly not a people
and its ruler; I see what may be termed an aggregation, but not an
association; there is as yet neither public good nor body politic. The man in
question, even if he has enslaved half the world, is still only an individual;
his interest, apart from that of others, is still a purely private interest. If this
same man comes to die, his empire, after him, remains scattered and
without unity, as an oak falls and dissolves into a heap of ashes when the
fire has consumed it.
A people, says Grotius, can give itself to a king. Then, according to
Grotius, a people is a people before it gives itself. The gift is itself a civil
act, and implies public deliberation. It would be better, before examining
the act by which a people gives itself to a king, to examine that by which it
has become a people; for this act, being necessarily prior to the other, is the
true foundation of society.
Indeed, if there were no prior convention, where, unless the election
were unanimous, would be the obligation on the minority to submit to the
choice of the majority? How have a hundred men who wish for a master the
right to vote on behalf of ten who do not? The law of majority voting is
itself something established by convention, and presupposes unanimity, on
one occasion at least.
Chapter VI.
The Social Compact
Table of Contents
I suppose men to have reached the point at which the obstacles in the way
of their preservation in the state of nature show their power of resistance to
be greater than the resources at the disposal of each individual for his
maintenance in that state. That primitive condition can then subsist no
longer; and the human race would perish unless it changed its manner of
existence.
But, as men cannot engender new forces, but only unite and direct
existing ones, they have no other means of preserving themselves than the
formation, by aggregation, of a sum of forces great enough to overcome the
resistance. These they have to bring into play by means of a single motive
power, and cause to act in concert.
This sum of forces can arise only where several persons come together:
but, as the force and liberty of each man are the chief instruments of his
self-preservation, how can he pledge them without harming his own
interests, and neglecting the care he owes to himself? This difficulty, in its
bearing on my present subject, may be stated in the following terms—
"The problem is to find a form of association which will defend and
protect with the whole common force the person and goods of each
associate, and in which each, while uniting himself with all, may still obey
himself alone, and remain as free as before." This is the fundamental
problem of which the Social Contract provides the solution.
The clauses of this contract are so determined by the nature of the act
that the slightest modification would make them vain and ineffective; so
that, although they have perhaps never been formally set forth, they are
everywhere the same and everywhere tacitly admitted and recognised, until,
on the violation of the social compact, each regains his original rights and
resumes his natural liberty, while losing the conventional liberty in favour
of which he renounced it.
These clauses, properly understood, may be reduced to one—the total
alienation of each associate, together with all his rights, to the whole
community for, in the first place, as each gives himself absolutely, the
conditions are the same for all; and, this being so, no one has any interest in
making them burdensome to others.
Moreover, the alienation being without reserve, the union is as perfect
as it can be, and no associate has anything more to demand: for, if the
individuals retained certain rights, as there would be no common superior to
decide between them and the public, each, being on one point his own
judge, would ask to be so on all; the state of nature would thus continue,
and the association would necessarily become inoperative or tyrannical.
Finally, each man, in giving himself to all, gives himself to nobody; and
as there is no associate over whom he does not acquire the same right as he
yields others over himself, he gains an equivalent for everything he loses,
and an increase of force for the preservation of what he has.
If then we discard from the social compact what is not of its essence, we
shall find that it reduces itself to the following terms—
"Each of us puts his person and all his power in common
under the supreme direction of the general will, and, in our
corporate capacity, we receive each member as an
indivisible part of the whole."
At once, in place of the individual personality of each contracting party,
this act of association creates a moral and collective body, composed of as
many members as the assembly contains votes, and receiving from this act
its unity, its common identity, its life and its will. This public person, so
formed by the union of all other persons, formerly took the name of city,1
and now takes that of Republic or body politic; it is called by its members
State when passive, Sovereign when active, and Power when compared
with others like itself. Those who are associated in it take collectively the
name of people, and severally are called citizens, as sharing in the sovereign
power, and subjects, as being under the laws of the State. But these terms
are often confused and taken one for another: it is enough to know how to
distinguish them when they are being used with precision.
1. The real meaning of this word has been almost wholly lost in modern times; most people mistake
a town for a city, and a townsman for a citizen. They do not know that houses make a town, but
citizens a city. The same mistake long ago cost the Carthaginians dear. I have never read of the
title of citizens being given to the subjects of any prince, not even the ancient Macedonians or
the English of to-day, though they are nearer liberty than any one else. The French alone
everywhere familiarly adopt the name of citizens, because, as can be seen from their
dictionaries, they have no idea of its meaning; otherwise they would be guilty in usurping it, of
the crime of lèse-majesté: among them, the name expresses a virtue, and not a right. When
Bodin spoke of our citizens and townsmen, he fell into a bad blunder in taking the one class for
the other. M. d'Alembert has avoided the error, and, in his article on Geneva, has clearly
distinguished the four orders of men (or even five, counting mere foreigners) who dwell in our
town, of which two only compose the Republic. No other French writer, to my knowledge, has
understood the real meaning of the word citizen.
Chapter VII.
The Sovereign
Table of Contents
This formula shows us that the act of association comprises a mutual
undertaking between the public and the individuals, and that each
individual, in making a contract, as we may say, with himself, is bound in a
double capacity; as a member of the Sovereign he is bound to the
individuals, and as a member of the State to the Sovereign. But the maxim
of civil right, that no one is bound by undertakings made to himself, does
not apply in this case; for there is a great difference between incurring an
obligation to yourself and incurring one to a whole of which you form a
part.
Attention must further be called to the fact that public deliberation,
while competent to bind all the subjects to the Sovereign, because of the
two different capacities in which each of them may be regarded, cannot, for
the opposite reason, bind the Sovereign to itself; and that it is consequently
against the nature of the body politic for the Sovereign to impose on itself a
law which it cannot infringe. Being able to regard itself in only one
capacity, it is in the position of an individual who makes a contract with
himself; and this makes it clear that there neither is nor can be any kind of
fundamental law binding on the body of the people—not even the social
contract itself. This does not mean that the body politic cannot enter into
undertakings with others, provided the contract is not infringed by them; for
in relation to what is external to it, it becomes a simple being, an individual.
But the body politic or the Sovereign, drawing its being wholly from the
sanctity of the contract, can never bind itself, even to an outsider, to do
anything derogatory to the original act, for instance, to alienate any part of
itself, or to submit to another Sovereign. Violation of the act by which it
exists would be self-annihilation; and that which is itself nothing can create
nothing.
As soon as this multitude is so united in one body, it is impossible to
offend against one of the members without attacking the body, and still
more to offend against the body without the members resenting it. Duty and
interest therefore equally oblige the two contracting parties to give each
other help; and the same men should seek to combine, in their double
capacity, all the advantages dependent upon that capacity.
Again, the Sovereign, being formed wholly of the individuals who
compose it, neither has nor can have any interest contrary to theirs; and
consequently the sovereign power need give no guarantee to its subjects,
because it is impossible for the body to wish to hurt all its members. We
shall also see later on that It cannot hurt any in particular. The Sovereign,
merely by virtue of what it is, is is always what it should be.
This, however, is not the case with the relation of the subjects to the
Sovereign, which, despite the common interest, would have no security that
they would fulfil their undertakings, unless it found means to assure itself of
their fidelity.
In fact, each individual, as a man, may have a particular will contrary or
dissimilar to the general will which he has as a citizen. His particular
interest may speak to him quite differently from the common interest: his
absolute and naturally independent existence may make him look upon
what he owes to the common cause as a gratuitous contribution, the loss of
which will do less harm to others than the payment of it is burdensome to
himself; and, regarding the moral person which constitutes the State as a
persona ficta, because not a man, he may wish to enjoy the rights of
citizenship without being ready to fulfil the duties of a subject. The
continuance of such an injustice could not but prove the undoing of the
body politic.
In order then that the social compact may not be an empty formula, it
tacitly includes the undertaking, which alone can give force to the rest, that
whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be compelled to do so by the
whole body. This means nothing less than that he will be forced to be free;
for this is the condition which, by giving each citizen to his country, secures
him against all personal dependence. In this lies the key to the working of
the political machine; this alone legitimizes civil undertakings, which,
without it, would be absurd, tyrannical, and liable to the most frightful
abuses.
Chapter VIII.
The Civil State
Table of Contents
The passage from the state of nature to the civil state produces a very
remarkable change in man, by substituting justice, for instinct in his
conduct, and giving his actions the morality they had formerly lacked. Then
only, when the voice of duty takes the place of physical impulses and right
of appetite, does man, who so far had considered only himself, find that he
is forced to act on different principles, and to consult his reason before
listening to his inclinations. Although, in this state, he deprives himself of
some advantages which he got from nature, he gains in return others so
great, his faculties are so stimulated and developed, his ideas so extended,
his feelings so ennobled, and his whole soul so uplifted, that, did not the
abuses of this new condition often degrade him below that which he left, he
would be bound to bless continually the happy moment which took him
from it for ever, and, instead of a stupid and unimaginative animal, made
him an intelligent being and a man.
Let us draw up the whole account in terms easily commensurable. What
man loses by the social contract in his natural liberty and an unlimited right
to everything he tries to get and succeeds in getting; what he gains is civil
liberty and the proprietorship of all he possesses. If we are to avoid mistake
in weighing one against the other, we must clearly distinguish natural
liberty, which is bounded only by the strength of the individual, from civil
liberty, which is limited by the general will; and possession, which is
merely the effect of force or the right of the first occupier, from property,
which can be founded only on a positive title.
We might, over and above all this, add, to what man acquires in the civil
state, moral liberty, which alone makes him truly master of himself; for the
mere impulse of appetite is slavery, while obedience to a law which we
prescribe to ourselves is liberty. But I have already said too much on this
head, and the philosophical meaning of the word liberty does not now
concern us.
Chapter IX.
Real Property
Table of Contents
Each member of the community gives himself to it, at the moment of its
foundation, just as he is, with all the resources at his command, including
the goods he possesses. This act does not make possession, in changing
hands, change its nature, and becomes property in the hands of the
Sovereign; but, as the forces of the city are incomparably greater than those
of an individual, public possession is also, in fact, stronger and more
irrevocable, without being any more legitimate, at any rate from the point of
view of foreigners. For the State, in relation to its members, is master of all
their goods by the social contract, which, within the State, is the basis of all
rights; but, in relation to other powers, it is so only by the right of the first
occupier, which it holds from its members.
The right of the first occupier, though more real than the right of the
strongest, becomes a real right only when the right of property has already
been established. Every man has naturally a right to everything he needs;
but the positive act which makes him proprietor of one thing excludes him
from everything else. Having his share, he ought to keep to it, and can have
no further right against the community. This is why the right of the first
occupier, which in the state of nature is so weak, claims the respect of every
man in civil society. In this right we are respecting not so much what
belongs to another as what does not belong to ourselves.
In general, to establish the right of the first occupier over a plot of
ground, the following conditions are necessary: first, the land must not yet
be inhabited; secondly, a man must occupy only the amount he needs for his
subsistence; and, in the third place, possession must be taken, not by an
empty ceremony, but by labour and cultivation, the only sign of
proprietorship that should be respected by others, in default of a legal title.
In granting the right of first occupancy to necessity and labour, are we
not really stretching it as far as it can go? Is it possible to leave such a right
unlimited? Is it to be enough to set foot on a plot of common ground, in
order to be able to call yourself at once the master of it? Is it to be enough
that a man has the strength to expel others for a moment, in order to
establish his right to prevent them from ever returning? How can a man or a
people seize an immense territory and keep it from the rest of the world
except by a punishable usurpation, since all others are being robbed, by
such an act, of the place of habitation and the means of subsistence which
nature gave them in common? When Nuñez Balbao, standing on the sea-
shore, took possession of the South Seas and the whole of South America in
the name of the crown of Castille, was that enough to dispossess all their
actual inhabitants, and to shut out from them all the princes of the world?
On such a showing, these ceremonies are idly multiplied, and the Catholic
King need only take possession all at once, from his apartment, of the
whole universe, merely making a subsequent reservation about what was
already in the possession of other princes.
We can imagine how the lands of individuals, where they were
contiguous and came to be united, became the public territory, and how the
right of Sovereignty, extending from the subjects over the lands they held,
became at once real and personal. The possessors were thus made more
dependent, and the forces at their command used to guarantee their fidelity.
The advantage of this does not seem to have been felt by ancient monarchs,
who called themselves King of the Persians, Scythians, or Macedonians,
and seemed to regard themselves more as rulers of men than as masters of a
country. Those of the present day more cleverly call themselves Kings of
France, Spain, England, etc.: thus holding the land, they are quite confident
of holding the inhabitants.
The peculiar fact about this alienation is that, in taking over the goods
of individuals, the community, so far from despoiling them, only assures
them legitimate possession, and changes usurpation into a true right and
enjoyment into proprietorship. Thus the possessors, being regarded as
depositaries of the public good, and having their rights, respected by all the
members of the State and maintained against foreign aggression by all its
forces, have, by a cession which benefits both the public and still more
themselves, acquired, so to speak, all that they gave up. This paradox may
easily be explained by the distinction between the rights which the
Sovereign and the proprietor have over the same estate, as we shall see later
on. It may also happen that men begin to unite one with another before they
possess anything, and that, subsequently occupying a tract of country which
is enough for all, they enjoy it in common, or share it out among
themselves, either equally or according to a scale fixed by they Sovereign.
However the acquisition be made, the right which each individual has to his
own estate is always subordinate to the right which the community has over
all: without this, there would be neither stability in the social tie, nor real
force in the exercise of Sovereignty.
I shall end this chapter and this book by remarking on a fact on which
the whole social system should rest: i.e. that, instead of destroying natural
inequality, the fundamental compact substitutes, for such physical
inequality as nature may have set up between men, an equality that is moral
and legitimate, and that men, who may be unequal in strength or
intelligence, become every one equal by convention and legal right.1
1. Under bad governments, this equality is only apparent and illusory: it serves only to keep the
pauper in his poverty and the rich man in the position he has usurped. In fact, laws are always of
use to those who possess and harmful to those who have nothing: from which it follows that the
social state is advantageous to men only when all have something and none too much.
Book II
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
That Sovereignty is Inalienable
Table of Contents
The first and most important deduction from the principles we have so far
laid down is that the general will alone can direct the State according to the
object for which it was instituted, i.e. the common good: for if the clashing
of particular interests made the establishment of societies necessary, the
agreement of these very interests made it possible. The common element in
these different interests is what forms the social tie; and, were there no point
of agreement between them all, no society could exist. It is solely on the
basis of this common interest that every society should be governed.
I hold then that Sovereignty, being nothing less than the exercise of the
general will, can never be alienated, and that the Sovereign, who is no less
than a collective being, cannot be represented except by himself: the power
indeed may be transmitted, but not the will.
In reality, if it is not impossible for a particular will to agree on some
point with the general will, it is at least impossible for the agreement to be
lasting and constant; for the particular will tends, by its very nature, to
partiality, while the general will tends to equality. It is even more
impossible to have any guarantee of this agreement; for even if it should
always exist, it would be the effect not of art, but of chance. The Sovereign
may indeed say: "I now will actually what this man wills, or at least what he
says he wills"; but it cannot say: "What he wills tomorrow, I too shall will"
because it is absurd for the will to bind itself for the future, nor is it
incumbent on any; will to consent to anything that is not for the good of the
being who wills. If then the people promises simply to obey, by that very
act it dissolves itself and loses what makes it a people; the moment a master
exists, there is no longer a Sovereign, and from that moment the body
politic has ceased to exist.
This does not mean that the commands of the rulers cannot pass for
general wills, so long as the Sovereign, being free to oppose them, offers no
opposition. In such a case, universal silence is taken to imply the consent of
the people. This will be explained later on.
Chapter II.
That Sovereignty is Indivisible
Table of Contents
Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, is indivisible; for
will either is, or is not, general;1 it is the will either of the body of the
people, or only of a part of it. In the first case, the will, when declared, is an
act of Sovereignty and constitutes law: in the second, it is merely a
particular will, or act of magistracy—at the most a decree.
But our political theorists, unable to divide Sovereignty in principle,
divide it according to its object: into force and will; into legislative power
and executive power; into rights of taxation, justice and war; into internal
administration and power of foreign treaty. Sometimes they confuse all
these sections, and sometimes they distinguish them; they turn the
Sovereign into a fantastic being composed of several connected pieces: it is
as if they were making man of several bodies, one with eyes, one with arms,
another with feet, and each with nothing besides. We are told that the
jugglers of Japan dismember a child before the eyes of the spectators; then
they throw all the members into the air one after another, and the child falls
down alive and whole. The conjuring tricks of our political theorists are
very like that; they first dismember the body politic by an illusion worthy of
a fair, and then join it together again we know not how.
This error is due to a lack of exact notions concerning the Sovereign
authority, and to taking for parts of it what are only emanations from it.
Thus, for example, the acts of declaring war and making peace have been
regarded as acts of Sovereignty; but this is not the case, as these acts do not
constitute law, but merely the application of a law, a particular act which
decides how the law applies, as we shall see clearly when the idea attached
to the word law has been defined.
If we examined the other divisions in the same manner, we should find
that, whenever Sovereignty seems to be divided, there is an illusion: the
rights which are taken as being part of Sovereignty are really all
subordinate, and always imply supreme wills of which they only sanction
the execution.
It would be impossible to estimate the obscurity this lack of exactness
has thrown over the decisions of writers who have dealt with political right,
when they have used the principles laid down by them to pass judgment on
the respective rights of kings and peoples. Every one can see, in Chapters
III and IV of the First Book of Grotius, how the learned man and his
translator, Barbeyrac, entangle and tie themselves up in their own
sophistries, for fear of saying too little or too much of what they think, and
so offending the interests they have to conciliate. Grotius, a refugee in
France, ill-content with his own country, and desirous of paying his court to
Louis XIII, to whom his book is dedicated, spares no pains to rob the
peoples of all their rights and invest kings with them by every conceivable
artifice. This would also have been much to the taste of Barbeyrac, who
dedicated his translation to George I of England. But unfortunately the
expulsion of James II, which he called his "abdication," compelled him to
use all reserve, to shuffle and to tergiversate, in order to avoid making
William out a usurper. If these two writers had adopted the true principles,
all difficulties would have been removed, and they would have been always
consistent; but it would have been a sad truth for them to tell, and would
have paid court for them to no-one save the people. Moreover, truth is no
road to fortune, and the people dispenses neither ambassadorships, nor
professorships, nor pensions.
1. To be general, a will need not always be unanimous; but every vote—must be counted: any
exclusion is a breach of generality.
Chapter III.
Whether the General Will is Fallible
Table of Contents
It follows from what has gone before that the general will is always right
and tends to the public advantage; but it does not follow that the
deliberations of the people are always equally correct. Our will is always
for our own good, but we do not always see what that is; the people is never
corrupted, but it is often deceived, and on such occasions only does it seem
to will what is bad.
There is often a great deal of difference between the will of all and the
general will; the latter considers only the common interest, while the former
takes private interest into account, and is no more than a sum of particular
wills: but take away from these same wills the pluses and minuses that
cancel one another,1 and the general will remains as the sum of the
differences.
If, when the people, being furnished with adequate information, held its
deliberations, the citizens had no communication one with another, the
grand total of the small differences would always give the general will, and
the decision would always be good. But when factions arise, and partial
associations are formed at the expense of the great association, the will of
each of these associations becomes general in relation to its members, while
it remains particular in relation to the State: it may then be said that there
are no longer as many votes as there are men, but only as many as there are
associations. The differences become less numerous and give a less general
result. Lastly, when one of these associations is so great as to prevail over
all the rest, the result is no longer a sum of small differences, but a single
difference; in this case there is no longer a general will, and the opinion
which prevails is purely particular.
It is therefore essential, if the general will is to be able to express itself,
that there should be no partial society within the State, and that each citizen
should think only his own thoughts:2 which was indeed the sublime and
unique system established by the great Lycurgus. But if there are partial
societies, it is best to have as many as possible and to prevent them from
being unequal, as was done by Solon, Numa and Servius. These precautions
are the only ones that can guarantee that the general will shall be always
enlightened, and that the people shall in no way deceive itself.
1. "Every interest," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "has different principles. The agreement of two
particular interests is formed by opposition to a third." He might have added that the agreement
of all interests is formed by opposition to that of each. If there were no different interests, the
common interest would be barely felt, as it would encounter no obstacle; all would go on of its
own accord, and politics would cease to be an art.
2. "In fact," says Macchiavelli, "there are some divisions that are harmful to a Republic and some
that are advantageous. Those which stir up sects and parties are harmful; those attended by
neither are advantageous. Since, then, the founder of a Republic cannot help enmities arising, he
ought at least to prevent them from growing into sects" (History of Florence, Book vii).
Rousseau quotes the Italian.
Chapter IV.
The Limits of the Sovereign Power
Table of Contents
If the State is a moral person whose life is in the union of its members, and
if the most important of its cares is the care for its own preservation, it must
have a universal and compelling force, in order to move and dispose each
part as may be most advantageous to the whole. As nature gives each man
absolute power over all his members, the social compact gives the body
politic absolute power over all its members also; and it is this power which,
under the direction of the general will, bears, as I have said, the name of
Sovereignty.
But, besides the public person, we have to consider the private persons
composing it, whose life and liberty are naturally independent of it. We are
bound then to distinguish clearly between the respective rights of the
citizens and the Sovereign,1 and between the duties the former have to fulfil
as subjects, and the natural rights they should enjoy as men.
Each man alienates, I admit, by the social compact, only such part of his
powers, goods and liberty as it is important for the community to control;
but it must also be granted that the Sovereign is sole judge of what is
important.
Every service a citizen can render the State he ought to render as soon
as the Sovereign demands it; but the Sovereign, for its part, cannot impose
upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the community, nor can it
even wish to do so; for no more by the law of reason than by the law of
nature can anything occur without a cause.
The undertakings which bind us to the social body are obligatory only
because they are mutual; and their nature is such that in fulfilling them we
cannot work for others without working for ourselves. Why is it that the
general will is always in the right, and that all continually will the happiness
of each one, unless it is because there is not a man who does not think of
"each" as meaning him, and consider himself in voting for all? This proves
that equality of rights and the idea of justice which such equality creates
originate in the preference each man gives to himself, and accordingly in
the very nature of man. It proves that the general will, to be really such,
must be general in its object as well as its essence; that it must both come
from all and apply to all; and that it loses its natural rectitude when it is
directed to some particular and determinate object, because in such a case
we are judging of something foreign to us, and have no true principle of
equity to guide us.
Indeed, as soon as a question of particular fact or right arises on a point
not previously regulated by a general convention, the matter becomes
contentions. It is a case in which the individuals concerned are one party,
and the public the other, but in which I can see neither the law that ought to
be followed nor the judge who ought to give the decision. In such a case, it
would be absurd to propose to refer the question to an express decision of
the general will, which can be only the conclusion reached by one of the
parties and in consequence will be, for the other party, merely an external
and particular will, inclined on this occasion to injustice and subject to
error. Thus, just as a particular will cannot stand for the general will, the
general will, in turn, changes its nature, when its object is particular, and, as
general, cannot pronounce on a man or a fact. When, for instance, the
people of Athens nominated or displaced its rulers, decreed honours to one,
and imposed penalties on another, and, by a multitude of particular decrees,
exercised all the functions of government indiscriminately, it had in such
cases no longer a general will in the strict sense; it was acting no longer as
Sovereign, but as magistrate. This will seem contrary to current views; but I
must be given time to expound my own.
It should be seen from the foregoing that what makes the will general is
less the number of voters than the common interest uniting them; for under
this system, each necessarily submits to the conditions he imposes on
others; and this admirable agreement between interest and justice gives to
the common deliberations an equitable character which at once vanishes
when any particular question is discussed, in the absence of a common
interest to unite and identify the ruling of the judge with that of the party.
From whatever side we approach our principle, we reach the same
conclusion, that the social compact sets up among the citizens an equality of
such a kind, that they all bind themselves to observe the same conditions
and should therefore all enjoy the same rights. Thus, from the very nature of
the compact, every "act of Sovereignty", i.e. every authentic act of the
general will, binds or favours all the citizens equally; so that the Sovereign
recognises only the body of the nation, and draws no distinctions between
those of whom it is made up. What, then, strictly speaking is an act of
Sovereignty? It is not a convention between a superior and an inferior, but a
convention between the body and each of its members. It is legitimate,
because based on the social contract, and, equitable, because common to
all; useful, because it can have no other object than the general good, and
stable, because guaranteed by the public force and the supreme power. So
long as the subjects have to submit only to conventions of this sort, they
obey no-one but their own will; and to ask how far the respective rights of
the Sovereign and the citizens extend, is to ask up to what point the latter
can enter into undertakings with themselves, each with all, and all with
each.
We can see from this that the sovereign power, absolute, sacred and
inviolable as it is, does not and cannot exceed the limits of general
conventions, and that every man may dispose at will of such goods and
liberty as these conventions leave him; so that the Sovereign never has a
right to lay more charges on one subject than on another, because, in that
case, the question becomes particular, and ceases to be within its
competency.
When these distinctions have once been admitted, it is seen to be so
untrue that there is, in the social contract, any real renunciation on the part
of the individuals, that the position in which they find themselves as a result
of the contract is really preferable to that in which they were before. Instead
of a renunciation, they have made an advantageous exchange: instead of an
uncertain and precarious way of living they have got one that is better and
more secure; instead of natural independence they have got liberty, instead
of the power to harm others security for themselves, and instead of their
strength, which others might overcome, a right which social union makes
invincible. Their very life, which they have devoted to the State, is by it
constantly protected; and when they risk it in the State's defence, what more
are they doing than giving back what they have received from it? What are
they doing that they would not do more often and with greater danger in the
state of nature, in which they would inevitably have to fight battles at the
peril of their lives in defence of that which is the means of their
preservation? All have indeed to fight when their country needs them; but
then no one has ever to fight for himself. Do we not gain something by
running, on behalf of what gives us our security, only some of the risks we
should have to run for ourselves, as soon as we lost it?
1. Attentive readers, do not, I pray, be in a hurry to charge me with contradicting myself. The
terminology made it unavoidable, considering the poverty of the language; but wait and see.
Chapter V.
The Right of Life and Death
Table of Contents
The question is often asked how individuals, having no right to dispose of
their own lives, can transfer to the Sovereign a right which they do not
possess. The difficulty of answering this question seems to me to lie in its
being wrongly stated. Every man has a right to risk his own life in order to
preserve it. Has it ever, been said that a man who throws himself out of the
window to escape from a fire is guilty of suicide? Has such a crime ever
been laid to the charge of him who perishes in a storm because, when he
went on board, he knew of the danger?
The social treaty has for its end the preservation of the contracting
parties. He who wills the end wills the means also, and the means must
involve some risks, and even some losses. He who wishes to preserve his
life at others expense should also, when it is necessary, be ready to give it
up for their sake. Furthermore, the citizen is no longer the judge of the
dangers to which the law desires him to expose himself; and when the
prince says to him: "It is expedient for the State that you should die," he
ought to die, because it is only on that condition that he has been living in
security up to the present, and because his life is no longer a mere bounty of
nature, but a gift made conditionally by the State.
The death-penalty inflicted upon criminals may be looked on in much
the same light: it is in order that we may not fall victims to an assassin that
we consent to die if we ourselves turn assassins. In this treaty, so far from
disposing of our own lives, we think only of securing them, and it is not to
be assumed that any of the parties then expects to get hanged.
Again, every malefactor, by attacking social rights, becomes on forfeit a
rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating its laws he ceases to be a
member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a case the preservation of
the State is inconsistent with his own, and one or the other must perish; in
putting the guilty to death, we slay not so much the citizen as an enemy.
The trial and the judgment are the proofs that he has broken the social
treaty, and is in consequence no longer a member of the State. Since, then,
he has recognised himself to be such by living there, he must be removed
by exile as a violator of the compact, or by death as a public enemy; for
such an enemy is not a moral person, but merely a man; and in such a case
the right of war is to kill the vanquished.
But, it will be said, the condemnation of a criminal is a particular act. I
admit it: but such condemnation is not a function of the Sovereign; it is a
right the Sovereign can confer without being able itself to exert it. All my
ideas are consistent, but I cannot expound them all at once.
We may add that frequent punishments are always a sign of weakness or
remissness on the part of the government. There is not a single ill-doer who
could not be turned to some good. The State has no right to put to death,
even for the sake of making an example, any one whom it can leave alive
without danger.
The right of pardoning or exempting the guilty from a penalty imposed
by the law and pronounced by the judge belongs only to the authority which
is superior to both judge and law, i.e. the Sovereign; even its right in this
matter is tar from clear, and the cases for exercising it are extremely rare. In
a well-governed State, there are few punishments, not because there are
many pardons, but because criminals are rare; it is when a State is in decay
that the multitude of crimes is a guarantee of impunity. Under the Roman
Republic, neither the Senate nor the Consuls ever attempted to pardon; even
the people never did so, though it sometimes revoked its own decision.
Frequent pardons mean that crime will soon need them no longer, and no-
one can help seeing whither that leads. But I feel my heart protesting and
restraining my pen; let us leave these questions to the just man who has
never offended, and would himself stand in no-need of pardon.
Chapter VI.
Law
Table of Contents
By the social compact we have given the body politic existence and life: we
have now by legislation to give it movement and will. For the original act
by which the body is formed and united still in no respect determines what
it ought to do for its preservation.
What is well and in conformity with order is so by the nature of things
and independently of human conventions. All justice comes from God, who
is its sole source; but if we knew how to receive so high an inspiration, we
should need neither government nor laws. Doubtless, there is a universal
justice emanating from reason alone; but this justice, to be admitted among
us, must be mutual. Humanly speaking, in default of natural sanctions, the
laws of justice are ineffective among men: they merely make for the good
of the wicked and the undoing of the just, when the just man observes them
towards everybody and nobody observes them towards him. Conventions
and laws are therefore needed to join rights to duties and refer justice to its
object. In the state of nature, where everything is common, I owe nothing to
him whom I nave promised nothing; I recognise as belonging to others only
what is of no use to me. In the state of society all rights are fixed by law,
and the case becomes different.
But what, after all, is a law? As long as we remain satisfied with
attaching purely metaphysical ideas to the word, we shall go on arguing
without arriving at an understanding; and when we have defined a law of
nature, we shall be no nearer the definition of a law of the State.
I have already said that there can be no general will directed to a
particular object. Such an object must be either within or outside the State.
If outside, a will which is alien to it cannot be, in relation to it, general; if
within, it is part of the State, and in that case there arises a relation between
whole and part which makes them two separate beings, of which the part is
one, and the whole minus the part the other. But the whole minus a part
cannot be the whole; and while this relation persists, there can be no whole,
but only two unequal parts; and it follows that the will of one is no longer in
any respect general in relation to the other.
But when the whole people decrees for the whole people, it is
considering only itself; and if a relation is then formed, it is between two
aspects of the entire object, without there being any division of the whole.
In that case the matter about which the decree is made is, like the decreeing
will general. This act is what I call a law.
When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that law
considers subjects en masse and actions in the abstract, and never a
particular person or action. Thus the law may indeed decree that there shall
be privileges, but cannot confer them on anybody by name. It may set up
several classes of citizens, and even lay down the qualifications for
membership of these classes, but it cannot nominate such and such persons
as belonging to them; it may establish a monarchical government and
hereditary succession, but it cannot choose a king, or nominate a royal
family. In a word, no function which has a particular object belongs to the
legislative power.
On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose
business it is to make laws, since they are acts of the general will: nor
whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the State; nor
whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to himself; nor how
we can be both free and subject to the laws since they are but registers of
our wills.
We see further that, as the law unites universality of will with
universality of object, what a man, whoever he be, commands of his own
motion cannot be a law; and even what the Sovereign commands with
regard to a particular matter is no nearer being a law, but is a decree, an act,
not of sovereignty, but of magistracy.
I therefore give the name 'Republic' to every State that is governed by
laws, no matter what the form of its administration may be: for only in such
a case does the public interest govern, and the res publica rank as a reality.
Every legitimate government is republican;1 what government is I will
explain later on.
Laws are, properly speaking, only the conditions of civil association.
The people, being subject to the laws, ought to be their author: the
conditions of the society ought to be regulated solely by those who come
together to form it. But how are they to regulate them? Is it to be by
common agreement, by a sudden inspiration? Has the body politic an organ
to declare its will? Who can give it the foresight to formulate and announce
its acts in advance? Or how is it to announce them in the hour of need?
How can a blind multitude, which often does not know what it wills,
because it rarely knows what is good for it, carry out for itself so great and
difficult an enterprise as a system of legislation? Of itself the people wills
always the good, but of itself it by no means always sees it. The general will
is always in the right, but the judgment which guides it is not always
enlightened. It must be got to see objects as they are, and sometimes as they
ought to appear to it; it must be shown the good road it is in search of,
secured from the seductive influences of individual wills, taught to see
times and spaces as a series, and made to weigh the attractions of present
and sensible advantages against the danger of distant and hidden evils. The
individuals see the good they reject; the public wills the good it does not
see. All stand equally in need of guidance. The former must be compelled to
bring their wills into conformity with their reason; the latter must be taught
to know what it wills. If that is done, public enlightenment leads to the
union of understanding and will in the social body: the parts are made to
work exactly together, and the whole is raised to its highest power. This
makes a legislator necessary.
1. I understand by this word, not merely an aristocracy or a democracy, but generally any
government directed by the general will, which is the law. To be legitimate, the government
must be, not one with the Sovereign, but its minister. In such a case even a monarchy is a
Republic. This will be made clearer in the following book.
Chapter VII.
The Legislator
Table of Contents
In order to discover the rules of society best suited to nations, a superior
intelligence beholding all the passions of men without experiencing any of
them would be needed. This intelligence would have to be wholly unrelated
to our nature, while knowing it through and through; its happiness would
have to be independent of us, and yet ready to occupy itself with ours; and
lastly, it would have, in the march of time, to look forward to a distant
glory, and, working in one century, to be able to enjoy in the next.1 It would
take gods to give men laws.
What Caligula argued from the facts, Plato, in the dialogue called the
Politicus, argued in defining the civil or kingly man, on the basis of right.
But if great princes are rare, how much more so are great legislators? The
former have only to follow the pattern which the latter have to lay down.
The legislator is the engineer who invents the machine, the prince merely
the mechanic who sets it up and makes it go. "At the birth of societies,"
says Montesquieu, "the rulers of Republics establish institutions, and
afterwards the institutions mould the rulers."2
He who dares to undertake the making of a people's institutions ought to
feel himself capable, so to speak, of changing human nature, of
transforming each individual, who is by himself a complete and solitary
whole, into part of a greater whole from which he in a manner receives his
life and being; of altering man's constitution for the purpose of
strengthening it; and of substituting a partial and moral existence for the
physical and independent existence nature has conferred on us all. He must,
in a word, take away from man his own resources and give him instead new
ones alien to him, and incapable of being made use of without the help of
other men. The more completely these natural resources are annihilated, the
greater and the more lasting are those which he acquires, and the more
stable and perfect the new institutions; so that if each citizen is nothing and
can do nothing without the rest, and the resources acquired by the whole are
equal or superior to the aggregate of the resources of all the individuals, it
may be said that legislation is at the highest possible point of perfection.
The legislator occupies in every respect an extraordinary position in the
State. If he should do so by reason of his genius, he does so no less by
reason of his office, which is neither magistracy, nor Sovereignty. This
office, which sets up the Republic, nowhere enters into its constitution; it is
an individual and superior function, which has nothing in common with
human empire; for if he who holds command over men ought not to have
command over the laws, he who has command over the laws ought not any
more to have it over men; or else his laws would be the ministers of his
passions and would often merely serve to perpetuate his injustices: his
private aims would inevitably mar the sanctity of his work.
When Lycurgus gave laws to his country, he began by resigning the
throne. It was the custom of most Greek towns to entrust the establishment
of their laws to foreigners. The Republics of modern Italy in many cases
followed this example; Geneva did the same and profited by it.3 Rome,
when it was most prosperous, suffered a revival of all the crimes of tyranny,
and was brought to the verge of destruction, because it put the legislative
authority and the sovereign power into the same hands.
Nevertheless, the decemvirs themselves never claimed the right to pass
any law merely on their own authority. "Nothing we propose to you," they
said to the people, "can pass into law without your consent. Romans, be
yourselves the authors of the laws which are to make you happy."
He, therefore, who draws up the laws has, or should have, no right of
legislation, and the people cannot, even if it wishes, deprive itself of this
incommunicable right, because, according to the fundamental compact,
only the general will can bind the individuals, and there can be no assurance
that a particular will is in conformity with the general will, until it has been
put to the free vote of the people. This I have said already; but it is worth
while to repeat it.
Thus in the task of legislation we find together two things which appear
to be incompatible: an enterprise too difficult for human powers, and, for its
execution, an authority that is no authority.
There is a further difficulty that deserves attention. Wise men, if they try
to speak their language to the common herd instead of its own, cannot
possibly make themselves understood. There are a thousand kinds of ideas
which it is impossible to translate into popular language. Conceptions that
are too general and objects that are too remote are equally out of its range:
each individual, having no taste for any other plan of government than that
which suits his particular interest, finds it difficult to realise the advantages
he might hope to draw from the continual privations good laws impose. For
a young people to be able to relish sound principles of political theory and
follow the fundamental rules of statecraft, the effect would have to become
the cause; the social spirit, which should be created by these institutions,
would have to preside over their very foundation; and men would have to
be before law what they should become by means of law. The legislator
therefore, being unable to appeal to either force or reason, must have
recourse to an authority of a different order capable of constraining without
violence and persuading without convincing.
This is what has, in all ages, compelled the fathers of nations to have
recourse to divine intervention and credit the gods with their own wisdom,
in order that the peoples, submitting to the laws of the State as to those of
nature, and recognising the same power in the formation of the city as in
that of man, might obey freely, and bear with docility the yoke of the public
happiness.
This sublime reason, far above the range of the common herd, is that
whose decisions the legislator puts into the mouth of the immortals, in order
to constrain by divine authority those whom human prudence could not
move.4 But it is not anybody who can make the gods speak, or get himself
believed when he proclaims himself their interpreter. The great soul of the
legislator is the only miracle that can prove his mission. Any man may
grave tablets of stone, or buy an oracle; or feign secret intercourse with
some divinity, or train a bird to whisper in his ear, or find other vulgar ways
of imposing on the people. He whose knowledge goes no further may
perhaps gather round him a band of fools; but he will never found an
empire, and his extravagances will quickly perish with him. Idle tricks form
a passing tie; only wisdom can make it lasting. The Judaic law, which still
subsists, and that of the child of Ishmael, which, for ten centuries, has ruled
half the world, still proclaim the great men who laid them down; and, while
the pride of philosophy or the blind spirit of faction sees in them no more
than lucky impostures, the true political theorist admires, in the institutions
they set up, the great and powerful genius which presides over things made
to endure.
We should not, with Warburton, conclude from this that politics and
religion have among us a common object, but that, in the first periods of
nations, the one is used as an instrument for the other.
1. A people becomes famous only when its legislation begins to decline. We do not know for how
many centuries the system of Lycurgus made the Spartans happy before the rest of Greece took
any notice of it.
2. Montesquieu, The Greatness and Decadence of the Romans, ch. i.
3. Those who know Calvin only as a theologian much underestimate the extent of his genius. The
codification of our wise edicts, in which he played a large part, does him no less honour than his
Institute. Whatever revolution time may bring in our religion, so long as the spirit of patriotism
and liberty still lives among us, the memory of this great man will be for ever blessed.
4. "In truth," says Macchiavelli, "there has never been, in any country, an extraordinary legislator
who has not had recourse to God; for otherwise his laws would not have been accepted: there
are, in fact, many useful truths of which a wise man may have knowledge without their having
in themselves such clear reasons for their being so as to be able to convince others" (Discourses
on Livy, Bk. v, ch. xi). (Rousseau quotes the Italian.)
Chapter VIII.
The People
Table of Contents
As, before putting up a large building, the architect surveys and sounds the
site to see if it will bear the weight, the wise legislator does not begin by
laying down laws good in themselves, but by investigating the fitness of the
people, for which they are destined, to receive them. Plato refused to
legislate for the Arcadians and the Cyrenæans, because he knew that both
peoples were rich and could not put up with equality; and good laws and
bad men were found together in Crete, because Minos had inflicted
discipline on a people already burdened with vice.
A thousand nations have achieved earthly greatness, that could never
have endured good laws; even such as could have endured them could have
done so only for a very brief period of their long history. Most peoples, like
most men, are docile only in youth; as they grow old they become
incorrigible. When once customs have become established and prejudices
inveterate, it is dangerous and useless to attempt their reformation; the
people, like the foolish and cowardly patients who rave at sight of the
doctor, can no longer bear that any one should lay hands on its faults to
remedy them.
There are indeed times in the history of States when, just as some kinds
of illness turn men's heads and make them forget the past, periods of
violence and revolutions do to peoples what these crises do to individuals:
horror of the past takes the place of forgetfulness, and the State, set on fire
by civil wars, is born again, so to speak, from its ashes, and takes on anew,
fresh from the jaws of death, the vigour of youth. Such were Sparta at the
time of Lycurgus, Rome after the Tarquins, and, in modern times, Holland
and Switzerland after the expulsion of the tyrants.
But such events are rare; they are exceptions, the cause of which is
always to be found in the particular constitution of the State concerned.
They cannot even happen twice to the same people, for it can make itself
free as long as it remains barbarous, but not when the civic impulse has lost
its vigour. Then disturbances may destroy it, but revolutions cannot mend it:
it needs a master, and not a liberator. Free peoples, be mindful of maxim;
"Liberty may be gained, but can never be recovered."
Youth is not infancy. There is for nations, as for men, a period of youth,
or, shall we say, maturity, before which they should not be made subject to
laws; but the maturity of a people is not always easily recognisable, and, if
it is anticipated, the work is spoilt. One people is amenable to discipline
from the beginning; another, not after ten centuries. Russia will never be
really civilised, because it was civilised too soon. Peter had a genius for
imitation; but he lacked true genius, which is creative and makes all from
nothing. He did some good things, but most of what he did was out of
place. He saw that his people was barbarous, but did not see that it was not
ripe for civilisation: he wanted to civilise it when it needed only hardening.
His first wish was to make Germans or Englishmen, when he ought to have
been making Russians; and he prevented his subjects from ever becoming
what they might have been by persuading them that they were what they are
not. In this fashion too a French teacher turns out his pupil to be an infant
prodigy, and for the rest of his life to be nothing whatsoever. The empire of
Russia will aspire to conquer Europe, and will itself be conquered. The
Tartars, its subjects or neighbours, will become its masters and ours, by a
revolution which I regard as inevitable. Indeed, all the kings of Europe are
working in concert to hasten its coming.
Chapter IX.
The People (continued)
Table of Contents
As nature has set bounds to the stature of a well-made man, and, outside
those limits, makes nothing but giants or dwarfs, similarly, for the
constitution of a State to be at its best, it is possible to fix limits that will
make it neither too large for good government, nor too small for self-
maintenance. In every body politic there is a maximum strength which it
cannot exceed and which it only loses by increasing in size. Every
extension of the social tie means its relaxation; and, generally speaking, a
small State is stronger in proportion than a great one.
A thousand arguments could be advanced in favour of this principle.
First, long distances make administration more difficult, just as a weight
becomes heavier at the end of a longer lever. Administration therefore
becomes more and more burdensome as the distance grows greater; for, in
the first place, each city has its own, which is paid for by the people: each
district its own, still paid for by the people: then comes each province, and
then the great governments, satrapies, and vice-royalties, always costing
more the higher you go, and always at the expense of the unfortunate
people. Last of all comes the supreme administration, which eclipses all the
rest. All these overcharges are a continual drain upon the subjects; so far
from being better governed by all these different orders, they are worse
governed than if there were only a single authority over them. In the
meantime, there scarce remain resources enough to meet emergencies; and,
when recourse must be had to these, the State is always on the eve of
destruction.
This is not all; not only has the government less vigour and promptitude
for securing the observance of the laws, preventing nuisances, correcting
abuses, and guarding against seditious undertakings begun in distant places;
the people has less affection for its rulers, whom it never sees, for its
country, which, to its eyes, seems like the world, and for its fellow-citizens,
most of whom are unknown to it. The same laws cannot suit so many
diverse provinces with different customs, situated in the most various
climates, and incapable of enduring a uniform government. Different laws
lead only to trouble and confusion among peoples which, living under the
same rulers and in constant communication one with another, intermingle
and intermarry, and, coming under the sway of new customs, never know if
they can call their very patrimony their own. Talent is buried, virtue
unknown and vice unpunished, among such a multitude of men who do not
know one another, gathered together in one place at the seat of the central
administration. The leaders, overwhelmed with business, see nothing for
themselves; the State is governed by clerks. Finally, the measures which
have to be taken to, maintain the general authority, which all these distant
officials wish to escape or to impose upon, absorb all the energy of the
public, so that there is none left for the happiness of the people. There is
hardly enough to defend it when need arises, and thus a body which is too
big for its constitution gives way and falls crushed under its own weight.
Again, the State must assure itself a safe foundation, if it is to have
stability, and to be able to resist the shocks it cannot help experiencing, as
well as the efforts it will be forced to make for its maintenance; for all
peoples have a kind of centrifugal force that makes them continually act
one against another, and tend to aggrandise themselves at their neighbours'
expense, like the vortices of Descartes. Thus the weak run the risk of being
soon swallowed up; and it is almost impossible for any one to preserve
itself except by putting itself in a state of equilibrium with all, so that the
pressure is on all sides practically equal.
It may therefore be seen that there are reasons for expansion and
reasons for contraction; and it is no small part of the statesman's skill to hit
between them the mean that is most favourable to the preservation of the
State. It may be said that the reason for expansion, being merely external
and relative, ought to be subordinate to the reasons for contraction, which
are internal and absolute. A strong and healthy constitution is the first thing
to look for; and it is better to count on the vigour which comes of good
government than on the resources a great territory furnishes.
It may be added that there have been known States so constituted that
the necessity of making conquests entered into their very constitution, and
that, in order to maintain themselves, they were forced to expand
ceaselessly. It may be that they congratulated themselves greatly on this
fortunate necessity, which none the less indicated to them, along with the
limits of their greatness, the inevitable moment of their fall.
Chapter X.
The People (continued)
Table of Contents
A body politic may be measured in two ways—either by the extent of its
territory, or by the number of its people; and there is, between these two
measurements, a right relation which makes the State really great. The men
make the State, and the territory sustains the men; the right relation
therefore is that the land should suffice for the maintenance of the
inhabitants, and that there should be as many inhabitants as the land can
maintain. In this proportion lies the maximum strength of a given number of
people; for if there is too much land, it is troublesome to guard and
inadequately cultivated, produces more than is needed, and soon gives rise
to wars of defence; if there is not enough, the State depends on its
neighbours for what it needs over and above, and this soon gives rise to
wars of offence. Every people, to which its situation gives no choice save
that between commerce and war, is weak in itself: it depends on its
neighbours, and on circumstances; its existence can never be more than
short and uncertain. It either conquers others, and changes its situation, or it
is conquered and becomes nothing. Only insignificance or greatness can
keep it free.
No fixed relation can be stated between the extent of \; territory and the
population that are adequate one to the other, both because of the
differences in the quality of land, in its fertility, in the nature of its products,
and in the influence of climate, and because of the different tempers of
those who inhabit it; for some in a fertile country consume little, and others
on an ungrateful soil much. The greater or less fecundity of women, the
conditions that are more or less favourable in each country to the growth of
population, and the influence the legislator can hope to exercise by his
institutions, must also be taken into account. The legislator therefore should
not go by what he sees, but by what he foresees; he should stop not so much
at the state in which he actually finds the population, as at that to which it
ought naturally to attain. Lastly, there are countless cases in which the
particular local circumstances demand or allow the acquisition of a greater
territory than seems necessary. Thus, expansion will be great in a
mountainous country, where the natural products, i.e. woods and pastures,
need less labour, where we know from experience that women are more
fertile than in the plains, and where a great expanse of slope affords only a
small level tract that can be counted on for vegetation. On the other hand,
contraction is possible on the coast, even in lands of rocks and nearly barren
sands, because there fishing makes up to a great extent for the lack of land-
produce, because the inhabitants have to congregate together more in order
to repel pirates, and further because it is easier to unburden die country of
its superfluous inhabitants by means of colonies.
To these conditions of law-giving must be added one other which,
though it cannot take the place of the rest, renders them all useless when it
is absent. This is the enjoyment of peace and plenty; for the moment at
which a State sets its house in order is, like the moment when a battalion is
forming up, that when its body is least capable of offering resistance and
easiest to destroy. A better resistance could be made at a time of absolute
disorganisation than at a moment of fermentation, when each is occupied
with his own position and not with the danger. If war, famine, or sedition
arises at this time of crisis, the State will inevitably be overthrown.
Not that many governments have not been set up during such storms;
but in such cases these governments are themselves the State's destroyers.
Usurpers always bring about or select troublous times to get passed, under
cover of the public terror, destructive laws, which the people would never
adopt in cold blood. The moment chosen is one of the surest means of
distinguishing the work of the legislator from that of the tyrant.
What people, then, is a fit subject for legislation? One which, already
bound by some unity of origin, interest, or convention, has never yet felt the
real yoke of law; one that has neither customs nor superstitions deeply
ingrained, one which stands in no fear of being overwhelmed by sudden
invasion; one which, without entering into its neighbours' quarrels, can
resist each of them single-handed, or get the help of one to repel another;
one in which every member may be known by every other, and there is no
need to lay on any man burdens too heavy for a man to bear; one which can
do without other peoples, and without which all others can do;1 one which
is neither rich nor poor, but self-sufficient; and, lastly, one which unites the
consistency of an ancient people with the docility of a new one. Legislation
is made difficult less by what it is necessary to build up than by what has to
be destroyed; and what makes success so rare is the impossibility of finding
natural simplicity together with social requirements. All these conditions
are indeed rarely found united, and therefore few States have good
constitutions.
There is still in Europe one country capable of being given laws—
Corsica. The valour and persistency with which that brave people has
regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some wise man should
teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that some day that
little island will astonish Europe.
1. If there were two neighbouring peoples, one of which could not do without the other, it would be
very hard on the former, and very dangerous for the latter. Every wise nation, in such a case,
would make haste to free the other from dependence. The Republic of Thlascala, enclosed by
the Mexican Empire, preferred doing without salt to buying from the Mexicans, or even getting
it from them as a gift The Thlascalans were wise enough to see the snare hidden under such
liberality. They kept their freedom, and that little State, shut up in that great Empire, was finally
the instrument of its ruin.
Chapter XI.
The Various Systems of Legislation
Table of Contents
If we ask in what precisely consists the greatest good of all, which should
be the end of every system of legislation, we shall find it reduce itself to
two main objects, liberty and equality—liberty, because all particular
dependence means so much force taken from the body of the State, and
equality, because liberty cannot exist without it.
I have already defined civil liberty; by equality, we should understand,
not that the degrees of power and riches are to be absolutely identical for
everybody; but that power shall never be great enough for violence, and
shall always be exercised by virtue of rank and law; and that, in respect of
riches, no citizen shall ever be wealthy enough to buy another, and none
poor enough to be forced to sell himself:1 which implies, on the part of the
great, moderation in goods and position, and, on the side of the common
sort, moderation in avarice and covetousness.
Such equality, we are told, is an unpractical ideal that cannot actually
exist. But if its abuse is inevitable, does it follow that we should not at least
make regulations concerning it? It is precisely because the force of
circumstances tends continually to destroy equality that the force of
legislation should always tend to its maintenance.
But these general objects of every good legislative system need
modifying in every country in accordance with the local situation and the
temper of the inhabitants; and these circumstances should determine, in
each case, the particular system of institutions which is best, not perhaps in
itself, but for the State for which it is destined. If, for instance, the soil is
barren and unproductive, or the land too crowded for its inhabitants, the
people should turn to industry and the crafts, and exchange what they
produce for the commodities they lack. If, on the other hand, a people
dwells in rich plains and fertile slopes, or, in a good land, lacks inhabitants,
it should give all its attention to agriculture, which causes men to multiply,
and should drive out the crafts, which would only result in depopulation, by
grouping in a few localities the few inhabitants there are.2 If a nation dwells
on an extensive and convenient coast-line, let it cover the sea with ships and
foster commerce and navigation. It will have a life that will be short and
glorious. If, on its coasts, the sea washes nothing but almost inaccessible
rocks, let it remain barbarous and ichthyophagous: it will have a quieter,
perhaps a better, and certainly a happier life. In a word, besides the
principles that are common to all, every nation has in itself something that
gives them a particular application, and makes its legislation peculiarly its
own. Thus, among the Jews long ago and more recently among the Arabs,
the chief object was religion, among the Athenians letters, at Carthage and
Tyre commerce, at Rhodes shipping, at Sparta war, at Rome virtue. The
author of The Spirit of the Laws has shown with many examples by what art
the legislator directs the constitution towards each of these objects.
What makes the constitution of a State really solid and lasting is the due
observance of what is proper, so that the natural relations are always in
agreement with the laws on every point, and law only serves, so to speak, to
assure, accompany and rectify them. But if the legislator mistakes his object
and adopts a principle other than circumstances naturally direct; if his
principle makes for servitude while they make for liberty, or if it makes for
riches, while they make for populousness, or if it makes for peace, while
they make for conquest—the laws will insensibly lose their influence, the
constitution will alter, and the State will have no rest from trouble till it is
either destroyed or changed, and nature has resumed her invincible sway.
1. If the object is to give the State consistency, bring the two extremes as near to each other as
possible; allow neither rich men nor beggars. These two estates, which are naturally inseparable,
are equally fatal to the common good; from the one come the friends of tyranny, and from the
other tyrants. It is always between them that public liberty is put up to auction; the one buys,
and the other sells.
2. "Any branch of foreign commerce," says M. d'Argenson, "creates on the whole only apparent
advantage for the kingdom in general; it may enrich some individuals, or even some towns; but
the nation as a whole gains nothing by it, and the people is no better off."
Chapter XII.
The Division of the Laws
Table of Contents
If the whole is to be set in order, and the commonwealth put into the best
possible shape, there are various relations to be considered. First, there is
the action of the complete body upon itself, the relation of the whole to the
whole, of the Sovereign to the State; and this relation, as we shall see, is
made up of the relations of the intermediate terms.
The laws which regulate this relation bear the name of political laws,
and are also called fundamental laws, not without reason if they are wise.
For, if there is, in each State, only one good system, the people that is in
possession of it should hold fast to this; but if the established order is bad,
why should laws that prevent men from being good be regarded as
fundamental? Besides, in any case, a people is always in a position to
change its laws, however good; for, if it choose to do itself harm, who can
have a right to stop it?
The second relation is that of the members one to another, or to the body
as a whole; and this relation should be in the first respect as unimportant,
and in the second as important, as possible. Each citizen would then be
perfectly independent of all the rest, and at the same time very dependent
on the city; which is brought about always by the same means, as the
strength of the State can alone secure the liberty of its members. From this
second relation arise civil laws.
We may consider also a third kind of relation between the individual
and the law, a relation of disobedience to its penalty. This gives rise to the
setting up of criminal laws, which, at bottom, are less a particular class of
law than the sanction behind all the rest.
Along with these three kinds of law goes a fourth, most important of all,
which is not graven on tablets of marble or brass, but on the hearts of the
citizens. This forms the real constitution of the State, takes on every day
new powers, when other laws decay or die out, restores them or takes their
place, keeps a people in the ways in which it was meant to go, and
insensibly replaces authority by the force of habit. I am speaking of
morality, of custom, above all of public opinion; a power unknown to
political thinkers, on which none the less success in everything else
depends. With this the great legislator concerns himself in secret, though he
seems to confine himself to particular regulations; for these are only the arc
of the arch, while manners and morals, slower to arise, form in the end its
immovable keystone.
Among the different classes of laws, the political, which determine the
form of the government, are alone relevant to my subject.
Book III
Table of Contents
Before speaking of the different forms of government, let us try to fix
the exact sense of the word, which has not yet been very clearly
explained.
Chapter I.
Government in General
Table of Contents
I warn the reader that this chapter requires careful reading, and that I am
unable to make myself clear to those who refuse to be attentive.
Every free action is produced by the concurrence of two causes; one
moral, i.e. the will which determines the act; the other physical, i.e. the
power which executes it. When I walk towards an object, it is necessary
first that I should will to go there, and, in the second place, that my feet
should carry me. If a paralytic wills to run and an active man wills not to,
they will both stay where they are. The body politic has the same motive
powers; here too force and will are distinguished, will under the name of
legislative power and force under that of executive power. Without their
concurrence, nothing is, or should be, done.
We have seen that the legislative power belongs to the people, and can
belong to it alone. It may, on the other hand, readily be seen, from the
principles laid down above, that the executive power cannot belong to the
generality as legislature or Sovereign, because it consists wholly of
particular acts which fall outside the competency of the law, and
consequently of the Sovereign, whose acts must always be laws.
The public force therefore needs an agent of its own to bind it together
and set it to work under the direction of the general will, to serve as a means
of communication between the State and the Sovereign, and to do for the
collective person more or less what the union of soul and body does for
man. Here we have what is, in the State, the basis of government, often
wrongly confused with the Sovereign, whose minister it is.
What then is government? An intermediate body set up between the
subjects and the Sovereign, to secure their mutual correspondence, charged
with the execution of the laws and the maintenance of liberty, both civil and
political.
The members of this body are called magistrates or kings, that is to say
governors, and the whole body bears the name prince.1 Thus those who
hold that the act, by which a people puts itself under a prince, is not a
contract, are certainly right. It is simply and solely a commission, an
employment, in which the rulers, mere officials of the Sovereign, exercise
in their own name the power of which it makes them depositaries. This
power it can limit, modify or recover at pleasure; for the alienation of such
a right is incompatible with the nature of the social body, and contrary to
the end of association.
I call then government, or supreme administration, the legitimate
exercise of the executive power, and prince or magistrate the man or the
body entrusted with that administration.
In government reside the intermediate forces whose relations make up
that of the whole to the whole, or of the Sovereign to the State. This last
relation may be represented as that between the extreme terms of a
continuous proportion, which has government as its mean proportional. The
government gets from the Sovereign the orders it gives the people, and, for
the State to be properly balanced, there must, when everything is reckoned
in, be equality between the product or power of the government taken in
itself, and the product or power of the citizens, who are on the one hand
sovereign and on the other subject.
Furthermore, none of these three terms can be altered without the
equality being instantly destroyed. If the Sovereign desires to govern, or the
magistrate to give laws, or if the subjects refuse to obey, disorder takes the
place of regularity, force and will no longer act together, and the State is
dissolved and falls into despotism or anarchy. Lastly, as there is only one
mean proportional between each relation, there is also only one good
government possible for a State. But, as countless events may change the
relations of a people, not only may different governments be good for
different peoples, but also for the same people at different times.
In attempting to give some idea of the various relations that may hold
between these two extreme terms, I shall take as an example the number of
a people, which is the most easily expressible.
Suppose the State is composed of ten thousand citizens. The Sovereign
can only be considered collectively and as a body; but each member, as
being a subject, is regarded as an individual: thus the Sovereign is to the
subject as ten thousand to one, i.e. each member of the State has as his
share only a ten-thousandth part of the sovereign authority, although he is
wholly under its control. If the people numbers a hundred thousand, the
condition of the subject undergoes no change, and each equally is under the
whole authority of the laws, while his vote, being reduced to one hundred
thousandth part, has ten times less influence in drawing them up. The
subject therefore remaining always a unit, the relation between him and the
Sovereign increases with the number of the citizens. From this it follows
that, the larger the State, the less the liberty.
When I say the relation increases, I mean that it grows more unequal.
Thus the greater it is in the geometrical sense, the less relation there is in
the ordinary sense of the word. In the former sense, the relation, considered
according to quantity, is expressed by the quotient; in the latter, considered
according to identity, it is reckoned by similarity.
Now, the less relation the particular wills have to the general will, that
is, morals and manners to laws, the more should the repressive force be
increased. The government, then, to be good, should be proportionately
stronger as the people is more numerous.
On the other hand, as the growth of the State gives the depositaries of
the public authority more temptations and chances of abusing their power,
the greater the force with which the government ought to be endowed for
keeping the people in hand, the greater too should be the force at the
disposal of the Sovereign for keeping the government in hand. I am
speaking, not of absolute force, but of the relative force of the different
parts of the State.
It follows from this double relation that the continuous proportion
between the Sovereign, the prince and the people, is by no means an
arbitrary idea, but a necessary consequence of the nature of the body politic.
It follows further that, one of the extreme terms, viz. the people, as subject,
being fixed and represented by unity, whenever the duplicate ratio increases
or diminishes, the simple ratio does the same, and is changed accordingly.
From this we see that there is not a single unique and absolute form of
government, but as many governments differing in nature as there are States
differing in size.
If, ridiculing this system, any one were to say that, in order to find the
mean proportional and give form to the body of the government, it is only
necessary, according to me, to find the square root of the number of the
people, I should answer that I am here taking this number only as an
instance; that the relations of which I am speaking are not measured by the
number of men alone, but generally by the amount of action, which is a
combination of a multitude of causes; and that, further, if, to save words, I
borrow for a moment the terms of geometry, I am none the less well aware
that moral quantities do not allow of geometrical accuracy.
The government is on a small scale what the body politic which
includes it is on a great one. It is a moral person endowed with certain
faculties, active like the Sovereign and passive like the State, and capable of
being resolved into other similar relations. This accordingly gives rise to a
new proportion, within which there is yet another, according to the
arrangement of the magistracies, till an indivisible middle term is reached,
i.e. a single ruler or supreme magistrate, who may be represented, in the
midst of this progression, as the unity between the fractional and the ordinal
series.
Without encumbering ourselves with this multiplication of terms, let us
rest content with regarding government as a new body within the State,
distinct from the people and the Sovereign, and intermediate between them.
There is between these two bodies this essential difference, that the
State exists by itself, and the government only through the Sovereign. Thus
the dominant will of the prince is, or should be, nothing but the general will
or the law; his force is only the public force concentrated in his hands, and,
as soon as he tries to base any absolute and independent act on his own
authority, the tie that binds the whole together begins to be loosened. If
finally the prince should come to have a particular will more active than the
will of the Sovereign, and should employ the public force in his hands in
obedience to this particular will, there would be, so to speak, two
Sovereigns, one rightful and the other actual, the social union would
evaporate instantly, and the body politic would be dissolved.
However, in order that the government may have a true existence and a
real life distinguishing it from the body of the State, and in order that all its
members may be able to act in concert and fulfil the end for which it was
set up, it must have a particular personality, a sensibility common to its
members, and a force and will of its own making for its preservation. This
particular existence implies assemblies, councils, power of deliberation and
decision, rights, titles, and privileges belonging exclusively to the prince
and making the office of magistrate more honourable in proportion as it is
more troublesome. The difficulties lie in the manner of so ordering this
subordinate whole within the whole, that it in no way alters the general
constitution by affirmation of its own, and always distinguishes the
particular force it possesses, which is destined to aid in its preservation,
from the public force, which is destined to the preservation of the State;
and, in a word, is always ready to sacrifice the government to the people,
and never to sacrifice the people to the government.
Furthermore, although the artificial body of the government is the work
of another artificial body, and has, we may say, only a borrowed and
subordinate life, this does not prevent it from being able to act with more or
less vigour or promptitude, or from being, so to speak, in more or less
robust health. Finally, without departing directly from the end for which it
was instituted, it may deviate more or less from it, according to the manner
of its constitution.
From all these differences arise the various relations which the
government ought to bear to the body of the State, according to the
accidental and particular relations by which the State itself is modified, for
often the government that is best in itself will become the most pernicious,
if the relations in which it stands have altered according to the defects of the
body politic to which it belongs.
1. Thus at Venice the College, even in the absence of the Doge, is called "Most Serene Prince."
Chapter II.
The Constituent Principle in the Various Forms of
Government
Table of Contents
To set forth the general cause of the above differences, we must here
distinguish between government and its principle, as we did before between
the State and the Sovereign.
The body of the magistrate may be composed of a greater or a less
number of members. We said that the relation of the Sovereign to the
subjects was greater in proportion as the people was more numerous, and,
by a clear analogy, we may say the same of the relation of the government
to the magistrates.
But the total force of the government, being always that of the State, is
invariable; so that, the more of this force it expends on its own members,
the less it has left to employ on the whole people.
The more numerous the magistrates, therefore, the weaker the
government. This principle being fundamental, we must do our best to
make it clear.
In the person of the magistrate we can distinguish three essentially
different wills: first, the private will of the individual, tending only to his
personal advantage; secondly, the common will of the magistrates, which is
relative solely to the advantage of the prince, and may be called corporate
will, being general in relation to the government, and particular in relation
to the State, of which the government forms part; and, in the third place, the
will of the people or the sovereign will, which is general both in relation to
the State regarded as the whole, and to the government regarded as a part of
the whole.
In a perfect act of legislation, the individual or particular will should be
at zero; the corporate will belonging to the government should occupy a
very subordinate position; and, consequently, the general or sovereign will
should always predominate and should be the sole guide of all the rest.
According to the natural order, on the other hand, these different wills
become more active in proportion as they are concentrated. Thus, the
general will is always the weakest, the corporate will second, and the
individual will strongest of all: so that, in the government, each member is
first of all himself, then a magistrate, and then a citizen —in an order
exactly the reverse of what the social system requires.
This granted, if the whole government is in the hands of one man, the
particular and the corporate will are wholly united, and consequently the
latter is at its highest possible degree of intensity. But, as the use to which
the force Is put depends on the degree reached by the will, and as the
absolute force of the government is invariable, it follows that the most
active government is that of one man.
Suppose, on the other hand, we unite the government with the
legislative authority, and make the Sovereign prince also, and all the
citizens so many magistrates: then the corporate will, being confounded
with the general will, can possess no greater activity than that will, and
must leave the particular will as strong as it can possibly be. Thus, the
government, having always the same absolute force, will be at the lowest
point of its relative force or activity.
These relations are incontestable, and there are other considerations
which still further confirm them. We can see, for instance, that each
magistrate is more active in the body to which he belongs than each citizen
in that to which he belongs, and that consequently the particular will has
much more influence on the acts of the government than on those of the
Sovereign; for each magistrate is almost always charged with some
governmental function, while each citizen, taken singly, exercises no
function of Sovereignty. Furthermore, the bigger the State grows, the more
its real force increases, though not in direct proportion to its growth; but,
the State remaining the same, the number of magistrates may increase to
any extent, without the government gaining any greater real force; for its
force is that of the State, the dimension of which remains equal. Thus the
relative force or activity of the government decreases, while its absolute or
real force cannot increase.
Moreover, it is a certainty that promptitude in execution diminishes as
more people are put in charge of it: where prudence is made too much of,
not enough is made of fortune; opportunity is let slip, and deliberation
results in the loss of its object.
I have just proved that the government grows remiss in proportion as
the number of the magistrates increases; and I previously proved that, the
more numerous the people, the greater should be the repressive force. From
this it follows that the relation of the magistrates to the government should
vary inversely to the relation of the subjects to the Sovereign; that is to say,
the larger the State, the more should the government be tightened, so that
the number of the rulers diminish in proportion to the increase of that of the
people.
It should be added that I am here speaking of the relative strength of the
government, and not of its rectitude: for, on the other hand, the more
numerous the magistracy, the nearer the corporate will comes to the general
will; while, under a single magistrate, the corporate will is, as I said, merely
a particular will. Thus, what may be gained on one side is lost on the other,
and the art of the legislator is to know how to fix the point at which the
force and the will of the government, which are always in inverse
proportion, meet in the relation that is most to the advantage of the State.
Chapter III.
The Division of Governments
Table of Contents
We saw in the last chapter what causes the various kinds or forms of
government to be distinguished according to the number of the members
composing them: it remains in this to discover how the division is made.
In the first place, the Sovereign may commit the charge of the
government to the whole people or to the majority of the people, so that
more citizens are magistrates than are mere private individuals. This form
of government is called democracy.
Or it may restrict the government to a small number; so that there are
more private citizens than magistrates; and this is named aristocracy.
Lastly, it may concentrate the whole government in the hands of a single
magistrate from whom all others hold their power. This third form is the
most usual, and is called monarchy, or royal government.
It should be remarked that all these forms, or at least the first two, admit
of degree, and even of very wide differences; for democracy may include
the whole people, or may be restricted to half. Aristocracy, in its turn, may
be restricted indefinitely from half the people down to the smallest possible
number. Even royalty is susceptible of a measure of distribution. Sparta
always had two kings, as its constitution provided; and the Roman Empire
saw as many as eight emperors at once, without it being possible to say that
the Empire was split up. Thus there is a point at which each form of
government passes into the next, and it becomes clear that, under three
comprehensive denominations, government is really susceptible of as many
diverse forms as the State has citizens.
There are even more: for, as the government may also, in certain
aspects, be subdivided into other parts, one administered in one fashion and
one in another, the combination of the three forms may result in a multitude
of mixed forms, each of which admits of multiplication by all the simple
forms.
There has been at all times much dispute concerning the best form of
government, without consideration of the fact that each is in some cases the
best, and in others the worst.
If, in the different States, the number of supreme magistrates should be
in inverse ratio to the number of citizens, it follows that, generally,
democratic government suits small States, aristocratic government those of
middle size, and monarchy great ones. This rule is immediately deducible
from the principle laid down. But it is impossible to count the innumerable
circumstances which may furnish exceptions.
Chapter IV.
Democracy
Table of Contents
He who makes the law knows better than any one else how it should be
executed and interpreted. It seems then impossible to have a better
constitution than that in which the executive and legislative powers are
united; but this very fact renders the government in certain respects
inadequate, because things which should be distinguished are confounded,
and the prince and the Sovereign, being the same person, form, so to speak,
no more than a government without government.
It is not good for him who makes the laws to execute them, or for the
body of the people to turn its attention away from a general standpoint and
devote it to particular objects. Nothing is more dangerous than the influence
of private interests in public affairs, and the abuse of the laws by the
government is a less evil than the corruption of the legislator, which is the
inevitable sequel to a particular standpoint. In such a case, the State being
altered in substance, all reformation becomes impossible. A people that
would never misuse governmental powers would never misuse
independence; a people that would always govern well would not need to
be governed.
If we take the term in the strict sense, there never has been a real
democracy, and there never will be. It is against the natural order for the
many to govern and the few to be governed. It is unimaginable that the
people should remain continually assembled to devote their time to public
affairs, and it is clear that they cannot set up commissions for that purpose
without the form of administration being changed.
In fact, I can confidently lay down as a principle that, when the
functions of government are shared by several tribunals, the less numerous
sooner or later acquire the greatest authority, if only because they are in a
position to expedite affairs, and power thus naturally comes into their
hands.
Besides, how many conditions that are difficult to unite does such a
government presuppose! First, a very small State, where the people can
readily be got together and where each citizen can with ease know all the
rest; secondly, great simplicity of manners, to prevent business from
multiplying and raising thorny problems; next, a large measure of equality
in rank and fortune, without which equality of rights and authority cannot
long subsist; lastly, little or no luxury—for luxury either comes of riches or
makes them necessary; it corrupts at once rich and poor, the rich by
possession and the poor by covetousness; it sells the country to softness and
vanity, and takes away from the State all its citizens, to make them slaves
one to another, and one and all to public opinion.
This is why a famous writer has made virtue the fundamental principle
of Republics; for all these conditions could not exist without virtue. But, for
want of the necessary distinctions, that great thinker was often inexact, and
sometimes obscure, and did not see that, the sovereign authority being
everywhere the same, the same principle should be found in every well-
constituted State, in a greater or less degree, it is true, according to the form
of the government.
It may be added that there is no government so subject to civil wars and
intestine agitations as democratic or popular government, because there is
none which has so strong and continual a tendency to change to another
form, or which demands more vigilance and courage for its maintenance as
it is. Under such a constitution above all, the citizen should arm himself
with strength and constancy, and say, every day of his life, what a virtuous
Count Palatine1 said in the Diet of Poland: Malo periculosam libertatem
quam quietum servitium.
Were there a people of gods, their government would be democratic. So
perfect a government is not for men.
1. The Palatine of Posen, father of the King of Poland, Duke of Lorraine. I prefer liberty with
danger to peace with slavery.
Chapter V.
Aristocracy
Table of Contents
We have here two quite distinct moral persons, the government and the
Sovereign, and in consequence two general wills, one general in relation to
all the citizens, the other only for the members of the administration. Thus,
although the government may regulate its internal policy as it pleases, it can
never speak to the people save in the name of the Sovereign, that is, of the
people itself, a fact which must not be forgotten.
The first societies governed themselves aristocratically. The heads of
families took counsel together on public affairs. The young bowed without
question to the authority of experience. Hence such names as priests,
elders, senate, and gerontes. The savages of North America govern
themselves in this way even now, and their government is admirable.
But, in proportion as artificial inequality produced by institutions
became predominant over natural inequality, riches or power1 were put
before age, and aristocracy became elective. Finally, the transmission of the
father's power along with his goods to his children, by creating patrician
families, made government hereditary, and there came to be senators of
twenty.
There are then three sorts of aristocracy—natural, elective and
hereditary. The first is only for simple peoples; the third is the worst of all
governments; the second is the best, and is aristocracy properly so called.
Besides the advantage that lies in the distinction between the two
powers, it presents that of its members being chosen; for, in popular
government, all the citizens are born magistrates; but here magistracy is
confined to a few, who become such only by election.2 By this means
uprightness, understanding, experience and all other claims to pre-eminence
and public esteem become so many further guarantees of wise government.
Moreover, assemblies are more easily held, affairs better discussed and
carried out with more order and diligence, and the credit of the State is
better sustained abroad by venerable senators than by a multitude that is
unknown or despised.
In a word, it is the best and most natural arrangement that the wisest
should govern the many, when it is assured that they will govern for its
profit, and not for their own. There is no need to multiply instruments, or
get twenty thousand men to do what a hundred picked men can do even
better, but it must not be forgotten mat corporate interest here begins to
direct the public power less under the regulation of the general will, and
that a further inevitable propensity takes away from the laws part of the
executive power.
If we are to speak of what is individually desirable, neither should the
State be so small, nor a people so simple and upright, that the execution of
the laws follows immediately from the public will, as it does in a good
democracy. Nor should the nation be so great that the rulers have to scatter
in order to govern it and are able to play the Sovereign each in his own
department, and, beginning by making themselves independent, end by
becoming masters.
But if aristocracy does not demand all the virtues needed by popular
government, it demands others which are peculiar to itself; for instance,
moderation on the side of the rich and contentment on that of the poor; for it
seems that thorough-going equality would be out of place, as it was not
found even at Sparta.
Furthermore, if this form of government carries with it a certain
inequality of fortune, this is justifiable in order that as a rule the
administration of public affairs may be entrusted to those who are most able
to give them their whole time, but not, as Aristotle maintains, in order that
the rich may always be put first. On the contrary, it is of importance that an
opposite choice should occasionally teach the people that the deserts of men
offer claims to pre-eminence more important than those of riches.
1. It is clear that the word optimates meant, among the ancients, not the best, but the most powerful.
2. It is of great importance that the form of the election of magistrates should be regulated by law;
for if it is left at the discretion of the prince, k is impossible to avoid falling into hereditary
aristocracy, as the Republics of Venice and Berne actually did. The first of these has therefore
long been a State dissolved; the second, however, is maintained by the extreme wisdom of the
senate, and forms an honourable and highly dangerous exception.
Chapter VI.
Monarchy
Table of Contents
So far, we have considered the prince as a moral and collective person,
unified by the force of the laws, and the depositary in the State of the
executive power. We have now to consider this power when it is gathered
together into the hands of a natural person, a rear man, who alone has the
right to dispose of it in accordance with the laws. Such a person is called a
monarch or king.
In contrast with other forms of administration, in which a collective
being stands for an individual, in this form an individual stands for a
collective being; so that the moral unity that constituted the prince is at the
same time a physical unity, and all the qualities, which in the other case are
only with difficulty brought together by the law, are found naturally united.
Thus the will of the people, the will of the prince, the public force of the
State, and the particular force of the government, all answer to a single
motive power; all the springs of the machine are in the same hands, the
whole moves towards the same end; there are no conflicting movements to
cancel one another, and no kind of constitution can be imagined in which a
less amount of effort produces a more considerable amount of action.
Archimedes, seated quietly on the bank and easily drawing a great vessel
afloat, stands to my mind for a skilful monarch, governing vast states from
his study, and moving everything while he seems himself unmoved.
But if no government is more vigorous than this, there is also none in
which the particular will holds more sway and rules the rest more easily.
Everything moves towards the same end indeed, but this end is by no means
that of the public happiness, and even the force of the administration
constantly shows itself prejudicial to the State.
Kings desire to be absolute, and men are always crying out to them
from afar that the best means of being so is to get themselves loved by their
people. This precept is all very well, and even in some respects very true.
Unfortunately, it will always be derided at court. The power which comes of
a people's love is no doubt the greatest; but it is precarious and conditional,
and princes will never rest content with it. The best kings desire to be in a
position to be wicked, if they please, without forfeiting their mastery:
political sermonisers may tell them to their hearts' content that, the people's
strength being their own, their first interest is that the people should be
prosperous, numerous and formidable; they are well aware that this is
Untrue. Their first personal interest is that the people should be weak,
wretched, and unable to resist them. I admit that, provided the subjects
remained always in submission, the prince's interest would indeed be that it
should be powerful, in order that its power, being his own, might make him
formidable to his neighbours; but, this interest being merely secondary and
subordinate, and strength being incompatible with submission, princes
naturally give the preference always to the principle that is more to their
immediate advantage. This is what Samuel put strongly before the Hebrews,
and what Macchiavelli has clearly shown. He professed to teach kings; but
it was the people he really taught. His Prince is the book of Republicans.1
We found, on general grounds, that monarchy is suitable only for great
States, and this is confirmed when we examine it in itself. The more
numerous the public administration, the smaller becomes the relation
between the prince and the subjects, and the nearer it comes to equality, so
that in democracy the ratio is unity, or absolute equality. Again, as the
government is restricted in numbers the ratio increases and reaches its
maximum when the government is in the hands of a single person. There is
then too great a distance between prince and people and the State lacks a
bond of union. To form such a bond, there must be intermediate orders, and
princes, personages and nobility to compose them. But no such things suit a
small State, to which all class differences mean ruin.
If, however, it is hard for a great State to be well governed, it is much
harder for it to be so by a single man; and every one knows what happens
when kings substitute others for themselves.
An essential and inevitable defect, which will always rank monarchical
below republican government, is that in a republic the public voice hardly
ever raises to the highest positions men who are not enlightened and
capable, and such as to fill them with honour; while in monarchies these
who rise to the top are most often merely petty blunderers petty swindlers,
and petty intriguers, whose petty talents cause them to get into the highest
positions at Court, but, as soon as they have got there, serve only to make
their ineptitude clear to the public. The people is far less often mistaken in
its choice than the prince; and a man of real worth among the king's
ministers is almost as rare as a fool at the head of a republican government.
Thus, when, by some fortunate chance, one of these born governors takes
the helm of State in some monarchy that has been nearly overwhelmed by
swarms of 'gentlemanly' administrators, there is nothing but amazement at
the resources he discovers, and his coming marks an era in his country's
history.
For a monarchical State to have a chance of being well governed, its
population and extent must be proportionate to the abilities of its governor.
If is easier to conquer than to rule. With a long enough lever, the world
could be moved with a single finger; to sustain it needs the shoulders of
Hercules. However small a State may be, the prince is hardly ever big
enough for it. When, on the other hand, it happens that the State is too small
for its ruler, in these rare cases too it is ill governed, because the ruler,
constantly pursuing his great designs, forgets the interests of the people, and
makes it no less wretched by misusing the talents he has, than a ruler of less
capacity would make it for want of those he had not. A kingdom should, so
to speak, expand or contract with each reign, according to the prince's
capabilities; but, the abilities of a senate being more constant in quantity,
the State can then have permanent frontiers without the administration
suffering.
The disadvantage that is most felt in monarchical government is the
want of the continuous succession which, in both the other forms, provides
an unbroken bond of union. When one king dies, another is needed;
elections leave dangerous intervals and are full of storms; and unless the
citizens are disinterested and upright to a degree which very seldom goes
with this kind of government, intrigue and corruption abound. He to whom
the State has sold itself can hardly help selling it in his turn and repaying
himself, at the expense of the weak, the money the powerful have wrung
from him. Under such an administration, venality sooner or later spreads
through every part, and peace so enjoyed under a king is worse than the
disorders of an interregnum.
What has been done to prevent these evils? Crowns have been made
hereditary in certain families, and an order of succession has been set up, to
prevent disputes from arising on the death of kings. That is to say, the
disadvantages of regency have been put in place of those of election,
apparent tranquillity has been preferred to wise administration, and men
have chosen rather to risk having children, monstrosities, or imbeciles as
rulers to having disputes over the choice of good kings. It has not been
taken into account that, in so exposing ourselves to the risks this possibility
entails, we are setting almost all the chances against us. There was sound
sense in what the younger Dionysius said to his father, who reproached him
for doing some shameful deed by asking, "Did I set you the example?"
"No," answered his son, "but your father was not king."
Everything conspires to take away from a man who is set in authority
over others the sense of justice and reason. Much trouble, we are told, is
taken to teach young princes the art of reigning; but their education seems
to do them no good. It would be better to begin by teaching them the art of
obeying. The greatest kings whose praises history tells were not brought up
to reign: reigning is a science we are never so far from possessing as when
we have learnt too much of it, and one we acquire better by obeying than by
commanding. "Nam utilissimus idem ac brevissimus bonarum malarumque
rerum delectus cogitare quid aut nolueris sub alio principe, aut volueris."2
One result Of this lack of coherence is the inconstancy of royal
government, which, regulated now on one scheme and now on another,
according to the character of the reigning prince or those who reign for him,
cannot for long have a fixed object or a consistent policy—and this
variability, not found in the other forms of government, where the prince is
always the same, causes the State to be always shifting from principle to
principle and from project to project. Thus we may say that generally, if a
court is more subtle in intrigue, there is more wisdom in a senate, and
Republics advance towards their ends by more consistent and better
considered policies; while every revolution in a royal ministry creates a
revolution in the State; for the principle common to all ministers and nearly
all kings is to do in every respect the reverse of what was done by their
predecessors.
This incoherence further clears up a sophism that is very familiar to
royalist political writers; not only is civil government likened to domestic
government, and the prince to the father of a family—this error has already
been refuted—but the prince is also freely credited with all the virtues he
ought to possess, and is supposed to be always what he should be. This
supposition once made, royal government is clearly preferable to all others,
because it is incontestably the strongest, and, to be the best also, wants only
a corporate will more in conformity with the general will.
But if, according to Plato,3 the "king by nature" is such a rarity, how
often will nature and fortune conspire to give him a crown? And, if royal
education necessarily corrupts those who receive it, what is to be hoped
from a series of men brought up to reign? It is, then, wanton self-deception
to confuse royal government with government by a good king. To see such
government as it is in itself, we must consider it as it is under princes who
are incompetent or wicked: for either they will come to the throne wicked
or incompetent, or the throne will make them so.
These difficulties have not escaped our writers, who, all the same, are
not troubled by them. The remedy, they say, is to obey without a murmur:
God sends bad kings in His wrath, and they must be borne as the scourges
of Heaven. Such talk is doubtless edifying; but it would be more in place in
a pulpit than in a political book. What are we to think of a doctor who
promises miracles, and whose whole art is to exhort the sufferer to
patience? We know for ourselves that we must put up with a bad
government when it is there; the question is how to find a good one.
1. Macchiavelli was a proper man and a good citizen; but, being attached to the court of the Medici,
he could not help veiling his love of liberty in the midst of his country's oppression. The choice
of his detestable hero, Cæsar Borgia, clearly enough shows his hidden aim; and the
contradiction between the teaching of the Prince and that of the Discourses on Livy and the
History of Florence shows that this profound political thinker has so far been studied only by
superficial or corrupt readers. The Court of Rome sternly prohibited his book. I can well believe
it; for it is that Court it most clearly portrays.
2. Tacitus, Histories, i. 16. "For the best, and also the shortest way of finding out what is good and
what is bad is to consider what you would have wished to happen or not to happen, had another
than you been Emperor."
3. In the Politicus.
Chapter VII.
Mixed Governments
Table of Contents
Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as a simple government. An
isolated ruler must have subordinate magistrates; a popular government
must have a head. There is therefore, in the distribution of the executive
power, always a gradation from the greater to the lesser number, with the
difference that sometimes the greater number is dependent on the smaller,
and sometimes the smaller on the greater.
Sometimes the distribution is equal, when either the constituent parts
are in mutual dependence, as in the government of England, or the authority
of each section is independent, but imperfect, as in Poland. This last form is
bad; for it secures no unity in the government, and the State is left without a
bond of union.
Is a simple or a mixed government the better? Political writers are
always debating the question, which must be answered as we have already
answered a question about all forms of government.
Simple government is better in itself, just because it is simple. But when
the executive power is not sufficiently dependent upon the legislative
power, i.e. when the prince is more closely related to the Sovereign than the
people to the prince, this lack of proportion must be cured by the division of
the government; for all the parts have then no less authority over the
subjects, while their division makes them all together less strong against the
Sovereign.
The same disadvantage is also prevented by the appointment of
intermediate magistrates, who leave the government entire, and have the
effect only of balancing the two powers and maintaining their respective
rights. Government is then not mixed, but moderated.
The opposite disadvantages may be similarly cured, and, when the
government is too lax, tribunals may be set up to concentrate it. This is done
in all democracies. In the first case, the government is divided to make it
weak; in the second, to make it strong: for the maxima of both strength and
weakness are found in simple governments, while the mixed forms result in
a mean strength.
Chapter VIII.
That All Forms of Government Do Not Suit All
Countries
Table of Contents
Liberty not being a fruit of all climates, is not within the reach of all
peoples. The more this principle, laid down by Montesquieu, is considered,
the more its truth is felt; the more it is combated, the more chance is given
to confirm it by new proofs.
In all the governments that there are, the public person consumes
without producing. Whence then does it get what it consumes? From the
labour of its members. The necessities of the public are supplied out of the
superfluities of individuals. It follows that the civil State can subsist only so
long as men's labour brings them a return greater than their needs.
The amount of this excess is not the same in all countries. In some it is
considerable, in others middling, in yet others nil, in some even negative.
The relation of product to subsistence depends on the fertility of the
climate, on the sort of labour the land demands, on the nature of its
products, on the strength of its inhabitants, on the greater or less
consumption they find necessary, and on several further considerations of
which the whole relation is made up.
On the other side, all governments are not of the same nature: some are
less voracious than others, and the differences between them are based on
this second principle, that the further from their source the public
contributions are removed, the more burdensome they become.
The charge should be measured not by the amount of the impositions,
but by the path they have to travel in order to get back to those from whom
they came. When the circulation is prompt and well-established, it does not
matter whether much or little is paid; the people is always rich and,
financially speaking, all is well. On the contrary, however little the people
gives, if that little does not return to it, it is soon exhausted by giving
continually: the State is then never rich, and the people is always a people
of beggars.
It follows that, the more the distance between people and government
increases, the more burdensome tribute becomes: thus, in a democracy, the
people bears the least charge; in an aristocracy, a greater charge; and, in
monarchy, the weight becomes heaviest. Monarchy therefore suits only
wealthy nations; aristocracy, States of middling size and wealth; and
democracy, States that are small and poor.
In fact, the more we reflect, the more we find the difference between
free and monarchical States to be this: in the former, everything is used for
the public advantage; in the latter, the public forces and those of individuals
are affected by each other, and either increases as the other grows weak;
finally, instead of governing subjects to make them happy, despotism makes
them wretched in order to govern them.
We find then, in every climate, natural causes according to which the
form of government which it requires can be assigned, and we can even say
what sort of inhabitants it should have.
Unfriendly and barren lands, where the product does; not repay the
labour, should remain desert and uncultivated, or peopled only by savages;
lands where men's labour brings in no more than the exact minimum
necessary to subsistence should be inhabited by barbarous peoples: in such
places all polity is impossible. Lands where the surplus of product over
labour is only middling are suitable for free peoples; those in which the soil
is abundant and fertile and gives a great product for a little labour call for
monarchical government, in order that the surplus of superfluities among
the subjects may be consumed by the luxury of the prince: for it is better for
this excess to be absorbed by the government than dissipated among the
individuals. I am aware that there are exceptions; but these exceptions
themselves confirm the rule, in that sooner or later they produce revolutions
which restore things to the natural order.
General laws should always be distinguished from individual causes
that may modify their effects. If all the South were covered with Republics
and all the North with despotic States, it would be none the less true that, in
point of climate, despotism is suitable to hot countries, barbarism to cold
countries, and good polity to temperate regions. I see also that, the principle
being granted, there may be disputes on its application; it may be said that
there are cold countries that are very fertile, and tropical countries that are
very unproductive. But this difficulty exists only for those who do not
consider the question in all its aspects. We must, as I have already said, take
labour, strength, consumption, etc., into account.
Take two tracts of equal extent, one of which brings in five and the
other ten. If the inhabitants of the first consume four and those of the
second nine, the surplus of the first product will be a fifth and that of the
second a tenth. The ratio of these two surpluses will then be inverse to that
of the products, and the tract which produces only five will give a surplus
double that of the tract which produces ten.
But there is no question of a double product, and I think no one would
put the fertility of cold countries, as a general rule, on an equality with that
of hot ones. Let us, however, suppose this equality to exist: let us, if you
will, regard England as on the same level as Sicily, and Poland as Egypt—
further south, we shall have Africa and the Indies; further north, nothing at
all. To get this equality of product, what a difference there must be in
tillage: in Sicily, there is only need to scratch the ground; in England, haw
men must toil! But, where more hands are needed to get the same product,
the superfluity must necessarily be less.
Consider, besides, that the same number of men consume much less in
hot countries. The climate requires sobriety for the sake of health; and
Europeans who try to live there as they would at home all perish of
dysentery and indigestion. "We are," says Chardin, "carnivorous animals,
wolves, in comparison with the Asiatics. Some attribute the sobriety of the
Persians to the fact that their country is less cultivated; but it is my belief
that their country abounds less in commodities because the inhabitants need
less. If their frugality," he goes on, "were the effect of the nakedness of die
land, only the poor would eat little; but everybody does so. Again, less or
more would be eaten in various provinces, according to the land's fertility;
but the same sobriety is found throughout the kingdom. They are very
proud of their manner of life, saying that you have only to look at their hue
to recognise how far it excels that of the Christians. In fact, the Persians are
of an even hue; their skins are fair, fine and smooth; while die hue of their
subjects, the Armenians, who live after the European fashion, is rough and
blotchy, and their bodies are gross and unwieldy."
The nearer you get to the equator, the less people live on. Meat they
hardly touch; rice, maize, curcur, millet and cassava are their ordinary food.
There are in the Indies millions of men whose subsistence does not cost a
halfpenny a day. Even in Europe we find considerable differences of
appetite between Northern and Southern peoples. A Spaniard will live for a
week on a German's dinner. In the countries in which men are more
voracious, luxury therefore turns in the direction of consumption. In
England, luxury appears in a well-filled table; in Italy, you feast on sugar
and flowers.
Luxury in clothes shows similar differences. In climates in which the
changes of season are prompt and violent, men have better and simpler
clothes; where they clothe themselves only for adornment, what is striking
is more thought of than what is useful; clothes themselves are then a luxury.
At Naples, you may see daily walking in the Pausilippeum men in gold-
embroidered upper garments and nothing else. It is the same with buildings;
magnificence is the sole consideration where there is nothing to fear from
the air. In Paris and London, you desire to be lodged warmly and
comfortably; in Madrid, you have superb salons, but not a window that
closes, and you go to bed in a mere hole.
In hot countries foods are much more substantial and succulent; and the
third difference cannot but have an influence on the second. Why are so
many vegetables eaten in Italy? Because there they are good, nutritious and
excellent in taste. In France, where they are nourished only on water, they
are far from nutritious and are thought nothing of at table. They take up all
the same no less ground, and cost at least as much pains to cultivate. It is a
proved fact that the wheat of Barbary, in other respects inferior to that of
France, yields much more flour, and that the wheat of France in turn yields
more than that of northern countries; from which it may be inferred that a
like gradation in the same direction, from equator to pole, is found
generally. But is it not an obvious disadvantage for an equal product to
contain less nourishment?
To all these points may be added another, which at once depends on and
strengthens them. Hot countries need inhabitants less than cold countries,
and can support more of them. There is thus a double surplus, which is all
to the advantage of despotism. The greater the territory occupied by a fixed
number of inhabitants, the more difficult revolt becomes, because rapid or
secret concerted action is impossible, and the government can easily
unmask projects and cut communications; but the more a numerous people
is gathered together, the less can the government usurp the Sovereign's
place: the people's leaders can deliberate as safely in their houses as the
prince in council, and the crowd gathers as rapidly in the squares as the
prince's troops in their quarters. The advantage of tyrannical government
therefore lies in acting at great distances. With the help of the rallying-
points it establishes, its strength, like that of the lever,1 grows with distance.
The strength of the people, on the other hand, acts only when concentrated:
when spread abroad, it evaporates and is lost, like powder scattered on the
ground, which catches fire only grain by grain. The least populous countries
are thus the fittest for tyranny: fierce animals reign only in deserts.
1. This does not contradict what I said before (Book ii, ch. ix) about the disadvantages of great
States; for we were then dealing with the authority of the government over the members, while
here we are dealing with its force against the subjects. Its scattered members serve it as rallying-
points for action against the people at a distance, but it has no rallying-point for direct action on
its members themselves. Thus the length of the lever is its weakness in the one case, and its
strength in the other.
Chapter IX.
The Marks of a Good Government
Table of Contents
The question "What absolutely is the best government?" is unanswerable as
well as indeterminate; or rather, there are as many good answers as there are
possible combinations in the absolute and relative situations of all nations.
But if it is asked by what sign we may know that a given people is well
or ill governed, that is another matter, and the question, being one of fact,
admits of an answer.
It is not, however, answered, because every-one wants to answer it in
his own way. Subjects extol public tranquillity, citizens individual liberty;
the one class prefers security of possessions, the other that of person; the
one regards as the best government that which is most severe, the other
maintains that the mildest is the best; the one wants crimes punished, the
other wants them prevented; the one wants the State to be feared by its
neighbours, the other prefers that it should be ignored; the one is content if
money circulates, the other demands that the people shall have bread. Even
if an agreement were come to on these and similar points, should we have
got any further? As moral qualities do not admit of exact measurement,
agreement about the mark does not mean agreement about the valuation.
For my part, I am continually astonished that a mark so simple is not
recognised, or that men are of so bad faith as not to admit it. What is the
end of political association? The preservation and prosperity of its
members. And what is the surest mark of their preservation and prosperity?
Their numbers and population. Seek then nowhere else this mark that is in
dispute. The rest being equal, the government under which, without external
aids, without naturalisation or colonies, the citizens increase and multiply
most, is beyond question the best. The government under which a people
wanes and diminishes is worst. Calculators, it is left for you to count, to
measure, to compare.1
1. On the same principle it should be judged what centuries deserve the preference for human
prosperity. Those in which letters and arts have flourished have been too much admired, because
the hidden object of their culture has not been fathomed, and their fatal effects not taken into
account. "Idque apud imperitos humanitas vocabatur, cum pars servitutis esset." ["Fools called
'humanity' what was a part of slavery," Tacitus, Agricola, 31.] Shall we never see in the maxims
books lay down the vulgar interest that makes their writers speak? No, whatever they may say,
when, despite its renown, a country is depopulated, it is not true that all is well, and it is not
enough that a poet should have an income of 100,000 francs to make his age the best of all. Less
attention should be paid to the apparent repose and tranquillity of the rulers than to the well-
being of their nations as wholes, and above all of the most numerous States. A hail-storm lays
several cantons waste, but it rarely makes a famine. Outbreaks and civil wars give rulers rude
shocks, but they are not the real ills of peoples, who may even get a respite, while there is a
dispute as to who shall tyrannise over them. Their true prosperity and calamities come from
their permanent condition: it is when the whole remains crushed beneath the yoke, that decay
sets in, and that the rulers destroy them at will, and "ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant"
["Where they create solitude, they call it peace," Tacitus, Agricola, 31.] When the bickerings of
the great disturbed the kingdom of France, and the Coadjutor of Paris took a dagger in his
pocket to the Parliament, these things did not prevent the people of France from prospering and
multiplying in dignity, ease and freedom. Long ago Greece flourished in the midst of the most
savage wars; blood ran in torrents, and yet the whole country was covered with inhabitants. It
appeared, says Macchiavelli, that in the midst of murder, proscription and civil war, our republic
only throve: the virtue, morality and independence of the citizens did more to strengthen it than
all their dissensions had done to enfeeble it A little disturbance gives the soul elasticity; what
makes the race truly prosperous is not so much peace as liberty.
Chapter X.
The Abuse of Government and Its Tendency to
Degenerate
Table of Contents
As the particular will acts constantly in opposition to the general will, the
government continually exerts itself against the Sovereignty. The greater
this exertion becomes, the more the constitution changes; and, as there is in
this case no other corporate will to create an equilibrium by resisting the
will of the prince, sooner or later the prince must inevitably suppress the
Sovereign and break the social treaty. This is the unavoidable and inherent
defect which, from the very birth of the body politic, tends ceaselessly to
destroy it, as age and death end by destroying the human body.
There are two general courses by which government degenerates: i.e.
when it undergoes contraction, or when the State is dissolved.
Government undergoes contraction when it passes from the many to the
few, that is, from democracy to aristocracy, and from aristocracy to royalty.
To do so is its natural propensity.1 If it took the backward course from the
few to the many, it could be said that it was relaxed; by this inverse
sequence is impossible.
Indeed, governments never change their form except when their energy
is exhausted and leaves them too weak to keep what they have. If a
government at once extended its sphere and relaxed its stringency, its force
would become absolutely nil, and it would persist still less. It is therefore
necessary to wind up the spring and tighten the hold as it gives way: or else
the State it sustains will come to grief.
The dissolution of the State may come about in either of two ways.
First, when the prince ceases to administer the State in accordance with
the laws, and usurps the Sovereign power. A remarkable change then
occurs: not the government, but the State, undergoes contraction; I mean
that the great State is dissolved, and another is formed within it, composed
solely of the members of the government, which becomes for the rest of the
people merely master and tyrant. So that the moment the government
usurps the Sovereignty, the social compact is broken and all private citizens
recover by right their natural liberty, and are forced, but not bound, to obey.
The same thing happens when the members of the government severally
usurp the power they should exercise only as a body; this is as great an
infraction of the laws, and results in even greater disorders. There are then,
so to speak, as many princes as there are magistrates, and the State, no less
divided than the government, either perishes or changes its form.
When the State is dissolved, the abuse of government, whatever it is,
bears the common name of anarchy. To distinguish, democracy degenerates
into ochlocracy and aristocracy into oligarchy and I would add that royalty
degenerates into tyranny; but this last word is ambiguous and needs
explanation.
In vulgar usage, a tyrant is a king who governs violently and without
regard for justice and law. In the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who
arrogates to himself the royal authority without having a right to it. This is
how the Greeks understood the word "tyrant": they applied it indifferently
to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate.2 Tyrant and
usurper are thus perfectly synonymous terms.
In order that I may give different things different names, I call him who
usurps the royal authority tyrant, and him who usurps the sovereign power a
despot. The tyrant is he who thrusts himself in contrary to the laws to
govern in accordance with the laws; the despot is he who sets himself above
the laws themselves. Thus the tyrant cannot be a despot, but the despot is
always a tyrant.
1. The slow formation and the progress of the Republic of Venice in its lagoons are a notable
instance of this sequence; and it is most astonishing that, after more than twelve hundred years'
existence, the Venetians seem to be still at the second stage, which they reached with the Serrar
di Consiglio in 1198. As for the ancient Dukes who are brought up against them, it is proved,
whatever the Squittinio della libertà veneta may say of them, that they were in no sense
Sovereigns.
A case certain to be cited against my view is that of the Roman Republic, which, it will be said,
followed exactly the opposite course, and passed from monarchy to aristocracy and from
aristocracy to democracy. I by no means take this view of it.
What Romulus first set up was a mixed government, which soon deteriorated into despotism.
From special causes, the State died an untimely death, as new-born children sometimes perish
without reaching manhood. The expulsion of the Tarquins was the real period of the birth of the
Republic. But at first it took on no constant form, because, by not abolishing the patriciate, it left
half its work undone. For, by this means, hereditary aristocracy, the worst of all legitimate forms
of administration, remained in conflict with democracy, and the form of the government, as
Macchiavelli has proved, was only fixed on the establishment of the tribunate: only then was
there a true government and a veritable democracy. In fact, the people was then not only
Sovereign, but also magistrate and judge; the senate was only a subordinate tribunal, to temper
and concentrate the government, and the consuls themselves, though they were patricians, first
magistrates, and absolute generals in war, were in Rome itself no more than presidents of the
people.
From that point, the government followed its natural tendency, and inclined strongly to
aristocracy. The patriciate, we may say, abolished itself, and the aristocracy was found no longer
in the body of patricians as at Venice and Genoa, but in the body of the senate, which was
composed of patricians and plebeians, and even in the body of tribunes when they began to
usurp an active function: for names do not affect facts, and, when the people has rulers who
govern for it, whatever name they bear, the government is an aristocracy.
The abuse of aristocracy led to the civil wars and the triumvirate. Sulla, Julius Cæsar and
Augustus became in fact real monarchs; and finally, under the despotism of Tiberius, the State
was dissolved. Roman history then confirms, instead of invalidating, the principle I have laid
down.
2. Omnes enim et habentur et dicuntur tyranni, qui potestate utuntur perpetua in ea civitate quæ
libertate usa est (Cornelius Nepos, Life of Miltiades). [For all those are called and considered
tyrants, who hold perpetual power in a State that has known liberty.] It is true that Aristotle
(Nicomachean Ethics, Book viii, chapter x) distinguishes the tyrant from the king by the fact
that the former governs in his own interest, and the latter only for the good of his subjects; but
not only did all Greek authors in general use the word tyrant in a different sense, as appears
most clearly in Xenophon's Hiero, but also it would follow from Aristotle's distinction that, from
the very beginning of the world, there has not yet been a single king.
Chapter XI.
The Death of the Body Politic
Table of Contents
Such is the natural and inevitable tendency of the best constituted
governments. If Sparta and Rome perished, what State can hope to endure
for ever? If we would set up a long-lived form of government, let us not
even dream of making it eternal. If we are to succeed, we must not attempt
the impossible, or flatter ourselves that we are endowing the work of man
with a stability of which human conditions do not permit.
The body politic, as well as the human body, begins to die as soon as it
is born, and carries in itself the causes of its destruction. But both may have
a constitution that is more or less robust and suited to preserve them a
longer or a shorter time. The constitution of man is the work of nature; that
of the State the work of art. It is not in men's power to prolong their own
lives; but it is for them to prolong as much as possible the life of the State,
by giving it the best possible constitution. The best constituted State will
have an end; but it will end later than any other, unless some unforeseen
accident brings about its untimely destruction.
The life-principle of the body politic lies in the sovereign authority. The
legislative power is the heart of the State; the executive power is its brain,
which causes the movement of all the parts. The brain may become
paralysed and the individual still live. A man may remain an imbecile and
live; but as soon as the heart ceases to perform its functions, the animal is
dead.
The State subsists by means not of the laws, but of the legislative power.
Yesterday's law is not binding to-day; but silence is taken for tacit consent,
and the Sovereign is held to confirm incessantly the laws it does not
abrogate as it might. All that it has once declared itself to will it wills
always, unless it revokes its declaration.
Why then is so much respect paid to old laws? For this very reason. We
must believe that nothing but the excellence of old acts of will can have
preserved them so long: if the Sovereign had not recognised them as
throughout salutary, it would have revoked them a thousand times. This is
why, so far from growing weak, the laws continually gain new strength in
any well constituted State; the precedent of antiquity makes them daily
more venerable: while wherever the laws grow weak as they become old,
this proves that there is no longer a legislative power, and that the State is
dead.
Chapter XII.
How the Sovereign Authority Maintains Itself
Table of Contents
The Sovereign, having no force other than the legislative power, acts only
by means of the laws; and the laws being solely the authentic acts of the
general will, the Sovereign cannot act save when the people is assembled.
The people in assembly, I shall be told, is a mere chimera. It is so to-day,
but two thousand years ago it was not so. Has man's nature changed?
The bounds of possibility, in moral matters, are less narrow than we
imagine: it is our weaknesses, our vices and our prejudices that confine
them. Base souls have no belief in great men; vile slaves smile in mockery
at the name of liberty.
Let us judge of what can be done by what has been done. I shall say
nothing of the Republics of ancient Greece; but the Roman Republic was, to
my mind, a great State, and the town of Rome a great town. The last census
showed that there were in Rome four hundred thousand citizens capable of
bearing arms, and the last computation of the population of the Empire
showed over four million citizens, excluding subjects, foreigners, women,
children and slaves.
What difficulties might not be supposed to stand in the way of the
frequent assemblage of the vast population of this capital and its
neighbourhood. Yet few weeks passed without the Roman people being in
assembly, and even being so several times. It exercised not only the rights
of Sovereignty, but also a part of those of government. It dealt with certain
matters, and judged certain cases, and this whole people was found in the
public meeting-place hardly less often as magistrates than as citizens.
If we went back to the earliest history of nations, we should find that
most ancient governments, even those of monarchical form, such as the
Macedonian and the Frankish, had similar councils. In any case, the one
incontestable fact I have given is an answer to all difficulties; it is good
logic to reason from the actual to the possible.
Chapter XIII.
The Same (continued)
Table of Contents
It is not enough for the assembled people to have once fixed the constitution
of the State by giving its sanction to a body of law; it is not enough for it to
have set up a perpetual government, or provided once for all for the election
of 
magistrates. 
Besides 
the 
extraordinary 
assemblies 
unforeseen
circumstances may demand, there must be fixed periodical assemblies
which cannot be abrogated or prorogued, so that on the proper day the
people is legitimately called together by law, without need of any formal
summoning.
But, apart from these assemblies authorised by their date alone, every
assembly of the people not summoned by the magistrates appointed for that
purpose, and in accordance with the prescribed forms, should be regarded
as unlawful, and all its acts as null and void, because the command to
assemble should itself proceed from the law.
The greater or less frequency with which lawful assemblies should
occur depends on so many considerations that no exact rules about them
can be given. It can only be said generally that the stronger the government
the more often should the Sovereign show itself.
This, I shall be told, may do for a single town; but what is to be done
when the State includes several? Is the sovereign authority to be divided?
Or is it to be concentrated in a single town to which all the rest are made
subject?
Neither the one nor the other, I reply. First, the sovereign authority is
one and simple, and cannot be divided without being destroyed. In me
second place, one town cannot, any more than one nation, legitimately be
made subject to another, because the essence of the body politic lies in the
reconciliation of obedience and liberty, and the words subject and
Sovereign are identical correlatives the idea of which meets in the single
word "citizen."
I answer further that the union of several towns in a single city is always
bad, and that, if we wish to make such a union, we should not expect to
avoid its natural disadvantages. It is useless to bring up abuses that belong
to great States against one who desires to see only small ones; but how can
small States be given the strength to resist great ones, as formerly the Greek
towns resisted the Great King, and more recently Holland and Switzerland
have resisted the House of Austria?
Nevertheless, if the State cannot be reduced to the right limits, there
remains still one resource; this is, to allow no capital, to make the seat of
government move from town to town, and to assemble by turn in each the
Provincial Estates of the country.
People the territory evenly, extend everywhere the same rights, bear to
every place in it abundance and life: by these means will the State become
at once as strong and as well governed as possible. Remember that the walls
of towns are built of the ruins of the houses of the countryside. For every
palace I see raised in the capital, my mind's eye sees a whole country made
desolate.
Chapter XIV.
The Same (continued)
Table of Contents
The moment the people is legitimately assembled as a sovereign body, the
jurisdiction of the government wholly lapses, the executive power is
suspended, and the person of the meanest citizen is as sacred and inviolable
as that of the first magistrate; for in the presence of the person represented,
representatives no longer exist. Most of the tumults that arose in the comitia
at Rome were due to ignorance or neglect of this rule. The consuls were in
them merely the presidents of the people; the tribunes were mere speakers;1
the senate was nothing at all.
These intervals of suspension, during which the prince recognises or
ought to recognise an actual superior, have always been viewed by him with
alarm; and these assemblies of the people, which are the aegis of the body
politic and the curb on die government, have at all times been the horror of
rulers: who therefore never spare pains, objections, difficulties, and
promises, to stop the citizens from having them. When the citizens are
greedy, cowardly, and pusillanimous, and love ease more than liberty, they
do not long hold out against the redoubled efforts of the government; and
thus, as the resisting force incessantly grows, the sovereign authority ends
by disappearing, and most cities fall and perish before their time.
But between the sovereign authority and arbitrary government there
sometimes intervenes a mean power of which something must be said.
1. In nearly the same sense as this word has in the English Parliament. The similarity of these
functions would have brought the consuls and the tribunes into conflict, even had all jurisdiction
been suspended.
Chapter XV.
Deputies or Representatives
Table of Contents
As soon as public service ceases to be the chief business of the citizens, and
they would rather serve with their money than with their persons, the State
is not far from its fall. When it is necessary to march out to war, they pay
troops and stay at home: when it is necessary to meet in council, they name
deputies and stay at home. By reason of idleness and money, they end by
having soldiers to enslave their country and representatives to sell it.
It is through the hustle of commerce and the arts, through the greedy
self-interest of profit, and through softness and love of amenities that
personal services are replaced by money payments. Men surrender a part of
their profits in order to have time to increase them at leisure. Make gifts of
money, and you will not be long without chains. The word finance is a
slavish word, unknown in the city-state. In a country that is truly free, the
citizens do everything with their own arms and nothing by means of money;
so far from paying to be exempted from their duties, they would even pay
for the privilege of fulfilling them themselves. I am far from taking the
common view: I hold enforced labour to be less opposed to liberty than
taxes.
The better the constitution of a State is, the more do public affairs
encroach on private in the minds of the citizens. Private affairs are even of
much less importance, because the aggregate of the common happiness
furnishes a greater proportion of that of each individual, so that there is less
for him to seek in particular cares. In a well-ordered city every man flies to
the assemblies: under a bad government no one cares to stir a step to get to
them, because no one is interested in what happens there, because it is
foreseen that the general will will not prevail, and lastly because domestic
cares are all-absorbing. Good laws lead to the making of better ones; bad
ones bring about worse. As soon as any man says of the affairs of the State
What does it matter to me? the State may be given up for lost.
The lukewarmness of patriotism, the activity of private interest, the
vastness of States, conquest and the abuse of government suggested the
method of having deputies or representatives of the people in the national
assemblies. These are what, in some countries, men have presumed to call
the Third Estate. Thus the individual interest of two orders is put first and
second; the public interest occupies only the third place.
Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, cannot be
represented; it lies essentially in the general will, and will does not admit of
representation: it is either the same, or other; there is no intermediate
possibility. The deputies of the people, therefore, are not and cannot be its
representatives: they are merely its stewards, and can carry through no
definitive acts. Every law the people has not ratified in person is null and
void—is, in fact, not a law. The people of England regards itself as free; but
it is grossly mistaken; it is free only during the election of members of
parliament. As soon as they are elected, slavery overtakes it, and it is
nothing. The use it makes of the short moments of liberty it enjoys shows
indeed that it deserves to lose them.
The idea of representation is modern; it comes to us from feudal
government, from that iniquitous and absurd system which degrades
humanity and dishonours the name of man. In ancient republics and even in
monarchies, the people never had representatives; the word itself was
unknown. It is very singular that in Rome, where the tribunes were so
sacrosanct, it was never even imagined that they could usurp the functions
of the people, and that in the midst of so great a multitude they never
attempted to pass on their own authority a single plebiscitum. We can,
however, form an idea of the difficulties caused sometimes by the people
being so numerous, from what happened in the time of the Gracchi, when
some of the citizens had to cast their votes from the roofs of buildings.
Where right and liberty are everything, disadvantages count for nothing.
Among this wise people everything was given its just value, its lictors were
allowed to do what its tribunes would never have dared to attempt; for it
had no fear that its lictors would try to represent it.
To explain, however, in what way the tribunes did sometimes represent
it, it is enough to conceive how the government represents the Sovereign.
Law being purely the declaration of the general will, it is clear that, in the
exercise of the legislative power, the people cannot be represented; but in
that of the executive power, which is only the force that is applied to give
the law effect, it both can and should be represented. We thus see that if we
looked closely into the matter we should find that very few nations have
any laws. However that may be, it is certain that the tribunes, possessing no
executive power, could never represent the Roman people by right of the
powers entrusted to them, but only by usurping those of the senate.
In Greece, all that the people had to do, it did for itself; it was constantly
assembled in the public square. The Greeks lived in a mild climate; they
had no natural greed; slaves did their work for them; their great concern
was with liberty. Lacking the same advantages, how can you preserve the
same rights? Your severer climates add to your needs;1 for half the year
your public squares are uninhabitable; the flatness of your languages unfits
them for being heard in the open air; you sacrifice more for profit than for
liberty, and fear slavery less than poverty.
What then? Is liberty maintained only by the help of slavery? It may be
so. Extremes meet. Everything that is not in the course of nature has its
disadvantages, civil society most of all. There are some unhappy
circumstances in which we can only keep our liberty at others' expense, and
where the citizen can be perfectly free only when the slave is most a slave.
Such was the case with Sparta. As for you, modern peoples, you have no
slaves, but you are slaves yourselves; you pay for their liberty with your
own. It is in vain that you boast of this preference; I find in it more
cowardice than humanity.
I do not mean by all this that it is necessary to have slaves, or that the
right of slavery is legitimate: I am merely giving the reasons why modern
peoples, believing themselves to be free, have representatives, while ancient
peoples had none. In any case, the moment a people allows itself to be
represented, it is no longer free: it no longer exists.
All things considered, I do not see that it is possible henceforth for the
Sovereign to preserve among us the exercise of its rights, unless the city is
very small. But if it is very small, it will be conquered? No. I will show
later on how the external strength of a great people2 may be combined with
the convenient polity and good order of a small State.
1. To adopt in cold countries the luxury and effeminacy of the East is to desire to submit to its
chains; it is indeed to bow to them far more inevitably in our case than in theirs.
2. I had intended to do this in the sequel to this work, when in dealing with external relations I came
to the subject of confederations. The subject is quite new, and its principles have still to be laid
down.
Chapter XVI.
That the Institution of Government is Not a
Contract
Table of Contents
The legislative power once well established, the next thing is to establish
similarly the executive power; for this latter, which operates only by
particular acts, not being of the essence of the former, is naturally separate
from it. Were it possible for the Sovereign, as such, to possess the executive
power, right and fact would be so confounded that no one could tell what
was law and what was not; and the body politic, thus disfigured, would
soon fall a prey to the violence it was instituted to prevent.
As the citizens, by the social contract, are all equal, all can prescribe
what all should do, but no one has a right to demand that another shall do
what he does not do himself. It is strictly this right, which is indispensable
for giving the body politic life and movement, that the Sovereign, in
instituting the government, confers upon the prince.
It has been held that this act of establishment was a contract between the
people and the rulers it sets over itself.—a contract in which conditions
were laid down between the two parties binding the one to command and
the other to obey. It will be admitted, I am sure, that this is an odd kind of
contract to enter into. But let us see if this view can be upheld.
First, the supreme authority can no more be modified than it can be
alienated; to limit it is to destroy it. It is absurd and contradictory for the
Sovereign to set a superior over itself; to bind itself to obey a master would
be to return to absolute liberty.
Moreover, it is clear that this contract between the people and such and
such persons would be a particular act; and from this it follows that it can
be neither a law nor an act of Sovereignty, and that consequently it would
be illegitimate.
It is plain too that the contracting parties in relation to each other would
be under the law of nature alone and wholly without guarantees of their
mutual undertakings, a position wholly at variance with the civil state. He
who has force at his command being always in a position to control
execution, it would come to the same thing if the name "contract" were
given to the act of one man who said to another; "I give you all my goods,
on condition that you give me back as much of them as you please."
There is only one contract in the State, and that is the act of association,
which in itself excludes the existence of a second. It is impossible to
conceive of any public contract that would not be a violation of the first.
Chapter XVII.
The Institution of Government
Table of Contents
Under what general idea then should the act by which government is
instituted be conceived as falling? I will begin by stating that the act is
complex, as being composed of two others—the establishment' of the law
and its execution.
By the former, the Sovereign decrees that there shall be a governing
body established in this or that form; this act is clearly a law.
By the latter, the people nominates the rulers who are to be entrusted
with the government that has been established. This nomination, being a
particular act, is clearly not a second law, but merely a consequence of the
first and a function of government.
The difficulty is to understand how there can be a governmental act
before government exists, and how the people, which is only Sovereign or
subject, can, under certain circumstances, become a prince or magistrate.
It is at this point that there is revealed one of the astonishing properties
of the body politic, by means of which it reconciles apparently
contradictory operations; for this is accomplished by a sudden conversion
of Sovereignty into democracy, so that, without sensible change, and merely
by virtue of a new relation of all to all, the citizens become magistrates and
pass from general to particular acts, from legislation to the execution of the
law.
This changed relation is no speculative subtlety without instances in
practice: it happens every day in the English Parliament, where, on certain
occasions, the Lower House resolves itself into Grand Committee, for the
better discussion of affairs, and thus, from being at one moment a sovereign
court, becomes at the next a mere commission; so that subsequently it
reports to itself, as House of Commons, the result of its proceedings in
Grand Committee, and debates over again under one name what it has
already settled under another.
It is, indeed, the peculiar advantage of democratic government that it
can be established in actuality by a simple act of the general will.
Subsequently, this provisional government remains in power, if this form is
adopted, or else establishes in the name of the Sovereign the government
that is prescribed by law; and thus the whole proceeding is regular. It is
impossible to set up government in any other manner legitimately and in
accordance with the principles so far laid down.
Chapter XVIII.
How to Check the Usurpations of Government
Table of Contents
What we have just said confirms Chapter XVI, and makes it clear that the
institution of government is not a contract, but a law; that the depositaries
of the executive power are not the people's masters, but its officers; that it
can set them up and pull them down when it likes; that for them there is no
question of contract, but of obedience; and that in taking charge of the
functions the State imposes on them they are doing no more than fulfilling
their duty as citizens, without having the remotest right to argue about the
conditions.
When therefore the people sets up an hereditary government, whether it
be monarchical and confined to one family, or aristocratic and confined to a
class, what it enters into is not an undertaking; the administration is given a
provisional form, until the people chooses to order it otherwise.
It is true that such changes are always dangerous, and that the
established government should never be touched except when it comes to
be incompatible with the public good; but the circumspection this involves
is a maxim of policy and not a rule of right, and the State is no more bound
to leave civil authority in the hands of its rulers than military authority in
the hands of its generals.
It is also true that it is impossible to be too careful to observe, in such
cases, all the formalities necessary to distinguish a regular and legitimate
act from a seditious tumult, and the will of a whole people from the clamour
of a faction. Here above all no further concession should be made to the
untoward possibility than cannot, in the strictest logic, be refused it. From
this obligation the prince derives a great advantage in preserving his power
despite the people, without it being possible to say he has usurped it; for,
seeming to avail himself only of his rights, he finds it very easy to extend
them, and to prevent, under the pretext of keeping the peace, assemblies
that are destined to the re-establishment of order; with the result that he
takes advantage of a silence he does not allow to be broken, or of
irregularities he causes to be committed, to assume that he has the support
of those whom fear prevents from speaking, and to punish those who dare
to speak. Thus it was that the decemvirs, first elected for one year and then
kept on in office for a second, tried to perpetuate their power by forbidding
the comitia to assemble; and by this easy method every government in the
world, once clothed with the public power, sooner or later usurps the
sovereign authority.
The periodical assemblies of which I have already spoken are designed
to prevent or postpone this calamity, above all when they need no formal
summoning; for in that case, the prince cannot stop them without openly
declaring himself a law-breaker and an enemy of the State.
The opening of these assemblies, whose sole object is the maintenance
of the social treaty, should always take the form of putting two propositions
that may not be suppressed, which should be voted on separately.
The first is: "Does it please the Sovereign to preserve the present form
of government?"
The second is: "Does it please the people to leave its administration in
the hands of those who are actually in charge of it?"
I am here assuming what I think I have shown; that there is in the State
no fundamental law that cannot be revoked, not excluding the social
compact itself; for if all the citizens assembled of one accord to break the
compact, it is impossible to doubt that it would be very legitimately broken.
Grotius even thinks that each man can renounce his membership of his own
State, and recover his natural liberty and his goods on leaving the country.1
It would be indeed absurd if all the citizens in assembly could not do what
each can do by himself.
1. Provided, of course, he does not leave to escape his obligations and avoid having to serve his
country in the hour of need. Flight in such a case would be criminal and punishable, and would
be, not withdrawal, but desertion.
Book IV
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
That the General Will is Indestructible
Table of Contents
As long as several men in assembly regard themselves as a single body,
they have only a single will which is concerned with their common
preservation and general well-being. In this case, all the springs of the State
are vigorous and simple and its rules clear and luminous; there are no
embroilments or conflicts of interests; the common good is everywhere
clearly apparent, and only good sense is needed to perceive it. Peace, unity
and equality are the enemies of political subtleties. Men who are upright
and simple are difficult to deceive because of their simplicity; lures and
ingenious pretexts fail to impose upon them, and they are not even subtle
enough to be dupes. When, among the happiest people in the world, bands
of peasants are seen regulating affairs of State under an oak, and always
acting wisely, can we help scorning the ingenious methods of other nations,
which make themselves illustrious and wretched with so much art and
mystery?
A State so governed needs very few laws; and, as it becomes necessary
to issue new ones, the necessity is universally seen. The first man to
propose them merely says what all have already felt, and there is no
question of factions or intrigues or eloquence in order to secure the passage
into law of what every one has already decided to do, as soon as he is sure
that the rest will act with him.
Theorists are led into error because, seeing only States that have been
from the beginning wrongly constituted, they are struck by the impossibility
of applying such a policy to them. They make great game of all the
absurdities a clever rascal or an insinuating speaker might get the people of
Paris or London to believe. They do not know that Cromwell would have
been put to "the bells" by the people of Berne, and the Due de Beaufort on
the treadmill by the Genevese.
But when the social bond begins to be relaxed and the State to grow
weak, when particular interests begin to make themselves felt and the
smaller societies to exercise an influence over the larger, the common
interest changes and finds opponents: opinion is no longer unanimous; the
general will ceases to be the will of all; contradictory views and debates
arise; and the best advice is not taken without question.
Finally, when the State, on the eve of ruin, maintains only a vain,
illusory and formal existence, when in every heart the social bond is
broken, and the meanest interest brazenly lays hold of the sacred name of
"public good," the general will becomes mute: all men, guided by secret
motives, no more give their views as citizens than if the State had never
been; and iniquitous decrees directed solely to private interest get passed
under the name of laws.
Does it follow from this that the general will is exterminated or
corrupted? Not at all: it is always constant, unalterable and pure; but it is
subordinated to other wills which encroach upon its sphere. Each man, in
detaching, his interest from the common interest, sees clearly that he cannot
entirely separate them; but his share in the public mishaps seems to him
negligible beside the exclusive good he aims at making his own. Apart from
this particular good, he wills the general good in his own interest, as
strongly as any one else. Even in selling his vote for money, he does not
extinguish in himself the general will, but only eludes it. The fault he
commits is that of changing the state of the question, and answering
something different from what he is asked. Instead of saying, by his vote,
"It is to the advantage of the State," he says, "It is of advantage to this or
that man or party that this or that view should prevail." Thus the law of
public order in assemblies is not so much to maintain in them the general
will as to secure that the question be always put to it, and the answer always
given by it.
I could here set down many reflections on the simple right of voting in
every act of Sovereignty—a right which no-one can take from the citizens
—and also on the right of stating views, making proposals, dividing and
discussing, which the government is always most careful to leave solely to
its members; but this important subject would need a treatise to itself, and it
is impossible to say everything in a single work.
Chapter II.
Voting
Table of Contents
It may be seen, from the last chapter, that the way in which general business
is managed may give a clear enough indication of the actual state of morals
and the health of the body politic. The more concert reigns in the
assemblies, that is, the nearer opinion approaches unanimity, the greater is
the dominance of the general will. On the other hand, long debates,
dissensions and tumult proclaim the ascendancy of particular interests and
the decline of the State.
This seems less clear when two or more orders enter into the
constitution, as patricians and plebeians did at Rome; for quarrels between
these two orders often disturbed the comitia, even in the best days of the
Republic. But the exception is rather apparent than real; for then, through
the defect that is inherent in the body politic, there were, so to speak, two
States in one, and what is not true of the two together is true of either
separately. Indeed, even in the most stormy times, the plebiscita of the
people, when the Senate did not interfere with them, always went through
quietly and by large majorities. The citizens having but one interest, the
people had but a single will.
At the other extremity of the circle, unanimity recurs; this is the case
when the citizens, having fallen into servitude, have lost both liberty and
will. Fear and flattery then change votes into acclamation; deliberation
ceases, and only worship or malediction is left. Such was the vile manner in
which the senate expressed its views under the Emperors. It did so
sometimes with absurd precautions. Tacitus observes that, under Otho, the
senators, while they heaped curses on Vitellius, contrived at the same time
to make a deafening noise, in order that, should he ever become their
master, he might not know what each of them had said.
On these various considerations depend the rules by which the methods
of counting votes and comparing opinions should be regulated, according as
the general will is more or less easy to discover, and the State more or less
in its decline.
There is but one law which, from its nature, needs unanimous consent.
This is the social compact; for civil association is the most voluntary of all
acts. Every man being born free and his own master, no-one, under any
pretext whatsoever, can make any man subject without his consent. To
decide that the son of a slave is born a slave is to decide that he is not born a
man.
If then there are opponents when the social compact is made, their
opposition does not invalidate the contract, but merely prevents them from
being included in it. They are foreigners among citizens. When the State is
instituted, residence constitutes consent; to dwell within its territory is to
submit to the Sovereign.1
Apart from this primitive contract, the vote of the majority always binds
all the rest. This follows from the contract itself. But it is asked how a man
can be both free and forced to conform to wills that are not his own. How
are the opponents at once free and subject to laws they have not agreed to?
I retort that the question is wrongly put. The citizen gives his consent to
all the laws, including those which are passed in spite of his opposition, and
even those which punish him when he dares to break any of them. The
constant will of all the members of the State is the general will; by virtue of
it they are citizens and free.2 When in the popular assembly a law is
proposed, what the people is asked is not exactly whether it approves or
rejects the proposal, but whether it is in conformity with the general will,
which is their will. Each man, in giving his vote, states his opinion on that
point; and the general will is found by counting votes. When therefore the
opinion that is contrary to my own prevails, this proves neither more nor
less than that I was mistaken, and that what I thought to be the general will
was not so. If my particular opinion had carried the day I should have
achieved the opposite of what was my will and it is in that case that I should
not have been free.
This presupposes, indeed, that all the qualities of the general will still
reside in the majority: when they cease to do so, whatever side a man may
take, liberty is no longer possible.
In my earlier demonstration of how particular wills are substituted for
the general will in public deliberation, I have adequately pointed out the
practicable methods of avoiding this abuse; and I shall have more to say of
them later on. I have also given the principles for determining the
proportional number of votes for declaring that will. A difference of one
vote destroys equality; a single opponent destroys unanimity; but between
equality and unanimity, there are several grades of unequal division, at each
of which this proportion may be fixed in accordance with the condition and
the needs of the body politic.
There are two general rules that may serve to regulate this relation.
First, the more grave and important the questions discussed, the nearer
should the opinion that is to prevail approach unanimity. Secondly, the more
the matter in hand calls for speed, the smaller the prescribed difference in
the numbers of votes may be allowed to become: where an instant decision
has to be reached, a majority of one vote should be enough. The first of
these two rules seems more in harmony with the laws, and the second with
practical affairs. In any case, it is the combination of them that gives the
best proportions for determining the majority necessary.
1. This should of course be understood as applying to a free State; for elsewhere family, goods, lack
of a refuge, necessity, or violence may detain a man in a country against his will; and then his
dwelling there no longer by itself implies his consent to the contract or to its violation.
2. At Genoa, the word Liberty may be read over the front of the prisons and on the chains of the
galley-slaves. This application of the device is good and just It is indeed only malefactors of all
estates who prevent the citizen from being free. In the country in which all such men were in the
galleys, the most perfect liberty would be enjoyed.
Chapter III.
Elections
Table of Contents
In the elections of the prince and the magistrates, which are, as I have said,
complex acts, there are two possible methods of procedure, choice and lot.
Both have been employed in various republics, and a highly complicated
mixture of the two still survives in the election of the Doge at Venice.
"Election by lot," says Montesquieu, "is democratic in nature." I agree
that it is so; but in what sense? "The lot," he goes on, "is a way of making
choice that is unfair to nobody; it leaves each citizen a reasonable hope of
serving his country." These are not reasons.
If we bear in mind that the election of rulers is a function of
government, and not of Sovereignty, we shall see why the lot is the method
more natural to democracy, in which the administration is better in
proportion as the number of its acts is small.
In every real democracy, magistracy is not an advantage, but a
burdensome charge which cannot justly be imposed on one individual rather
than another. The law alone can lay the charge on him on whom the lot
falls. For, the conditions being then the same for all, and the choice not
depending on any human will, there is no particular application to alter the
universality of the law.
In an aristocracy, the prince chooses the prince, the government is
preserved by itself, and voting is rightly ordered.
The instance of the election of the Doge of Venice confirms, instead of
destroying, this distinction; the mixed form suits a mixed government. For
it is an error to take the government of Venice for a real aristocracy. If the
people has no share in the government, the nobility is itself the people. A
host of poor Barnabotes never gets near any magistracy, and its nobility
consists merely in the empty title of Excellency, and in the right to sit in the
Great Council. As this Great Council is as numerous as our General Council
at Geneva, its illustrious members have no more privileges than our plain
citizens. It is indisputable that, apart from the extreme disparity between the
two republics, the bourgeoisie of Geneva is exactly equivalent to the
patriciate of Venice; our natives and inhabitants correspond to the
townsmen and the people of Venice; our peasants correspond to the subjects
on the mainland; and, however that republic be regarded, if its size be left
out of account, its government is no more aristocratic than our own. The
whole difference is that, having no life-ruler, we do not, like Venice, need to
use the lot.
Election by lot would have few disadvantages in a real democracy, in
which, as equality would everywhere exist in morals and talents as well as
in principles and fortunes, it would become almost a matter of indifference
who was chosen. But I have already said that a real democracy is only an
ideal.
When choice and lot are combined, positions that require special talents,
such as military posts, should be filled by the former; the latter does for
cases, such as judicial offices, in which good sense, justice, and integrity are
enough, because in a State that is well constituted, these qualities are
common to all the citizens.
Neither lot nor vote has any place in monarchical government. The
monarch being by right sole prince and only magistrate, the choice of his
lieutenants belongs to none but him. When the Abbé de Saint-Pierre
proposed that the Councils of the King of France should be multiplied, and
their members elected by ballot, he did not see that he was proposing to
change the form of government.
I should now speak of the methods of giving and counting opinions in
the assembly of the people; but perhaps an account of this aspect of the
Roman constitution will more forcibly illustrate all the rules I could lay
down. It is worth the while of a judicious reader to follow in some detail the
working of public and private affairs in a Council consisting of two hundred
thousand men.
Chapter IV.
The Roman Comitia
Table of Contents
We are without well-certified records of the first period of Rome's
existence; it even appears very probable that most of the stories told about it
are fables; indeed, generally speaking, the most instructive part of the
history of peoples, that which deals with their foundation, is what we have
least of. Experience teaches us every day what causes lead to the
revolutions of empires; but, as no new peoples are now formed, we have
almost nothing beyond conjecture to go upon in explaining how they were
created.
The customs we find established show at least that these customs had an
origin. The traditions that go back to those origins, that have the greatest
authorities behind them, and that are confirmed by the strongest proofs,
should pass for the most certain. These are the rules I have tried to follow in
inquiring how the freest and most powerful people on earth exercised its
supreme power.
After the foundation of Rome, the new-born republic, that is, the army
of its founder, composed of Albans, Sabines and foreigners, was divided
into three classes, which, from this division, took the name of tribes. Each
of these tribes was subdivided into ten curiæ, and each curia into decuriæ,
headed by leaders called curiones and decuriones.
Besides this, out of each tribe was taken a body of one hundred Equites
or Knights, called a century, which shows that these divisions, being
unnecessary in a town, were at first merely military. But an instinct for
greatness seems to have led the little township of Rome to provide itself in
advance with a political system suitable for the capital of the world.
Out of this original division an awkward situation soon arose. The tribes
of the Albans (Ramnenses) and the Sabines (Tatienses) remained always in
the same condition, while that of the foreigners (Luceres) continually grew
as more and more foreigners came to live at Rome, so that it soon surpassed
the others in strength. Servius remedied this dangerous fault by changing
the principle of cleavage, and substituting for the racial division, which he
abolished, a new one based on the quarter of the town inhabited by each
tribe. Instead of three tribes he created four, each occupying and named
after one of the hills of Rome. Thus, while redressing the inequality of the
moment, he also provided for the future; and in order that the division
might be one of persons as well as localities, he forbade the inhabitants of
one quarter to migrate to another, and so prevented the mingling of the
races.
He also doubled the three old centuries of Knights and added twelve
more, still keeping the old names, and by this simple and prudent method,
succeeded in making a distinction between the body of Knights and the
people, without a murmur from the latter.
To the four urban tribes Servius added fifteen others called rural tribes,
because they consisted of those who lived in the country, divided into
fifteen cantons. Subsequently, fifteen more were created, and the Roman
people finally found itself divided into thirty-five tribes, as it remained
down to the end of the Republic.
The distinction between urban and rural tribes had one effect which is
worth mention, both because it is without parallel elsewhere, and because to
it Rome owed the preservation of her morality and the enlargement of her
empire. We should have expected that the urban tribes would soon
monopolise power and honours, and lose no time in bringing the rural tribes
into disrepute; but what happened was exactly the reverse. The taste of the
early Romans for country life is well known. This taste they owed to their
wise founder, who made rural and military labours go along with liberty,
and, so to speak, relegated to the town arts, crafts, intrigue, fortune and
slavery.
Since therefore all Rome's most illustrious citizens lived in the fields
and tilled the earth, men grew used to seeking there alone the mainstays of
the republic. This condition, being that of the best patricians, was honoured
by all men; the simple and laborious life of the villager was preferred to the
slothful and idle life of the bourgeoisie of Rome; and he who, in the town,
would have been but a wretched proletarian, became, as a labourer in the
fields, a respected citizen. Not without reason, says Varro, did our great-
souled ancestors establish in the village the nursery of the sturdy and valiant
men who defended them in time of war and provided for their Sustenance in
time of peace. Pliny states positively that the country tribes were honoured
because of the men of whom they were composed; while cowards men
wished to dishonour were transferred, as a public disgrace, to the town
tribes. The Sabine Appius Claudius, when he had come to settle in Rome,
was loaded with honours and enrolled in a rural tribe, which subsequently
took his family name. Lastly, freedmen always entered the urban, and never
the rural, tribes: nor is there a single example, throughout the Republic, of a
freedman, though he had become a citizen, reaching any magistracy.
This was an excellent rule; but it was carried so far that in the end it led
to a change and certainly to an abuse in the political system.
First the censors, after having for a long time claimed the right of
transferring citizens arbitrarily from one tribe to another, allowed most
persons to enrol themselves in whatever tribe they pleased. This permission
certainly did no good, and further robbed the censorship of one of its
greatest resources. Moreover, as the great and powerful all got themselves
enrolled in the country tribes, while the freedmen who had become citizens
remained with the populace in the town tribes, both soon ceased to have any
local or territorial meaning, and all were so confused that the members of
one could not be told from those of another except by the registers; so that
the idea of the word tribe became personal instead of real, or rather came to
be little more than a chimera.
It happened in addition that the town tribes, being more on the spot,
were often the stronger in the comitia and sold the State to those who
stooped to buy the votes of the rabble composing them.
As the founder had set up ten curiæ in each tribe, the whole Roman
people, which was then contained within the walls, consisted of thirty curia,
each with its temples, its gods, its officers, its priests and its festivals, which
were called compitalia and corresponded to the paganalia, held in later
times by the rural tribes.
When Servius made his new division, as the thirty curiæ could not be
shared equally between his four tribes, and as he was unwilling to interfere
with them, they became a further division of the inhabitants of Rome, quite
independent of the tribes: but in the case of the rural tribes and their
members there was no question of cutiæ as the tribes had then become a
purely civil institution, and, a new system of levying troops having been
introduced, the military divisions of Romulus were superfluous. Thus,
although every citizen was enrolled in a tribe, there were very many who
were not members of a curia.
Servius made yet a third division, quite distinct from the two we have
mentioned, which became, in its effects, the most important of all. He
distributed the whole Roman people into six classes, distinguished neither
by place nor by person, but by wealth; the first classes included the rich, the
last the poor, and those between persons of moderate means. These six
classes were subdivided into one hundred and ninety-three other bodies,
called centuries, which were so divided that the first class alone comprised
more than half of them, while the last comprised only one. Thus the class
that had the smallest number of members had the largest number of
centuries, and the whole of the last class only counted as a single
subdivision, although it alone included more than half the inhabitants of
Rome.
In order that the people might have the less insight into the results of
this arrangement, Servius tried to give it a military tone: in the second class
he inserted two centuries of armourers, and in the fourth two of makers of
instruments of war: in each class, except the last, he distinguished young
and old, that is, those who were under an obligation to bear arms and those
whose age gave them legal exemption. It was this distinction, rather than
that of wealth, which required frequent repetition of the census or counting.
Lastly, he ordered that the assembly should be held in the Campus Martius,
and that all who were of age to serve should come there armed.
The reason for his not making in the last class also the division of young
and old was that the populace, of whom it was composed, was not given the
right to bear arms for its country: a man had to possess a hearth to acquire
the right to defend it, and of all the troops of beggars who to-day lend lustre
to the armies of kings, there is perhaps not one who would not have been
driven with scorn out of a Roman cohort, at a time when soldiers were the
defenders of liberty.
In this last class, however, proletarians were distinguished from capite
censi The former, not quite reduced to nothing, at least gave the State
citizens, and sometimes, when the need was pressing, even soldiers. Those
who had nothing at all, and could be numbered only by counting heads,
were regarded as of absolutely no account, and Marius was the first who
stooped to enrol them.
Without deciding now whether this third arrangement was good or bad
in itself, I think I may assert that it could have been made practicable only
by the simple morals, the disinterestedness, the liking for agriculture and
the scorn for commerce and for love of gain which characterised the early
Romans. Where is the modern people among whom consuming greed,
unrest, intrigue, continual removals, and perpetual changes of fortune, could
let such a system last for twenty years without turning the State upside
down? We must indeed observe that morality and the censorship, being
stronger than this institution, corrected its defects at Rome, and that the rich
man found himself degraded to the class of the poor for making too much
display of his riches.
From all this it is easy to understand why only five classes are almost
always mentioned, though there were really six. The sixth, as it furnished
neither soldiers to the army nor votes in the Campus Martius,1 and was
almost without function in the State, was seldom regarded as of any
account.
These were the various ways in which the Roman people was divided.
Let us now see the effect on the assemblies. When lawfully summoned,
these were called comitia: they were usually held in the public square at
Rome or in the Campus Martius, and were distinguished as Comitia
Curiata, Comitia Centuriata, and Comitia Tributa, according to the form
under which they were convoked. The Comitia Curiata were founded by
Romulus; the Centuriata by Servius; and the Tributa by the tribunes of the
people. No law received its sanction and no magistrate was elected, save in
the comitia; and as every citizen was enrolled in a curia, a century, or a
tribe, it follows that no citizen was excluded from the right of voting, and
that the Roman people was truly sovereign both de jure and de facto.
For the comitia to be lawfully assembled, and for their acts to have the
force of law, three conditions were necessary. First, the body or magistrate
convoking them had to possess the necessary authority; secondly, the
assembly had to be held on a day allowed by law; and thirdly, the auguries
had to be favourable.
The reason for the first regulation needs no explanation; the second is a
matter of policy. Thus, the comitia might not be held on festivals or market-
days, when the country-folk, coming to Rome on business, had not time to
spend the day in the public square. By means of the third, the senate held in
check the proud and restive people, and meetly restrained the ardour of
seditious tribunes, who, however, found more than one way of escaping this
hindrance.
Laws and the election of rulers were not the only questions submitted to
the judgment of the comitia: as the Roman people had taken on itself the
most important functions of government, it may be said that the lot of
Europe was regulated in its assemblies. The variety of their objects gave
rise to the various forms these took, according to the matters on which they
had to pronounce.
In order to judge of these various forms, it is enough to compare them.
Romulus, when he set up curice, had in view the checking of the senate by
the people, and of the people by the senate, while maintaining his
ascendancy over both alike. He therefore gave the people, by means of this
assembly, all the authority of numbers to balance that of power and riches,
which he left to the patricians. But, after the spirit of monarchy, he left all
the same a greater advantage to the patricians in the influence of their
clients on the majority of votes. This excellent institution of patron and
client was a masterpiece of statesmanship and humanity without which the
patriciate, being flagrantly in contradiction to the republican spirit, could
not have survived. Rome alone has the honour of having given to the world
this great example, which never led to any abuse, and yet has never been
followed.
As the assemblies by curiæ persisted under the kings till the time of
Servius, and the reign of the later Tarquin was not regarded as legitimate,
royal laws were called generally leges curiatæ.
Under the Republic, the curiæ still confined to the four urban tribes, and
including only the populace of Rome, suited neither the senate, which led
the patricians, nor the tribunes, who, though plebeians, were at the head of
the well-to-do citizens. They therefore fell into disrepute, and their
degradation was such, that thirty lictors used to assemble and do what the
Comitia Curiata should have done.
The division by centuries was so favourable to the aristocracy that it is
hard to see at first how the senate ever failed to carry the day in the comitia
bearing their name, by which the consuls, the censors and the other curule
magistrates were elected. Indeed, of the hundred and ninety-three centuries
into which the six classes of the whole Roman people were divided, the first
class contained ninety-eight; and, as voting went solely by centuries, this
class alone had a majority over all the rest. When all these centuries were in
agreement, the rest of the votes were not even taken; the decision of the
smallest number passed for that of the multitude, and it may be said that, in
the Comitia Centuriata, decisions were regulated far more by depth of
purses than by the number of votes.
But this extreme authority was modified in two ways. First, the tribunes
as a rule, and always a great number of plebeians, belonged to the class of
the rich, and so counterbalanced the influence of the patricians in the first
class.
The second way was this. Instead of causing the centuries to vote
throughout in order, which would have meant beginning always with the
first, the Romans always chose one by lot which proceeded alone to the
election; after this all the centuries were summoned another day according
to their rank, and the same election was repeated, and as a rule confirmed.
Thus the authority of example was taken away from rank, and given to the
lot on a democratic principle.
From this custom resulted a further advantage. The citizens from the
country had time, between the two elections, to inform themselves of the
merits of the candidate who had been provisionally nominated, and did not
have to vote without knowledge of the case. But, under the pretext of
hastening matters, the abolition of this custom was achieved, and both
elections were held on the same day.
The Comitia Tributa were properly the council of the Roman people.
They were convoked by the tribunes alone; at them the tribunes were
elected and passed their plebiscita. The senate not only had no standing in
them, but even no right to be present; and the senators, being forced to obey
laws on which they could not vote, were in this respect less free than the
meanest citizens. This injustice was altogether ill-conceived, and was alone
enough to invalidate the decrees of a body to which all its members were
not admitted. Had all the patricians attended the comitia by virtue of the
right they had as citizens, they would not, as mere private individuals, have
had any considerable influence on a vote reckoned by counting heads,
where the meanest proletarian was as good as the princeps senatus.
It may be seen, therefore, that besides the order which was achieved by
these various ways of distributing so great a people and taking its votes, the
various methods were not reducible to forms indifferent in themselves, but
the results of each were relative to the objects which caused it to be
preferred.
Without going here into further details, we may gather from what has
been said above that the Comitia Tributa were the most favourable to
popular government, and the Comitia Centuriata to aristocracy. The
Comitia Curiata, in which the populace of Rome formed the majority, being
fitted only to further tyranny and evil designs, naturally fell into disrepute,
and even seditious persons abstained from using a method which too clearly
revealed their projects. It is indisputable that the whole majesty of the
Roman people lay solely in the Comitia Centuriata, which alone included
all; for the Comitia Curiata excluded the rural tribes, and the Comitia
Tributa the senate and the patricians.
As for the method of taking the vote, it was among the ancient Romans
as simple as their morals, although not so simple as at Sparta. Each man
declared his vote aloud, and a clerk duly wrote it down; the majority in each
tribe determined the vote of the tribe, the majority of the tribes that of the
people, and so with curiæ and centuries. This custom was good as long as
honesty was triumphant among the citizens, and each man was ashamed to
vote publicly in favour of an unjust proposal or an unworthy subject; but,
when the people grew corrupt and votes were bought, it was fitting that
voting should be secret in order that purchasers might be restrained by
mistrust, and rogues be given the means of not being traitors.
I know that Cicero attacks this change, and attributes partly to it the ruin
of the Republic. But though I feel the weight Cicero's authority must carry
on such a point, I cannot agree with him; I hold, on die contrary, that, for
want of enough such changes, the destruction of the State must be hastened.
Just as the regimen of health does riot suit the sick, we should not wish to
govern a people that has been corrupted by the laws that a good people
requires. There is no better proof of this rule than the long life of the
Republic of Venice, of which the shadow still exists, solely because its laws
are suitable only for men who are wicked.
The citizens were provided, therefore, with tablets by means of which
each man could vote without any one knowing how he voted: new methods
were also introduced for collecting the tablets, for counting voices, for
comparing numbers, etc.; but all these precautions did not prevent the good
faith of the officers charged with these functions2 from being often suspect.
Finally, to prevent intrigues and trafficking in votes, edicts were issued; but
their very number proves how useless they were.
Towards the close of the Republic, it was often necessary to have
recourse to extraordinary expedients in order to supplement the inadequacy
of the laws. Sometimes miracles were supposed; but this method, while it
might impose on the people, could not impose on those who governed.
Sometimes an assembly was hastily called together, before the candidates
had time to form their factions: sometimes a whole sitting was occupied
with talk, when it was seen that the people had been won over and was on
the point of taking up a wrong position. But in the end ambition eluded all
attempts to check it; and the most incredible fact of all is that, in the midst
of all these abuses, the vast people, thanks to its ancient regulations, never
ceased to elect magistrates, to pass laws, to judge cases, and to carry
through business both public and private, almost as easily as the senate
itself could have done.
1. I say "in the Campus Martius" because it was there that the comitia assembled by centuries; in its
two other forms the people assembled in the forum or elsewhere; and then the capite censi had
as much influence and authority as the foremost citizens.
2. Custodes, diribitores, rogatores suffragiorum.
Chapter V.
The Tribunate
Table of Contents
When an exact proportion cannot be established between the constituent
parts of the State, or when causes that cannot be removed continually alter
the relation of one part to another, recourse is had to the institution of a
peculiar magistracy that enters into no corporate unity with the rest. This
restores to each term its right relation to the others, and provides a link or
middle term between either prince and people, or prince and Sovereign, or,
if necessary, both at once.
This body, which I shall call the tribunate, is the preserver of the laws
and of the legislative power. It serves sometimes to protect the Sovereign
against the government, as the tribunes of the people did at Rome;
sometimes to uphold the government against the people, as the Council of
Ten now does at Venice; and sometimes to maintain the balance between
the two, as the Ephors did at Sparta.
The tribunate is not a constituent part of the city, and should have no
share in either legislative or executive power; but this very fact makes its
own power the greater: for, while it can do nothing, it can prevent anything
from being done. It is more sacred and more revered, as the defender of the
laws, than the prince who executes them, or than the Sovereign which
ordains them. This was seen very clearly at Rome, when the proud
patricians, for all their scorn of the people, were forced to bow before one
of its officers, who had neither auspices nor jurisdiction.
The tribunate, wisely tempered, is the strongest support a good
constitution can have; but if its strength is ever so little excessive, it upsets
the whole State. Weakness, on the other hand, is not natural to it: provided it
is something, it is never less than it should be.
It degenerates into tyranny when it usurps the executive power, which it
should confine itself to restraining, and when it tries to dispense with the
laws, which it should confine itself to protecting. The immense power of the
Ephors, harmless as long as Sparta preserved its morality, hastened
corruption when once it had begun. The blood of Agis, slaughtered by these
tyrants, was avenged by his successor; the crime and the punishment of the
Ephors alike hastened the destruction of the republic, and after Cleomenes
Sparta ceased to be of any account. Rome perished in the same way: the
excessive power of the tribunes, which they had usurped by degrees, finally
served, with the help of laws made to secure liberty, as a safeguard for the
emperors who destroyed it. As for the Venetian Council of Ten, it is a
tribunal of blood, an object of horror to patricians and people alike; and, so
far from giving a lofty protection to the laws, it does nothing, now they
have become degraded, but strike in the darkness blows of which no one
dare take note.
The tribunate, like the government, grows weak as the number of its
members increases. When the tribunes of the Roman people, who first
numbered only two, and then five, wished to double that number, the senate
let them do so, in the confidence that it could use one to check another, as
indeed it afterwards freely did.
The best method of preventing usurpations by so formidable a body,
though no government has yet made use of it, would be not to make it
permanent, but to regulate the periods during which it should remain in
abeyance. These intervals, which should not be long enough to give abuses
time to grow strong, may be so fixed by law that they can easily be
shortened at need by extraordinary commissions.
This method seems to me to have no disadvantages, because, as I have
said, the tribunate, which forms no part of the constitution, can be removed
without the constitution being affected. It seems to be also efficacious,
because a newly restored magistrate starts not with the power his
predecessor exercised, but with that which the law allows him.
Chapter VI.
The Dictatorship
Table of Contents
The inflexibility of the laws, which prevents them from adapting
themselves to circumstances, may, in certain cases, render them disastrous,
and make them bring about, at a time of crisis, the ruin of the State. The
order and slowness of the forms they enjoin require a space of time which
circumstances sometimes withhold. A thousand cases against which the
legislator has made no provision may present themselves, and it is a highly
necessary part of foresight to be conscious that everything cannot be
foreseen.
It is wrong therefore to wish to make political institutions so strong as to
render it impossible to suspend their operation. Even Sparta allowed its
laws to lapse.
However, none but the greatest dangers can counter-balance that of
changing the public order, and the sacred power of the laws should never be
arrested save when the existence of the country is at stake. In these rare and
obvious cases, provision is made for the public security by a particular act
entrusting it to him who is most worthy. This commitment may be carried
out in either of two ways, according to the nature of the danger.
If increasing the activity of the government is a sufficient remedy,
power is concentrated in the hands of one or two of its members: in this
case the change is not in the authority of the laws, but only in the form of
administering them. If, on the other hand, the peril is of such a kind that the
paraphernalia of the laws are an obstacle to their preservation, the method is
to nominate a supreme ruler, who shall silence all the laws and suspend for
a moment the sovereign authority. In such a case, there is no doubt about
the general will, and it is clear that the people's first intention is that the
State shall not perish. Thus the suspension of the legislative authority is in
no sense its abolition; the magistrate who silences it cannot make it speak;
he dominates it, but cannot represent it. He can do anything, except make
laws.
The first method was used by the Roman senate when, in a consecrated
formula, it charged the consuls to provide for the safety of the Republic.
The second was employed when one of the two consuls nominated a
dictator:1 a custom Rome borrowed from Alba.
During the first period of the Republic, recourse was very often had to
the dictatorship, because the State had not yet a firm enough basis to be able
to maintain itself by the strength of its constitution alone. As the state of
morality then made superfluous many of the precautions which would have
been necessary at other times, there was no fear that a dictator would abuse
his authority, or try to keep it beyond his term of office. On the contrary, so
much power appeared to be burdensome to him who was clothed with it,
and he made all speed to lay it down, as if taking the place of the laws had
been too troublesome and too perilous a position to retain.
It is therefore the danger not of its abuse, but of its cheapening, that
makes me attack the indiscreet use of this supreme magistracy in the
earliest times. For as long as it was freely employed at elections,
dedications and purely formal functions, there was danger of its becoming
less formidable in time of need, and of men growing accustomed to
regarding as empty a title that was used only on occasions of empty
ceremonial.
Towards the end of the Republic, the Romans, having grown more
circumspect, were as unreasonably sparing in the use of the dictatorship as
they had formerly been lavish. It is easy to see that their fears were without
foundation, that the weakness of the capital secured it against the
magistrates who were in its midst; that a dictator might, in certain cases,
defend the public liberty, but could never endanger it; and that the chains of
Rome would be forged, not in Rome itself, but in her armies. The weak
resistance offered by Marius to Sulla, and by Pompey to Cæsar, clearly
showed what was to be expected from authority at home against force from
abroad.
This misconception led the Romans to make great mistakes; such, for
example, as the failure to nominate a dictator in the Catilinarian conspiracy.
For, as only the city itself, with at most some province in Italy, was
concerned, the unlimited authority the laws gave to the dictator would have
enabled him to make short work of the conspiracy, which was, in fact,
stifled only by a combination of lucky chances human prudence had no
right to expect.
Instead, the senate contented itself with entrusting its whole power to
the consuls, so that Cicero, in order to take effective action, was compelled
on a capital point to exceed his powers; and if, in the first transports of joy,
his conduct was approved, he was justly called, later on, to account for the
blood of citizens spilt in violation of the laws. Such a reproach could never
have been levelled at a dictator. But the consul's eloquence carried the day;
and he himself, Roman though he was, loved his own glory better than his
country, and sought, not so much the most lawful and secure means of
saving the State, as to get for himself the whole honour of having done so.2
He was therefore justly honoured as the liberator of Rome, and also justly
punished as a law-breaker. However brilliant his recall may have been, it
was undoubtedly an act of pardon.
However this important trust be conferred, it is important that its
duration should be fixed at a very brief period, incapable of being ever
prolonged. In the crises which lead to its adoption, the State is either soon
lost, or soon saved; and, the present need passed, the dictatorship becomes
either tyrannical or idle. At Rome, where dictators held office for six
months only, most of them abdicated before their time was up. If their term
had been longer, they might well have tried to prolong it still further, as the
decemvirs did when chosen for a year. The dictator had only time to provide
against the need that had caused him to be chosen; he had none to think of
further projects.
1. The nomination was made secretly by night, as if there were something shameful in setting a man
above the laws.
2. That is what he could not be sure of, if he proposed a dictator; for he dared not nominate himself,
and could not be certain that his colleague would nominate him.
Chapter VII.
The Censorship
Table of Contents
As the law is the declaration of the general will, the censorship is the
declaration of the public judgment: public opinion is the form of law which
the censor administers, and, like the prince, only applies to particular cases.
The censorial tribunal, so far from being the arbiter of the people's
opinion, only declares it, and, as soon as the two part company, its decisions
are null and void.
It is useless to distinguish the morality of a nation from the objects of its
esteem; both depend on the same principle and are necessarily
indistinguishable. There is no people on earth the choice of whose pleasures
is not decided by opinion rather than nature. Right men's opinions, and their
morality will purge itself. Men always love what is good or what they find
good; it is in judging what is good that they go wrong. This judgment,
therefore, is what must be regulated. He who judges of morality judges of
honour; and he who judges of honour finds his law in opinion.
The opinions of a people are derived from its constitution; although the
law does not regulate morality, it is legislation that gives it birth. When
legislation grows weak, morality degenerates; but in such cases the
judgment of the censors will not do what the force of the laws has failed to
effect.
From this it follows that the censorship may be useful for the
preservation of morality, but can never be so for its restoration. Set up
censors while the laws are vigorous; as soon as they have lost their vigour,
all hope is gone; no legitimate power can retain force when the laws have
lost it.
The censorship upholds morality by preventing opinion from growing
corrupt, by preserving its rectitude by means of wise applications, and
sometimes even by fixing it when it is still uncertain. The employment of
seconds in duels, which had been carried to wild extremes in the kingdom
of France, was done away with merely by these words in a royal edict: "As
for those who are cowards enough to call upon seconds." This judgment, in
anticipating that of the public, suddenly decided it. But when edicts from
the same source tried to pronounce duelling itself an act of cowardice, as
indeed it is, then, since common opinion does not regard it as such, the
public took no notice of a decision on a point on which its mind was already
made up.
I have stated elsewhere1 that as public opinion is not subject to any
constraint, there need be no trace of it in the tribunal set up to represent it. It
is impossible to admire too much the art with which this resource, which we
moderns have wholly lost, was employed by the Romans, and still more by
the Lacedæmonians.
A man of bad morals having made a good proposal in the Spartan
Council, the Ephors neglected it, and caused the same proposal to be made
by a virtuous citizen. What an honour for the one, and what a disgrace for
the other, without praise or blame of either! Certain drunkards from Samos2
polluted the tribunal of the Ephors: the next day, a public edict gave
Samians permission to be filthy. An actual punishment would not have been
so severe as such an impunity. When Sparta has pronounced on what is or is
not right, Greece makes no appeal from her judgments.
1. I merely call attention in this chapter to a subject with which I have dealt at greater length in my
Letter to M. d'Alembert.
2. They were from another island, which the delicacy of our language forbids me to name on this
occasion.
Chapter VIII.
Civil Religion
Table of Contents
At first men had no kings save the gods, and no government save theocracy.
They reasoned like Caligula, and, at that period, reasoned aright. It takes a
long time for feeling so to change that men can make up their minds to take
their equals as masters, in the hope that they will profit by doing so.
From the mere fact that God was set over every political society, it
followed that there were as many gods as peoples. Two peoples that were
strangers the one to the other, and almost always enemies, could not long
recognise the same master: two armies giving battle could not obey the
same leader. National divisions thus led to polytheism, and this in turn gave
rise to theological and civil intolerance, which, as we shall see hereafter, are
by nature the same.
The fancy the Greeks had for rediscovering their gods among the
barbarians arose from the way they had of regarding themselves as the
natural Sovereigns of such peoples. But there is nothing so absurd as the
erudition which in our days identifies and confuses gods of different
nations. As if Moloch, Saturn and Chronos could be the same god! As if the
Phœnician Baal, the Greek Zeus, and the Latin Jupiter could be the same!
As if there could still be anything common to imaginary beings with
different names!
If it is asked how in pagan times, where each State had its cult and its
gods, there were no wars of religion, I answer that it was precisely because
each State, having its own cult as well as its own government, made no
distinction between its gods and its laws. Political war was also theological;
the provinces of the gods were, so to speak, fixed by the boundaries of
nations. The god of one people had no right over another. The gods of the
pagans were not jealous gods; they shared among themselves the empire of
the world: even Moses and the Hebrews sometimes lent themselves to this
view by speaking of the God of Israel. It is true, they regarded as powerless
the gods of the Canaanites, a proscribed people condemned to destruction,
whose place they were to take; but remember how they spoke of the
divisions of the neighbouring peoples they were forbidden to attack! "Is not
the possession of what belongs to your god Chamos lawfully your due?"
said Jephthah to the Ammonites. "We have the same title to the lands our
conquering God has made his own."1 Here, I think, there is a recognition
that the rights of Chamos and those of the God of Israel are of the same
nature.
But when the Jews, being subject to the kings of Babylon, and,
subsequently, to those of Syria, still obstinately refused to recognise any
god save their own, their refusal was regarded as rebellion against their
conqueror, and drew down on them the persecutions we read of in their
history, which are without parallel till the coming of Christianity.2
Every religion, therefore, being attached solely to the laws of the State
which prescribed it, there was no way of converting a people except by
enslaving it, and there could be no missionaries save conquerors. The
obligation to change cults being the law to which the vanquished yielded, it
was necessary to be victorious before suggesting such a change. So far from
men fighting for the gods, the gods, as in Homer, fought for men; each
asked his god for victory, and repayed him with new altars. The Romans,
before taking a city, summoned its gods to quit it; and, in leaving the
Tarentines their outraged gods, they regarded them as subject to their own
and compelled to do them homage. They left the vanquished their gods as
they left them their laws. A wreath to the Jupiter of the Capitol was often
the only tribute they imposed.
Finally, when, along with their empire, the Romans had spread their cult
and their gods, and had themselves often adopted those of the vanquished,
by granting to both alike the rights of the city, the peoples of that vast
empire insensibly found themselves with multitudes of gods and cults,
everywhere almost the same; and thus paganism throughout the known
world finally came to be one and the same religion.
It was in these circumstances that Jesus came to set up on earth a
spiritual kingdom, which, by separating the theological from the political
system, made the State no longer one, and brought about the internal
divisions which have never ceased to trouble Christian peoples. As the new
idea of a kingdom of the other world could never have occurred to pagans,
they always looked on the Christians as really rebels, who, while feigning
to submit, were only waiting for the chance to make themselves
independent and their masters, and to usurp by guile the authority they
pretended in their weakness to respect. This was the cause of the
persecutions.
What the pagans had feared took place. Then everything changed its
aspect: the humble Christians changed their language, and soon this so-
called kingdom of the other world turned, under a visible leader, into the
most violent of earthly despotisms.
However, as there have always been a prince and civil laws, this double
power and conflict of jurisdiction have made all good polity impossible in
Christian States; and men have never succeeded in finding out whether they
were bound to obey the master or the priest.
Several peoples, however, even in Europe and its neighbourhood, have
desired without success to preserve or restore the old system: but the spirit
of Christianity has everywhere prevailed. The sacred cult has always
remained or again become independent of the Sovereign, and there has been
no necessary link between it and the body of the State. Mahomet held very
sane views, and linked his political system well together; and, as long as the
form of his government continued under the caliphs who succeeded him,
that government was indeed one, and so far good. But the Arabs, having
grown prosperous, lettered, civilised, slack and cowardly, were conquered
by barbarians: the division between the two powers began again; and,
although it is less apparent among the Mahometans than among the
Christians, it none the less exists, especially in the sect of Ali, and there are
States, such as Persia, where it is continually making itself felt.
Among us, the Kings of England have made themselves heads of the
Church, and the Czars have done the same: but this title has made them less
its masters than its ministers; they have gained not so much the right to
change it, as the power to maintain it: they are not its legislators, but only
its princes. Wherever the clergy is a corporate body,3 it is master and
legislator in its own country. There are thus two powers, two Sovereigns, in
England and in Russia, as well as elsewhere.
Of all Christian writers, the philosopher Hobbes alone has seen the evil
and how to remedy it, and has dared to propose the reunion of the two
heads of the eagle, and the restoration throughout of political unity, without
which no State or government will ever be rightly constituted. But he
should have seen that the masterful spirit of Christianity is incompatible
with his system, and that the priestly interest would always be stronger than
that of the State. It is not so much what is false and terrible in his political
theory, as what is just and true, that has drawn down hatred on it.4
I believe that if the study of history were developed from this point of
view, it would be easy to refute the contrary opinions of Bayle and
Warburton, one of whom holds that religion can be of no use to the body
politic, while the other, on the contrary, maintains that Christianity is its
strongest support. We should demonstrate to the former that no State has
ever been founded without a religious basis, and to the latter, that the law of
Christianity at bottom does more harm by weakening than good by
strengthening the constitution of the State. To make myself understood, I
have only to make a little more exact the too vague ideas of religion as
relating to this subject.
Religion, considered in relation to society, which is either general or
particular, may also be divided into two kinds: the religion of man, and that
of the citizen. The first, which has neither temples, nor altars, nor rites, and
is confined to the purely internal cult of the supreme God and the eternal
obligations of morality, is the religion of the Gospel pure and simple, the
true theism, what may be called natural divine right or law. The other,
which is codified in a single country, gives it its gods, its own tutelary
patrons; it has its dogmas, its rites, and its external cult prescribed by law;
outside the single nation that follows it, all the world is in its sight infidel,
foreign and barbarous; the duties and rights of man extend for it only as far
as its own altars. Of this kind were all the religions of early peoples, which
we may define as civil or positive divine right or law.
There is a third sort of religion of a more singular kind, which gives
men two codes of legislation, two rulers, and two countries, renders them
subject to contradictory duties, and makes it impossible for them to be
faithful both to religion and to citizenship. Such are the religions of the
Lamas and of the Japanese, and such is Roman Christianity, which may be
called the religion of the priest. It leads to a sort of mixed and anti-social
code which has no name.
In their political aspect, all these three kinds of religion have their
defects. The third is so clearly bad, that it is waste of time to stop to prove it
such. All that destroys social unity is worthless; all institutions that set man
in contradiction to himself are worthless.
The second is good in that it unites the divine cult with love of the laws,
and, making country the object of the citizens' adoration, teaches them that
service done to the State is service done to its tutelary god. It is a form of
theocracy, in which there can be no pontiff save the prince, and no priests
save the magistrates. To die for one's country then becomes martyrdom;
violation of its laws, impiety; and to subject one who is guilty to public
execration is to condemn him to the anger of the gods: Sacer estod.
On the other hand, it is bad in that, being founded on lies and error, it
deceives men, makes them credulous and superstitious, and drowns the true
cult of the Divinity in empty ceremonial. It is bad, again, when it becomes
tyrannous and exclusive, and makes a people bloodthirsty and intolerant, so
that it breathes fire and slaughter, and regards as a sacred act the killing of
every one who does not believe in its gods. The result is to place such a
people in a natural state of war with all others, so that its security is deeply
endangered.
There remains therefore the religion of man or Christianity—not the
Christianity of to-day, but that of the Gospel, which is entirely different By
means of this holy, sublime, and real religion all men, being children of one
God, recognise one another as brothers, and the society that unites them is
not dissolved even at death.
But this religion, having no particular relation to the body politic, leaves
the laws in possession of the force they have in themselves without making
any addition to it; and thus one of the great bonds that unite society
considered in severalty fails to operate. Nay, more, so far from binding the
hearts of the citizens to the State, it has the effect of taking them away from
all earthly things. I know of nothing more contrary to the social spirit.
We are told that a people of true Christians would form the most perfect
society imaginable. I see in this supposition only one great difficulty: that a
society of true Christians would not be a society of men.
I say further that such a society, with all its perfection, would be neither
the strongest nor the most lasting: the very fact that it was perfect would rob
it of its bond of union; the flaw that would destroy it would lie in its very
perfection.
Every one would do his duty; the people would be law-abiding, the
rulers just and temperate; the magistrates upright and incorruptible; the
soldiers would scorn death; there would be neither vanity nor luxury. So far,
so good; but let us hear more.
Christianity as a religion is entirely spiritual, occupied solely with
heavenly things; the country of the Christian is not of this world. He does
his duty, indeed, but does it with profound indifference to the good or ill
success of his cares. Provided he has nothing to reproach himself with, it
matters little to him whether things go well or ill here on earth. If the State
is prosperous, he hardly dares to share in the public happiness, for fear he
may grow proud of his country's glory; if the State is languishing, he
blesses the hand of God that is hard upon His people.
For the State to be peaceable and for harmony to be maintained, all the
citizens without exception would have to be good Christians; if by ill hap
there should be a single self-seeker or hypocrite, a Catiline or a Cromwell,
for instance, he would certainly get the better of his pious compatriots.
Christian charity does not readily allow a man to think hardly of his
neighbours. As soon as, by some trick, he has discovered the art of
imposing on them and getting hold of a share in the public authority, you
have a man established in dignity; it is the will of God that he be respected:
very soon you have a power; it is God's will that it be obeyed: and if the
power is abused by him who wields it, it is the scourge wherewith God
punishes His children. There would be scruples about driving out the
usurper: public tranquillity would have to be disturbed, violence would
have to be employed, and blood spilt; all this accords ill with Christian
meekness; and after all, in this vale of sorrows, what does it matter whether
we are free men or serfs? The essential thing is to get to heaven, and
resignation is only an additional means of doing so.
If war breaks out with another State, the citizens march readily out to
battle; not one of them thinks of flight; they do their duty, but they have no
passion for victory; they know better how to die than how to conquer. What
does it matter whether they win or lose? Does not Providence know better
than they what is meet for them? Only think to what account a proud,
impetuous and passionate enemy could turn their stoicism! Set over against
them those generous peoples who were devoured by ardent love of glory
and of their country, imagine your Christian republic face to face with
Sparta or Rome: the pious Christians will be beaten, crushed and destroyed,
before they know where they are, or will owe their safety only to the
contempt their enemy will conceive for them. It was to my mind a fine oath
that was taken by the soldiers of Fabius, who swore, not to conquer or die,
but to come back victorious—and kept their oath. Christians, would never
have taken such an oath; they would have looked on it as tempting God.
But I am mistaken in speaking of a Christian republic; the terms are
mutually exclusive. Christianity preaches only servitude and dependence.
Its spirit is so favourable to tyranny that it always profits by such a régime.
True Christians are made to be slaves, and they know it and do not much
mind: this short life counts for too little in their eyes.
I shall be told that Christian troops are excellent. I deny it. Show me an
instance. For my part, I know of no Christian troops. I shall be told of the
Crusades. Without disputing the valour of the Crusaders, I answer that, so
far from being Christians, they were the priests' soldiery, citizens of the
Church. They fought for their spiritual country, which the Church had,
somehow or other, made temporal. Well understood, this goes back to
paganism: as the Gospel sets up no national religion, a holy war is
impossible among Christians.
Under the pagan emperors, the Christian soldiers were brave; every
Christian writer affirms it, and I believe it: it was a case of honourable
emulation of the pagan troops. As soon as the emperors were Christian, this
emulation no longer existed, and, when the Cross had driven out the eagle,
Roman valour wholly disappeared.
But, setting aside political considerations, let us come back to what is
right, and settle our principles on this important point. The right which the
social compact gives the Sovereign over the subjects does not, we have
seen, exceed the limits of public expediency.5 The subjects then owe the
Sovereign an account of their opinions only to such an extent as they matter
to the community. Now, it matters very much to the community that each
citizen should have a religion. That will make him love his duty; but the
dogmas of that religion concern the State and its members only so far as
they have reference to morality and to the duties which he who professes
them is bound to do to others. Each man may have, over and above, what
opinions he pleases, without it being the Sovereign's business to take
cognisance of them; for, as the Sovereign has no authority in the other
world, whatever the lot of its subjects may be in the life to come, that is not
its business, provided they are good citizens in this life.
There is therefore a purely civil profession of faith of which the
Sovereign should fix the articles, not exactly as religious dogmas, but as
social sentiments without which a man cannot be a good citizen or a faithful
subject.6 While it can compel no one to believe them, it can banish from the
State whoever does not believe them—it can banish him, not for impiety,
but as an anti-social being, incapable of truly loving the laws and justice,
and of sacrificing, at need, his life to his duty. If any one, after publicly
recognising these dogmas, behaves as if he does not believe them, let him
be punished by death: he has committed the worst of all crimes, that of
lying before the law.
The dogmas of civil religion ought to be few, simple, and exactly
worded, without explanation or commentary. The existence of a mighty,
intelligent and beneficent Divinity, possessed of foresight and providence,
the life to come, the happiness of the just, the punishment of the wicked, the
sanctity of the social contract and the laws: these are its positive dogmas. Its
negative dogmas I confine to one, intolerance, which is a part of the cults
we have rejected.
Those who distinguish civil from theological intolerance are, to my
mind, mistaken. The two forms are inseparable. It is impossible to live at
peace with those we regard as damned; to love them would be to hate God
who punishes them: we positively must either reclaim or torment them.
Wherever theological intolerance is admitted, it must inevitably have some
civil effect;7 and as soon as it has such an effect, the Sovereign is no longer
Sovereign even in the temporal sphere: thenceforth priests are the real
masters, and kings only their ministers.
Now that there is and can be no longer an exclusive national religion,
tolerance should be given to all religions that tolerate others, so long as
their dogmas contain nothing contrary to the duties of citizenship. But
whoever dares to say: Outside the Church is no salvation, ought to be
driven from the State, unless the State is the Church, and the prince the
pontiff. Such a dogma is good only in a theocratic government; in any other,
it is fatal. The reason for which Henry IV is said to have embraced the
Roman religion ought to make every honest man leave it, and still more any
prince who knows how to reason.
1. Nonne ea quæ possidet Chamos deus tuus, tibi jure debentur? (Judges xi. 24). Such is the text in
the Vulgate. Father de Carrières translates: "Do you not regard yourselves as having a right to
what your god possesses?" I do not know the force of the Hebrew text: but I perceive that, in the
Vulgate, Jephthah positively recognises the right of the god Chamos, and that the French
translator weakened this admission by inserting an "according to you," which is not in the Latin.
2. It is quite clear that the Phocian war, which was called "the Sacred War," was not a war of
religion. Its object was the punishment of acts of sacrilege, and not the conquest of unbelievers.
3. It should be noted that the clergy find their bond of union not so much in formal assemblies, as in
the communion of Churches. Communion and ex-communication are the social compact of the
clergy, a compact which will always make them masters of peoples and kings. All priests who
communicate together are fellow-citizens, even if they come from opposite ends of the earth.
This invention is a masterpiece of statesmanship: there is nothing like it among pagan priests;
who have therefore never formed a clerical corporate body.
4. See, for instance, in a letter from Grotius to his brother (April 11, 1643), what that learned man
found to praise and to blame in the De Cive. It is true that, with a bent for indulgence, he seems
to pardon the writer the good for the sake of the bad; but all men are not so forgiving.
5. "In the republic," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "each man is perfectly free in what does not harm
others." This is the invariable limitation, which it is impossible to define more exactly. I have
not been able to deny myself the pleasure of occasionally quoting from this manuscript, though
it is unknown to the public, in order to do honour to the memory of a good and illustrious man,
who had kept even in the Ministry the heart of a good citizen, and views on the government of
his country that were sane and right.
6. Cæsar, pleading for Catiline, tried to establish the dogma that the soul is mortal: Cato and Cicero,
in refutation, did not waste time in philosophising. They were content to show that Cæsar spoke
like a bad citizen, and brought forward a doctrine that would have a bad effect on the State.
This, in fact, and not a problem of theology, was what the Roman senate had to judge.
7. Marriage, for instance, being a civil contract, has civil effects without which society cannot even
subsist Suppose a body of clergy should claim the sole right of permitting this act, a right which
every intolerant religion must of necessity claim, is it not clear that in establishing the authority
of the Church in this respect, it will be destroying that of the prince, who will have thenceforth
only as many subjects as the clergy choose to allow him? Being in a position to marry or not to
marry people, according to their acceptance of such and such a doctrine, their admission or
rejection of such and such a formula, their greater or less piety, the Church alone, by the
exercise of prudence and firmness, will dispose of all inheritances, offices and citizens, and even
of the State itself, which could not subsist if it were composed entirely of bastards? But, I shall
be told, there will be appeals on the ground of abuse, summonses and decrees; the temporalities
will be seized. How sad! The clergy, however little, I will not say courage, but sense it has, will
take no notice and go its way: it will quietly allow appeals, summonses, decrees and seizures,
and, in the end, will remain the master. It is not, I think, a great sacrifice to give up a part, when
one is sure of securing all.
Chapter IX.
Conclusion
Table of Contents
Now that I have laid down the true principles of political right, and tried to
give the State a basis of its own to rest on, I ought next to strengthen it by
its external relations, which would include the law of nations, commerce,
the right of war and conquest, public right, leagues, negotiations, treaties,
etc. But all this forms a new subject that is far too vast for my narrow
scope. I ought throughout to have kept to a more limited sphere.
A Discourse
Table of Contents
WHICH WON THE PRIZE AT THE ACADEMY OF DIJON IN 1750,
ON THIS QUESTION PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY:
HAS THE RESTORATION OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES
HAD A PURIFYING EFFECT UPON MORALS?
Barbaras his ego sum, qui non intelligor illis.—OVID.1
Preface
The following pages contain a discussion of one of the most sublime and
interesting of all moral questions. It is not concerned, however, with those
metaphysical subtleties, which of late have found their way into every
department of literature, and from which even our academic curricula are
not always free. We have now to do with one of those truths on which the
happiness of mankind depends.
I foresee that I shall not readily be forgiven for having taken up the
position I have adopted. Setting myself up against all that is nowadays most
admired, I can expect no less than a universal outcry against me: nor is the
approbation of a few sensible men enough to make me count on that of the
public. But I have taken my stand, and I shall be at no pains to please either
intellectuals or men of the world. There are in all ages men born to be in
bondage to the opinions of the society in which they live. There are not a
few, who to-day play the free-thinker and the philosopher, who would, if
they had lived in the time of the League, have been no more than fanatics.
No author, who has a mind to outlive his own age, should write for such
readers.
A word more and I have done. As I did not expect the honour conferred
on me, I had, since sending in my Discourse, so altered and enlarged it as
almost to make it a new work; but in the circumstances I have felt bound to
publish it just as it was when it received the prize. I have only added a few
notes, and left two alterations which are easily recognisable, of which the
Academy possibly might not have approved. The respect, gratitude and
even justice I owe to that body seemed to me to demand this
acknowledgment.
1. Here I am, a barbarian, because men understand me not.
Moral Effects of the Arts and Sciences
Decipimur specie recti.—HORACE.
The question before me is, "Whether the Restoration of the arts and
sciences has had the effect of purifying or corrupting morals." Which side
am I to take? That, gentlemen, which becomes an honest man, who is
sensible of his own ignorance, and thinks himself none the worse for it.
I feel the difficulty of treating this subject fittingly, before the tribunal
which is to judge of what I advance. How can I presume to belittle the
sciences before one of the most learned assemblies in Europe, to commend
ignorance in a famous Academy, and reconcile my contempt for study with
the respect due to the truly learned?
I was aware of these inconsistencies, but not discouraged by them. It is
not science, I said to myself, that I am attacking; it is virtue that I am
defending, and that before virtuous men—and goodness is even dearer to
the good than learning to the learned.
What then have I to fear? The sagacity of the assembly before which I
am pleading? That, I acknowledge, is to be feared; but rather on account of
faults of construction than of the views I hold. Just sovereigns have never
hesitated to decide against themselves in doubtful cases; and indeed the
most advantageous situation in which a just claim can be, is that of being
laid before a just and enlightened arbitrator, who is judge in his own case.
To this motive, which encouraged me, I may add another which finally
decided me. And this is, that as I have upheld the cause of truth to the best
of my natural abilities, whatever my apparent success, there is one reward
which cannot fail me. That reward I shall find in the bottom of my heart.
The First Part
It is a noble and beautiful spectacle to see man raising himself, so to speak,
from nothing by his own exertions; dissipating, by the light of reason, all
the thick clouds in which he was by nature enveloped; mounting above
himself; soaring in thought even to the celestial regions; like the sun,
encompassing with giant strides the vast extent of the universe; and, what is
still grander and more wonderful, going back into himself, there to study
man and get to know his own nature, his duties and his end. All these
miracles we have seen renewed within the last few generations.
Europe had relapsed into the barbarism of the earliest ages; the
inhabitants of this part of the world, which is at present so highly
enlightened, were plunged, some centuries ago, in a state still-worse than
ignorance. A scientific jargon, more despicable than mere ignorance, had
usurped the name of knowledge, and opposed an almost invincible obstacle
to its restoration.
Things had come to such a pass, that it required a complete revolution
to bring men back to common sense. This came at last from the quarter
from which it was least to be expected. It was the stupid Mussulman, the
eternal scourge of letters, who was the immediate cause of their revival
among us. The fall of the throne of Constantine brought to Italy the relics of
ancient Greece; and with these precious spoils France in turn was enriched.
The sciences soon followed literature, and the art of thinking joined that of
writing: an order which may seem strange, but is perhaps only too natural.
The world now began to perceive the principal advantage of an intercourse
with the Muses, that of rendering mankind more sociable by inspiring them
with the desire to please one another with performances worthy of their
mutual approbation.
The mind, as well as the body, has its needs: those of the body are the
basis of society, those of the mind its ornaments.
So long as government and law provide for the security and well-being
of men in their common life, the arts, literature and the sciences, less
despotic though perhaps more powerful, fling garlands of flowers over the
chains which weigh them down. They stifle in men's breasts that sense of
original liberty, for which they seem to have been born; cause them to love
their own slavery, and so make of them what is called a civilised people.
Necessity raised up thrones; the arts and sciences have made them
strong. Powers of the earth, cherish all talents and protect those who
cultivate them.1 Civilised peoples, cultivate such pursuits: to them, happy
slaves, you owe that delicacy and exquisiteness of taste, which is so much
your boast, that sweetness of disposition and urbanity of manners which
make intercourse so easy and agreeable among you—in a word, the
appearance of all the virtues, without being in possession of one of them.
It was for this sort of accomplishment, which is by so much the more
captivating as it seems less affected, that Athens and Rome were so much
distinguished in the boasted times of their splendour and magnificence: and
it is doubtless in the same respect that our own age and nation will excel all
periods and peoples. An air of philosophy without pedantry; an address at
once natural and engaging, distant equally from Teutonic clumsiness and
Italian pantomime; these are the effects of a taste acquired by liberal studies
and improved by conversation with the world. What happiness would it be
for those who live among us, if our external appearance were always a true
mirror of our hearts; if decorum were but virtue; if the maxims we
professed were the rules of our conduct; and if real philosophy were
inseparable from the title of a philosopher! But so many good qualities too
seldom go together; virtue rarely appears in so much pomp and state.
Richness of apparel may proclaim the man of fortune, and elegance the
man of taste; but true health and manliness are known by different signs. It
is under the home-spun of the labourer, and not beneath the gilt and tinsel of
the courtier, that we should look for strength and vigour of body.
External ornaments are no less foreign to virtue, which is the strength
and activity of the mind. The honest man is an athlete, who loves to wrestle
stark naked; he scorns all those vile trappings, which prevent the exertion of
his strength, and were, for the most part, invented only to conceal some
deformity.
Before art had moulded our behaviour, and taught our passions to speak
an artificial language, our morals were rude but natural; and the different
ways in which we behaved proclaimed at the first glance die difference of
our dispositions. Human nature was not at bottom better then than now; but
men found their security in the ease with which they could see through one
another, and this advantage, of which we no longer feel the value, prevented
their having many vices.
In our day, now that more subtle study and a more refined taste have
reduced the art of pleasing to a system, there prevails in modern manners a
servile and deceptive conformity; so that one would think every mind had
been cast in the same mould. Politeness requires this thing; decorum that;
ceremony has its forms, and fashion its laws, and these we must always
follow, never the promptings of our own nature.
We no longer dare seem what we really are, but lie under a perpetual
restraint; in the meantime the herd of men, which we call society, all act
under the same circumstances exactly alike, unless very particular and
powerful motives prevent them. Thus we never know with whom we have
to deal; and even to know our friends we must wait for some critical and
pressing occasion; that is, till it is too late; for it is on those very occasions
that such knowledge is of use to us.
What a train of vices must attend this uncertainty! Sincere friendship,
real esteem, and perfect confidence are banished from among men.
Jealousy, suspicion, fear, coldness, reserve, hate and fraud lie constantly
concealed under that uniform and deceitful veil of politeness; that boasted
candour and urbanity, for which we are indebted to the light and leading of
this age. We shall no longer take in vain by our oaths the name of our
Creator; but we shall insult Him with our blasphemies, and our scrupulous
ears will take no offence. We have grown too modest to brag of our own
deserts; but we do not scruple to decry those of others. We do not grossly
outrage even our enemies, but artfully calumniate them. Our hatred of other
nations diminishes, but patriotism dies with it. Ignorance is held in
contempt; but a dangerous scepticism has succeeded it. Some vices indeed
are condemned and others grown dishonourable; but we have still many that
are honoured with the names of virtues, and it is become necessary that we
should either have, or at least pretend to have them. Let who will extol the
moderation of our modern sages, I see nothing in it but a refinement of
intemperance as unworthy of my commendation as their artificial
simplicity.2
Such is the purity to which our morals have attained; this is the virtue
we have made our own. Let the arts and sciences claim the share they have
had in this salutary work. I shall add but one reflection more; suppose an
inhabitant of some distant country should endeavour to form an idea of
European morals from the state of the sciences, the perfection of the arts,
the propriety of our public entertainments, the politeness of our behaviour,
the affability of our conversation, our constant professions of benevolence,
and from those tumultuous assemblies of people of all ranks, who seem,
from morning till night, to have no other care than to oblige one another.
Such a stranger, I maintain, would arrive at a totally false view of our
morality.
Where there is no effect, it is idle to look for a cause: but here the effect
is certain and the depravity actual; our minds have been corrupted in
proportion as the arts and sciences have improved. Will it be said, that this
is a misfortune peculiar to the present age? No, gentlemen, the evils
resulting from our vain curiosity are as old as the world. The daily ebb and
flow of the tides are not more regularly influenced by the moon, than the
morals of a people by the progress of the arts and sciences. As their light
has risen above our horizon, virtue has taken flight, and the same
phenomenon has been constantly observed in all times and places.
Take Egypt, the first school of mankind, that ancient country, famous
for its fertility under a brazen sky; the spot from which Sesostris once set
out to conquer the world. Egypt became the mother of philosophy and the
fine arts; soon she was conquered by Cambyses, and then successively by
the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, and finally the Turks.
Take Greece, once peopled by heroes, who twice vanquished Asia.
Letters, as yet in their infancy, had not corrupted the disposition of its
inhabitants; but the progress of the sciences soon produced a dissoluteness
of manners, and the imposition of the Macedonian yoke: from which time
Greece, always learned, always voluptuous and always a slave, has
experienced amid all its revolutions no more than a change of masters. Not
all the eloquence of Demosthenes could breathe life into a body which
luxury and the arts had once enervated.
It was not till the days of Ennius and Terence that Rome, founded by a
shepherd, and made illustrious by I peasants, began to degenerate. But after
the appearance of an Ovid, a Catullus, a Martial, and the rest of those
numerous obscene authors, whose very names are enough to put modesty to
the blush, Rome, once the shrine of virtue, became the theatre of vice, a
scorn among the nations, and an object of derision even to barbarians. Thus
the capital of the world at length submitted to the yoke of slavery it had
imposed on others, and the very day of its fall was the eve of that on which
it conferred on one of its citizens the title of Arbiter of Good Taste.
What shall I say of that metropolis of the Eastern Empire, which, by its
situation, seemed destined to be the capital of the world; that refuge of the
arts and sciences, when they were banished from the rest of Europe, more
perhaps by wisdom than barbarism? The most profligate debaucheries, the
most abandoned villainies, the most atrocious crimes, plots, murders and
assassinations form the warp and woof of the history of Constantinople.
Such is the pure source from which have flowed to us the floods of
knowledge on which the present age so prides itself.
But wherefore should we seek, in past ages, for proofs of a truth, of
which the present affords us ample evidence? There is in Asia a vast
empire, where learning is held in honour, and leads to the highest dignities
in the state. If the sciences improved our morals, if they inspired us with
courage and taught us to lay down our lives for the good of our country, the
Chinese should be wise, free and invincible. But, if there be no vice they do
not practise, no crime with which they are not familiar; if the sagacity of
their ministers, the supposed wisdom of their laws, and the multitude of
inhabitants who people that vast empire, have alike failed to preserve them
from the yoke of the rude and ignorant Tartars, of what use were their men
of science and literature? What advantage has that country reaped from the
honours bestowed on its learned men? Can it be that of being peopled by a
race of scoundrels and slaves?
Contrast with these instances the morals of those few nations which,
being preserved from the contagion of useless knowledge, have by their
virtues become happy in themselves and afforded an example to the rest of
the world. Such were the first inhabitants of Persia, a nation so singular that
virtue was taught among them in the same manner as the sciences are with
us. They very easily subdued Asia, and possess the exclusive glory of
having had the history of their political institutions regarded as a
philosophical romance. Such were the Scythians, of whom such wonderful
eulogies have come down to us. Such were the Germans, whose simplicity,
innocence and virtue, afforded a most delightful contrast to the pen of an
historian, weary of describing the baseness and villainies of an enlightened,
opulent and voluptuous nation. Such had been even Rome in the days of its
poverty and ignorance. And such has shown itself to be, even in our own
times, that rustic nation, whose justly renowned courage not even adversity
could conquer, and whose fidelity no example could corrupt.3
It is not through stupidity that the people have preferred other activities
to those of the mind. They were not ignorant that in other countries there
were men who spent their time in disputing idly about the sovereign good,
and about vice and virtue. They knew that these useless thinkers were lavish
in their own praises, and stigmatised other nations contemptuously as
barbarians. But they noted the morals of these people, and so learnt what to
think of their learning.4
Can it be forgotten that, in the very heart of Greece, there arose a city as
famous for the happy ignorance of its inhabitants, as for the wisdom of its
laws; a republic of demi-gods rather than of men, so greatly superior their
virtues seemed to those of mere humanity? Sparta, eternal proof of the
vanity of science, while the vices, under the conduct of the fine arts, were
being introduced into Athens, even while its tyrant was carefully collecting
together the works of the prince of poets, was driving from her walls artists
and the arts, the learned and their learning!
The difference was seen in the outcome. Athens became the seat of
politeness and taste, the country of orators and philosophers. The elegance
of its buildings equalled that of its language; on every side might be seen
marble and canvas, animated by the hands of the most skilful artists. From
Athens we derive those astonishing performances, which will serve as
models to every corrupt age. The picture of Lacedæmon is not so highly
coloured. There, the neighbouring nations used to say, "men were born
virtuous, their native air seeming to inspire them with virtue." But its
inhabitants have left us nothing but the memory of their heroic actions:
monuments that should not count for less in our eyes than the most curious
relics of Athenian marble.
It is true that, among the Athenians, there were some few wise men who
withstood the general torrent, and preserved their integrity even in the
company of the muses. But hear the judgment which the principal, and most
unhappy of them, passed on the artists and learned men of his day.
"I have considered the poets," says he, "and I look upon them as people
whose talents impose both on themselves and on others; they give
themselves out for wise men, and are taken for such; but in reality they are
anything sooner than that."
"From the poets," continues Socrates, "I turned to the artists. Nobody
was more ignorant of the arts than myself; nobody was more fully
persuaded that the artists were possessed of amazing knowledge. I soon
discovered, however, that they were in as bad a way as the poets, and that
both had fallen into the same misconception. Because the most skilful of
them excel others in their particular jobs, they think themselves wiser than
all the rest of mankind. This arrogance spoilt all their skill in my eyes, so
that, putting myself in the place of the oracle, and asking myself whether I
would rather be what I am or what they are, know what they know, or know
that I know nothing, I very readily answered, for myself and the god, that I
had rather remain as I am.
"None of us, neither the sophists, nor the poets, nor the orators, nor the
artists, nor I, know what is the nature of the true, the good, or the beautiful.
But there is this difference between us; that, though none of these people
know anything, they all think they know something; whereas for my part, if
I know nothing, I am at least in no doubt of my ignorance. So the
superiority of wisdom, imputed to me by the oracle, is reduced merely to
my being fully convinced that I am ignorant of what I do not know."
Thus we find Socrates, the wisest of men in the judgment of the god,
and the most learned of all the Athenians in the opinion of all Greece,
speaking in praise of ignorance. Were he alive now, there is little reason to
think that our modern scholars and artists would induce him to change his
mind. No, gentlemen, that honest man would still persist in despising our
vain sciences. He would lend no aid to swell the flood of books that flows
from every quarter: he would leave to us, as he did to his disciples, only the
example and memory of his virtues; that is the noblest method of
instructing mankind.
Socrates had begun at Athens, and the elder Cato proceeded at Rome, to
inveigh against those seductive and subtle Greeks, who corrupted the virtue
and destroyed the courage of their fellow-citizens: culture, however,
prevailed. Rome was filled with philosophers and orators, military
discipline was neglected, agriculture was held in contempt, men formed
sects, and forgot their country. To the sacred names of liberty,
disinterestedness and obedience to law, succeeded those of Epicurus, Zeno
and Arcesilaus. It was even a saying among their own philosophers that
since learned men appeared among them, honest men had been in eclipse.
Before that time the Romans were satisfied with the practice of virtue; they
were undone when they began to study it.
What would the great soul of Fabricius have felt, if it had been his
misfortune to be called back to life, when he saw the pomp and
magnificence of that Rome, which his arm had saved from ruin, and his
honourable name made more illustrious than all its conquests. "Ye gods!"
he would have said, "what has become of those thatched roofs and rustic
hearths, which were formerly the habitations of temperance and virtue?
What fatal splendour has succeeded the ancient Roman simplicity? What is
this foreign language, this effeminacy of manners? What is the meaning of
these statues, paintings and buildings? Fools, what have you done? You, the
lords of the earth, have made yourselves the slaves of the frivolous nations
you have subdued. You are governed by rhetoricians, and it has been only to
enrich architects, painters, sculptors and stage-players that you have
watered Greece and Asia with your blood. Even the spoils of Carthage are
the prize of a flute-player. Romans! Romans! make haste to demolish those
amphitheatres, break to pieces those statues, burn those paintings; drive
from among you those slaves who keep you in subjection, and whose fatal
arts are corrupting your morals. Let other hands make themselves illustrious
by such vain talents; the only talent worthy of Rome is that of conquering
the world and making virtue its ruler. When Cyneas took the Roman senate
for an assembly of kings, he was not struck by either useless pomp or
studied elegance. He heard there none of that futile eloquence, which is
now the study and the charm of frivolous orators. What then was the
majesty that Cyneas beheld? Fellow citizens, he saw the noblest sight that
ever existed under heaven, a sight which not all your riches or your arts can
show; an assembly of two hundred virtuous men, worthy to command in
Rome, and to govern the world."
But let pass the distance of time and place, and let us see what has
happened in our own time and country; or rather let us banish odious
descriptions that might offend our delicacy, and spare ourselves the pains of
repeating the same tilings under different names. It was not for nothing that
I invoked the Manes of Fabricius; for what have I put into his mouth, that
might not have come with as much propriety from Louis the Twelfth or
Henry the Fourth? It is true that in France Socrates would not have drunk
the hemlock, but he would have drunk of a potion infinitely more bitter, of
insult, mockery and contempt a hundred times worse than death.
Thus it is that luxury, profligacy and slavery, have been, in all ages, the
scourge of the efforts of our pride to emerge from that happy state of
ignorance, in which the wisdom of providence had placed us. That thick
veil with which it has covered all its operations seems to be a sufficient
proof that it never designed us for such fruitless researches. But is there,
indeed, one lesson it has taught us, by which we have rightly profited, or
which we have neglected with impunity? Let men learn for once that nature
would have preserved them from science, as a mother snatches a dangerous
weapon from the hands of her child. Let them know that all the secrets she
hides are so many evils from which she protects them, and that the very
difficulty they find in acquiring knowledge is not the least of her bounty
towards them. Men are perverse; but they would have been far worse, if
they had had the misfortune to be born learned.
How humiliating are these reflections to humanity, and how mortified
by them our pride should be! What! it will be asked, is uprightness the child
of ignorance? Is virtue inconsistent with learning? What consequences
might not be drawn from such suppositions? But to reconcile these apparent
contradictions, we need only examine closely the emptiness and vanity of
those pompous titles, which are so liberally bestowed on human knowledge,
and which so blind our judgment. Let us consider, therefore, the arts and
sciences in themselves. Let us see what must result from their advancement,
and let us not hesitate to admit the truth of all those points on which our
arguments coincide with the inductions we can make from history.
1. Sovereigns always see with, pleasure a taste for the arts of amusement and superfluity, which do
not result in the exportation of bullion, increase among their subjects. They very well know that,
besides nourishing that littleness of mind which is proper to slavery, the increase of artificial
wants only binds so many more chains upon the people. Alexander, wishing to keep the
Ichthyophages in a state of dependence, compelled them to give up fishing, and subsist on the
customary food of civilised nations. The American savages, who go naked, and live entirely on
the products of the chase, have been always impossible to subdue. What yoke, indeed, can be
imposed on men who stand in need of nothing?
2. "I love," said Montaigne, "to converse and hold an argument; but only with very few people, and
that for my own gratification. For to do so, by way of affording amusement for the great, or of
making a parade of one's talents, is, in my opinion, a trade very ill-becoming a man of honour."
It is the trade of all our intellectuals, save one.
3. I dare not speak of those happy nations, who did not even know the name of many vices, which
we find it difficult to suppress; the savages of America, whose simple and natural mode of
government Montaigne preferred, without hesitation, not only to the laws of Plato, but to the
most perfect visions of government philosophy can ever suggest He cites many examples,
striking for those who are capable of appreciating them. But, what of all that, says he, they can't
run to a pair of breeches!
4. What are we to think was the real opinion of the Athenians themselves about eloquence, when
they were so very careful to banish declamation from that upright tribunal, against whose
decision even their gods made no appeal? What did the Romans think of physicians, when they
expelled medicine from the republic? And when the relics of humanity left among the Spaniards
induced them to forbid their lawyers to set foot in America, what must they have thought of
jurisprudence? May it not be said that they thought, by this single expedient, to make reparation
for all the outrages they had committed against the unhappy Indians?
The Second Part
An ancient tradition passed out of Egypt into Greece, that some god, who
was an enemy to the repose of mankind, was the inventor of the sciences.1
What must the Egyptians, among whom the sciences first arose, have
thought of them? And they beheld, near at hand, the sources from which
they sprang. In fact, whether we turn to the annals of the world, or eke out
with philosophical investigations the uncertain chronicles of history, we
shall not find for human knowledge an origin answering to the idea we are
pleased to entertain of it at present. Astronomy was born of superstition,
eloquence of ambition, hatred, falsehood and flattery; geometry of avarice;
physics of an idle curiosity; and even moral philosophy of human pride.
Thus the arts and sciences owe their birth to our vices; we should be less
doubtful of their advantages, if they had sprung from our virtues.
Their evil origin is, indeed, but too plainly reproduced in their objects.
What would become of the arts, were they not cherished by luxury? If men
were not unjust, of what use were jurisprudence? What would become of
history, if there were no tyrants, wars, or conspiracies? In a word, who
would pass his life in barren speculations, if everybody, attentive only to the
obligations of humanity and the necessities of nature, spent his whole life in
serving his country, obliging his friends, and relieving the unhappy? Are we
then made to live and die on the brink of that well at the bottom of which
Truth lies hid? This reflection alone is, in my opinion, enough to discourage
at first setting out every man who seriously endeavours to instruct himself
by the study of philosophy.
What a variety of dangers surrounds us! What a number of wrong paths
present themselves in the investigation of the sciences! Through how many
errors, more perilous than truth itself is useful, must we not pass to arrive at
it? The disadvantages we lie under are evident; for falsehood is capable of
an infinite variety of combinations; but the truth has only one manner of
being. Besides, where is the man who sincerely desires to find it? Or even
admitting his good will, by what characteristic marks is he sure of knowing
it? Amid the infinite diversity of opinions where is the criterion2 by which
we may certainly judge of it? Again, what is still more difficult, should we
even be fortunate enough to discover it, who among us will know how to
make right use of it?
If our sciences are futile in the objects they propose, they are no less
dangerous in the effects they produce. Being the effect of idleness, they
generate idleness in their turn; and an irreparable loss of time is the first
prejudice which they must necessarily cause to society. To live without
doing some good is a great evil as well in the political as in the moral
world; and hence every useless citizen should be regarded as a pernicious
person. Tell me then, illustrious philosophers, of whom we learn the ratios
in which attraction acts in vacuo; and in the revolution of the planets, the
relations of spaces traversed in equal times; by whom we are taught what
curves have conjugate points, points of inflexion, and cusps; how the soul
and body correspond, like two clocks, without actual communication; what
planets may be inhabited; and what insects reproduce in an extraordinary
manner. Answer me, I say, you from whom we receive all this sublime
information, whether we should have been less numerous, worse governed,
less formidable, less flourishing, or more perverse, supposing you had
taught us none of all these fine things.
Reconsider therefore the importance of your productions; and, since the
labours of the most enlightened of our learned men and the best of our
citizens are of so little utility, tell us what we ought to think of that
numerous herd of obscure writers and useless litterateurs, who devour
without any return the substance of the State.
Useless, do I say? Would God they were! Society would be more
peaceful, and morals less corrupt. But these vain and futile declaimers go
forth on all sides, armed with their fatal paradoxes, to sap the foundations of
our faith, and nullify virtue. They smile contemptuously at such old names
as patriotism and religion, and consecrate their talents and philosophy to the
destruction; and defamation of all that men hold sacred. Not that they bear
any real hatred to virtue or dogma; they are the enemies of public opinion
alone; to bring them to the foot of the altar, it would be enough to banish
them to a land of atheists. What extravagancies will not the rage of
singularity induce men to commit!
The waste of time is certainly a great evil; but still greater evils attend
upon literature and the arts. One is luxury, produced like them by indolence
and vanity. Luxury is seldom unattended by the arts and sciences; and they
are always attended by luxury. I know that our philosophy, fertile in
paradoxes, pretends, in contradiction to the experience of all ages, that
luxury contributes to the splendour of States. But, without insisting on the
necessity of sumptuary laws, can it be denied that rectitude of morals is
essential to the duration of empires, and that luxury is diametrically
opposed to such rectitude? Let it be admitted that luxury is a certain
indication of wealth; that it even serves, if you will, to increase such wealth:
what conclusion is to be drawn from this paradox, so worthy of the times?
And what will become of virtue if riches are to be acquired at any cost? The
politicians of the ancient world were always talking of morals and virtue;
ours speak of nothing but commerce and money. One of them will tell you
that in such a country a man is worth just as much as he will sell for at
Algiers: another, pursuing the same mode of calculation, finds that in some
countries a man is worth nothing, and in others still less than nothing; they
value men as they do droves of oxen. According to them, a man is worth no
more to the State, than the amount he consumes; and thus a Sybarite would
be worth at least thirty Lacedæmonians. Let these writers tell me, however,
which of the two republics, Sybaris or Sparta, was subdued by a handful of
peasants, and which became the terror of Asia.
The monarchy of Cyrus was conquered by thirty thousand men, led by a
prince poorer than the meanest of Persian Satraps: in like manner the
Scythians, the poorest of all nations, were able to resist the most powerful
monarchs of the universe. When two famous republics contended for the
empire of the world, the one rich and the other poor, the former was
subdued by the latter. The Roman empire in its turn, after having engulfed
all the riches of the universe, fell a prey to peoples who knew not even what
riches were. The Franks conquered the Gauls, and the Saxons England,
without any other treasures than their bravery and their poverty. A band of
poor mountaineers, whose whole cupidity was confined to the possession of
a few sheep-skins, having first given a check to the arrogance of Austria,
went on to crush the opulent and formidable house of Burgundy, which at
that time made the potentates of Europe tremble. In short, all the power and
wisdom of the heir of Charles the Fifth, backed by all the treasures of the
Indies, broke before a few herring-fishers. Let our politicians condescend to
lay aside their calculations for a moment, to reflect on these examples; let
them learn for once that money, though it buys everything else, cannot buy
morals and citizens. What then is the precise point in dispute about luxury?
It is to know which is most advantageous to empires, that their existence
should be brilliant and momentary, or virtuous and lasting? I say brilliant,
but with what lustre! A taste for ostentation never prevails in the same
minds as a taste for honesty. No, it is impossible that understandings,
degraded by a multitude of futile cares, should ever rise to what is truly
great and noble; even if they had the strength, they would want the courage.
Every artist loves applause. The praise of his contemporaries is the most
valuable part of his recompense. What then will he do to obtain it, if he
have the misfortune to be born among a people, and at a time, when
learning is in vogue, and the superficiality of youth is in a position to lead
the fashion; when men have sacrificed their taste to those who tyrannise
over their liberty, and one sex dare not approve anything but what is
proportionate to the pusillanimity of the other;3 when the greatest
masterpieces of dramatic poetry are condemned, and the noblest of musical
productions neglected? This is what he will do. He will lower his genius to
the level of the age, and will rather submit to compose mediocre works, that
will be admired during his life-time, than labour at sublime achievements
which will not be admired till long after he is dead. Let the famous Voltaire
tell us how many nervous and masculine beauties he has sacrificed to our
false delicacy, and how much that is great and noble, that spirit of gallantry,
which delights in what is frivolous and petty, has cost him.
It is thus that the dissolution of morals, the necessary consequence of
luxury, brings with it in its turn the corruption of taste. Further, if by chance
there be found among men of average ability, an individual with enough
strength of mind to refuse to comply with the spirit of the age, and to
debase himself by puerile productions, his lot will be hard. He will die in
indigence and oblivion. This is not so much a prediction, as a fact already
confirmed by experience! Yes, Carle and Pierre Vanloo, the time is already
come when your pencils, destined to increase the majesty of our temples by
sublime and holy images, must fall from your hands, or else be prostituted
to adorn the panels of a coach with lascivious paintings. And you,
inimitable Pigal, rival of Phidias and Praxiteles, whose chisel the ancients
would have employed to carve them gods, whose images almost excuse
their idolatry in our eyes; even your hand must condescend to fashion the
belly of an ape, or else remain idle.
We cannot reflect on the morality of mankind without contemplating
with pleasure the picture of the simplicity which prevailed in the earliest
times. This image may be justly compared to a beautiful coast, adorned only
by the hands of nature; towards which our eyes are constantly turned, and
which we see receding with regret. While men were innocent and virtuous
and loved to have the gods for witnesses of their actions, they dwelt
together in the same huts; but when they became vicious, they grew tired of
such inconvenient onlookers, and banished them to magnificent temples.
Finally, they expelled their deities even from these, in order to dwell there
themselves; or at least the temples of the gods were no longer more
magnificent than the palaces of the citizens. This was the height of
degeneracy; nor could vice ever be carried to greater lengths than when it
was seen, supported, as it were, at the doors of the great, on columns of
marble, and graven on Corinthian capitals.
As the conveniences of life increase, as the arts are brought to
perfection, and luxury spreads, true courage flags, the virtues disappear; and
all this is the effect of the sciences and of those arts which are exercised in
the privacy of men's dwellings. When the Goths ravaged Greece, the
libraries only escaped the flames owing to an opinion that was set on foot
among them, that it was best to leave the enemy with a possession so
calculated to divert their attention from military exercises, and keep them
engaged in indolent and sedentary occupations.
Charles the Eighth found himself master of Tuscany and the kingdom of
Naples, almost without drawing sword; and all his court attributed this
unexpected success to the fact that the princes and nobles of Italy applied
themselves with greater earnestness to the cultivation of their
understandings than to active and martial pursuits. In fact, says the sensible
person who records these characteristics, experience plainly tells us, that in
military matters and all that resemble them application to the sciences tends
rather to make men effeminate and cowardly than resolute and vigorous.
The Romans confessed that military virtue was extinguished among
them, in proportion as they became connoisseurs in the arts of the painter,
the engraver and the goldsmith, and began to cultivate the fine arts. Indeed,
as if this famous country was to be for ever an example to other nations, the
rise of the Medici and the revival of letters has once more destroyed, this
time perhaps for ever, the martial reputation which Italy seemed a few
centuries ago to have recovered.
The ancient republics of Greece, with that wisdom which was so
conspicuous in most of their institutions, forbade their citizens to pursue all
those inactive and sedentary occupations, which by enervating and
corrupting the body diminish also the vigour of the mind. With what
courage, in fact, can it be thought that hunger and thirst, fatigues, dangers
and death, can be faced by men whom the smallest want overwhelms and
the slightest difficulty repels? With what resolution can soldiers support the
excessive toils of war, when they are entirely unaccustomed to them? With
what spirits can they make forced marches under officers who have not
even the strength to travel on horseback? It is no answer to cite the reputed
valour of all the modern warriors who are so scientifically trained. I hear
much of their bravery in a day's battle; but I am told nothing of how they
support excessive fatigue, how they stand the severity of the seasons and
the inclemency of the weather. A little sunshine or snow, or the want of a
few superfluities, is enough to cripple and destroy one of our finest armies
in a few days. Intrepid warriors I permit me for once to tell you the truth,
which you seldom hear. Of your bravery I am fully satisfied. I have no
doubt that you would have triumphed with Hannibal at Cannæ, and at
Trasimene: that you would have passed the Rubicon with Cæsar, and
enabled him to enslave his country; but you never would have been able to
cross the Alps with the former, or with the latter to subdue your own
ancestors, the Gauls.
A war does not always depend on the events of battle: there is in
generalship an art superior to that of gaining victories. A man may behave
with great intrepidity under fire, and yet be a very had officer. Even in the
common soldier, a little more Strength and vigour would perhaps be more
useful than so much courage, which after all is no protection from death.
And what does it matter to the State whether its troops perish by cold and
fever, or by the sword of the enemy?
If the cultivation of the sciences is prejudicial to military qualities, it is
still more so to moral qualities. Even from our infancy an absurd system of
education serves to adorn our wit and corrupt our judgment. We see, on
every side, huge institutions, where our youth are educated at great expense,
and instructed in everything but their duty. Your children will be ignorant of
their own language, when they can talk others which are not spoken
anywhere. They will be able to compose verses which they can hardly
understand; and, without being capable of distinguishing truth from error,
they will possess the art of making them unrecognisable by specious
arguments. But magnanimity, equity, temperance, humanity and courage
will be words of which they know not the meaning. The dear name of
country will never strike on their ears; and if they ever hear speak of God,4
it will be less to fear, than to be frightened of Him. I would as soon, said a
wise man, that my pupil had spent his time in the tennis court as in this
manner; for there his body at least would have got exercise.
I well know that children ought to be kept employed, and that idleness
is for them the danger most to be feared. But what should they be taught?
This is undoubtedly an important question. Let them be taught what they
are to practise when they come to be men;5 not what they ought to forget.
Our gardens are adorned with statues and our galleries with pictures.
What would you imagine these masterpieces of art, thus exhibited to public
admiration, represent? The great men, who have defended their country, or
the still greater men who have enriched it by their virtues? Far from it. They
are the images of every perversion of heart and mind, carefully selected
from ancient mythology, and presented to the early curiosity of our
children, doubtless that they may have before their eyes the representations
of vicious actions, even before they are able to read.
Whence arise all those abuses, unless it be from that fatal inequality
introduced among men by the difference of talents and the cheapening of
virtue? This is the most evident effect of all our studies, and the most
dangerous of all their consequences. The question is no longer whether a
man is honest, but whether he is clever. We do not ask whether a book is
useful, but whether it is well-written. Rewards are lavished on wit and
ingenuity, while virtue is left unhonoured. There are a thousand prizes for
fine discourses, and none for good actions. I should be glad, however, to
know whether the honour attaching to the best discourse that ever wins the
prize in this Academy is comparable with the merit of having founded the
prize.
A wise man does not go in chase of fortune; but he is by no means
insensible to glory, and when he sees it so ill distributed, his virtue, which
might have been animated by a little emulation, and turned to the advantage
of society, droops and dies away in obscurity and indigence. It is for this
reason that the agreeable arts must in time everywhere be preferred to the
useful; and this truth has been but too much confirmed since the revival of
the arts and sciences. We have physicists, geometricians, chemists,
astronomers, poets, musicians, and painters in plenty; but we have no
longer a citizen among us; or if there be found a few scattered over our
abandoned countryside, they are left to perish there unnoticed and
neglected. Such is the condition to which we are reduced, and such are our
feelings towards those who give us our daily bread, and our children milk.
I confess, however, that the evil is not so great as it might have become.
The eternal providence, in placing salutary simples beside noxious plants,
and making poisonous animals contain their own antidote, has taught the
sovereigns of the earth, who are its ministers, to imitate its wisdom. It is by
following this example that the truly great monarch, to whose glory every
age will add new lustre, drew from the very bosom of the arts and sciences,
the very fountains of a thousand lapses from rectitude, those famous
societies, which, while they are depositaries of the dangerous trust of
human knowledge, are yet the sacred guardians of morals, by the attention
they pay to their maintenance among themselves in all their purity, and by
the demands which they make on every member whom they admit.
These wise institutions, confirmed by his august successor and imitated
by all the kings of Europe, will serve at least to restrain men of letters, who,
all aspiring to the honour of being admitted into these Academies, will keep
watch over themselves, and endeavour to make themselves worthy of such
honour by useful performances and irreproachable morals. Those
Academies also, which, in proposing prizes for literary merit, make choice
of such subjects as are calculated to arouse the love of virtue in the hearts of
citizens, prove that it prevails in themselves, and must give men the rare
and real pleasure of finding learned societies devoting themselves to the
enlightenment of mankind, not only by agreeable exercises of the intellect,
but also by useful instructions.
An objection which may be made is, in fact, only an additional proof of
my argument. So much precaution proves but too evidently the need for it.
We never seek remedies for evils that do not exist. Why, indeed, must these
bear all the marks of ordinary remedies, on account of their inefficacy? The
numerous establishments in favour of the learned are only adapted to make
men mistake the objects of the sciences, and turn men's attention to the
cultivation of them. One would be inclined to think, from the precautions
everywhere taken, that we are overstocked with husbandmen, and are afraid
of a shortage of philosophers. I will not venture here to enter into a
comparison between agriculture and philosophy, as they would not bear it. I
shall only ask What is philosophy? What is contained in the writings of the
most celebrated philosophers? What are the lessons of these friends of
wisdom. To hear them, should we not take them for so many mountebanks,
exhibiting themselves in public, and crying out, Here, Here, come to me, I
am the only true doctor? One of them teaches that there is no such thing as
matter, but that everything exists only in representation. Another declares
that there is no other substance than matter, and no other God than the
world itself. A third tells you that there are no such things as virtue and vice,
and that moral good and evil are chimeras; while a fourth informs you that
men are only beasts of prey, and may conscientiously devour one another.
Why, my great philosophers, do you not reserve these wise and profitable
lessons for your friends and children? You would soon reap the benefit of
them, nor should we be under any apprehension of our own becoming your
disciples.
Such are the wonderful men, whom their contemporaries held in the
highest esteem during their lives, and to whom immortality has been
attributed since their decease. Such are the wise maxims we have received
from them, and which are transmitted, from age to age, to our descendants.
Paganism, though given over to all the extravagances of human reason, has
left nothing to compare with the shameful monuments which have been
prepared by the art of printing, during the reign of the gospel. The impious
writings of Leucippus and Diagoras perished with their authors. The world,
in their days, was ignorant of the art of immortalising the errors and
extravagancies of the human mind. But thanks to the art of printing6 and the
use we make of it, the pernicious reflections of Hobbes and Spinoza will
last for ever. Go, famous writings, of which the ignorance and rusticity of
our forefathers would have been incapable. Go to our descendants, along
with those still more pernicious works which reek of the corrupted manners
of the present age! Let them together convey to posterity a faithful history
of the progress and advantages of our arts and sciences. If they are read,
they will leave not a doubt about the question we are now discussing, and
unless mankind should then be still more foolish than we, they will lift up
their hands to Heaven and exclaim in bitterness of heart: "Almighty God!
thou who holdest in Thy hand the minds of men, deliver us from the fatal
arts and sciences of our forefathers; give us back ignorance, innocence and
poverty, which alone can make us happy and are precious in Thy sight."
But if the progress of the arts and sciences has added nothing to our real
happiness; if it has corrupted our morals, and if that corruption has vitiated
our taste, what are we to think of the herd of text-book authors, who have
removed those impediments which nature purposely laid in the way to the
Temple of the Muses, in order to guard its approach and try the powers of
those who might be tempted to seek knowledge? What are we to think of
those compilers who have indiscreetly broken open the door of the sciences,
and introduced into their sanctuary a populace unworthy to approach it,
when it was greatly to be wished that all who should be found incapable of
making a considerable progress in the career of learning should have been
repulsed at the entrance, and thereby cast upon those arts which are useful
to society. A man who will be all his life a bad versifier, or a third-rate
geometrician, might have made nevertheless an excellent clothier. Those
whom nature intended for her disciples have not needed masters. Bacon,
Descartes and Newton, those teachers of mankind, had themselves no
teachers. What guide indeed could have taken them so far as their sublime
genius directed them? Ordinary masters would only have cramped their
intelligence, by confining it within the narrow limits of their own capacity.
It was from the obstacles they met with at first, that they learned to exert
themselves, and bestirred themselves to traverse the vast field which they
covered. If it be proper to allow some men to apply themselves to the study
of the arts and sciences, it is only those who feel themselves able to walk
alone in their footsteps and to outstrip them. It belongs only to these few to
raise monuments to the glory of the human understanding. But if we are
desirous that nothing should be above their genius, nothing should be
beyond their hopes. This is the only encouragement they require. The soul
insensibly adapts itself to the objects on which it is employed, and thus it is
that great occasions produce great men. The greatest orator in the world was
Consul of Rome, and perhaps the greatest of philosophers Lord Chancellor
of England. Can it be conceived that, if the former had only been a
professor at some University, and the latter a pensioner of some Academy,
their works would not have suffered from their situation. Let not princes
disdain to admit into their councils those who are most capable of giving
them good advice. Let them renounce the old prejudice, which was invented
by the pride of the great, that the art of governing mankind is more difficult
than that of instructing them; as if it was easier to induce men to do good
voluntarily, than to compel them to it by force. Let the learned of the first
rank find an honourable refuge in their courts; let them there enjoy the only
recompense worthy of them, that of promoting by their influence the
happiness of the peoples they have enlightened by their wisdom. It is by
this means only that we are likely to see what virtue, science and authority
can do, when animated by the noblest emulation, and working unanimously
for the happiness of mankind.
But so long as power alone is on one side, and knowledge and
Understanding alone on the other, the learned will seldom make great
objects their study, princes will still more rarely do great actions, and the
peoples will continue to be, as they are, mean, corrupt and miserable.
As for us, ordinary men, on whom Heaven has not been pleased to
bestow such great talents; as we are not destined to reap such glory, let us
remain in our obscurity. Let us not covet a reputation we should never
attain, and which, in the present state of things, would never make up to us
for the trouble it would have cost us, even if we were fully qualified to
obtain it. Why should we build our happiness on the opinions of others,
when we can find it in our own hearts? Let us leave to others the task of
instructing mankind in their duty, and confine ourselves to the discharge of
our own. We have no occasion for greater knowledge than this.
Virtue! sublime science of simple minds, are such industry and
preparation needed if we are to know you? Are not your principles graven
on every heart? Need we do more, to learn your laws, than examine
ourselves, and listen to the voice of conscience, when the passions are
silent?
This is the true philosophy, with which we must learn to be content,
without envying the fame of those celebrated men, whose names are
immortal in the republic of letters. Let us, instead of envying them,
endeavour to make, between them and us, that honourable distinction which
was formerly seen to exist between two great peoples, that the one knew
how to speak, and the other how to act, aright.
1. It is easy to see the allegory in the fable of Prometheus: and it does not appear that the Greeks,
who chained him to the Caucasus, had a better opinion of him than the Egyptians had of their
god Theutus. The Satyr, says an ancient fable, the first time he saw a fire, was going to kiss and
embrace it; but Prometheus cried out to him to forbear, or his beard would rue it. It burns, says
he, everything that touches it.
2. The less we know, the more we think we know. The peripatetics doubted of nothing. Did not
Descartes construct the universe with cubes and vortices? And is there in all Europe one single
physicist who does not boldly explain the inexplicable mysteries of electricity, which will,
perhaps, be for ever the despair of real philosophers?
3. I am far from thinking that the ascendancy which women have obtained over men is an evil in
itself. It is a present which nature has made them for the good of mankind. If better directed, it
might be productive of as much good, as it is now of evil. We are not sufficiently sensible of
what advantage it would be to society to give a better education to that half of our species which
governs the other. Men will always be what women choose to make them. If you wish then that
they should be noble and virtuous, let women be taught what greatness of soul and virtue are.
The reflections which this subject arouses, and which Plato formerly made, deserve to be more
fully developed by a pen worthy of following so great a master, and defending so great a cause.
4. Pensées philosophiques (Diderot).
5. Such was the education of the Spartans with regard to one of the greatest of their-kings. It is well
worthy of notice, says Montaigne, that the excellent institutions of Lycurgus, which were in
truth miraculously perfect, paid as much attention to the bringing up of youth as if this were
their principal object, and yet, at the very seat of the Muses, they make so little mention of
learning that it seems as if their generous-spirited youth disdained every other restraint, and
required, instead of masters of the sciences, instructors in valour, prudence and justice alone.
Let us hear next what the same writer says of the ancient Persians. Plato, says he, relates that the
heir to the throne was thus brought up. At his birth he was committed, not to the care of women,
but to eunuchs in the highest authority and near the person of the king, on account of their
virtue. These undertook to render his body beautiful and healthy. At seven years of age they
taught him to ride and go hunting. At fourteen he was placed in the hands of four, the wisest, the
most just, the most temperate and the bravest persons in the kingdom. The first instructed him in
religion, the second taught him to adhere inviolably to truth, the third to conquer his passions,
and the fourth to be afraid of nothing. All, I may add, taught him to be a good man; but not one
taught him to be learned.
Astyages, in Xenophon, desires Cyrus to give him an account of his last lesson. It was this,
answered Cyrus, one of the big boys, of the school having a small coat, gave it to a little boy and
took away from him his coat, which was larger. Our master having appointed me arbiter in the
dispute, I ordered that matters should stand as they were, as each boy seemed to be better suited
than before. The master, however, remonstrated with me, saying that I considered only
convenience, whereas justice ought to have been the first concern, and justice teaches that no
one should suffer forcible interference with what belongs to him. He added that he was punished
for his wrong decision, just as boys are punished in our country schools when they forget the
first aorist of τύπτω. My tutor must make me a fine harangue, in genere demonstrative, before he
will persuade me that his school is as good as this.
6. If we consider the frightful disorders which printing has already caused in Europe, and judge of
the future by the progress of its evils from day to day, it is easy to foresee that sovereigns will
hereafter take as much pains to banish this dreadful art from their dominions, as they ever took
to encourage it The Sultan Achmet, yielding to the importunities of certain pretenders to taste,
consented to have a press erected at Constantinople; but it was hardly set to work before they
were obliged to destroy it, and throw the plant into a well.
It is related that the Caliph Omar, being asked what should be done with the library at
Alexandria, answered in these words. "If the books in the library contain anything contrary to
the Alcoran, they are evil and ought to be burnt; if they contain only what the Alcoran teaches,
they are superfluous." This reasoning has been cited by oar men of letters as the height of
absurdity; but if Gregory the Great had been in the place of Omar, and the Gospel in the place of
the Alcoran, the library would still have been burnt, and it would have been perhaps the finest
action of his life.
A Discourse
Table of Contents
ON A SUBJECT PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY OF DIJON:
WHAT IS THE ORIGIN OF INEQUALITY AMONG MEN,
AND IS IT AUTHORISED BY NATURAL LAW?
Non in depravatis, sed in his qua bene secundum naturam
se habent, considerandum est quid sit naturale.
Aristotle, Politics, Bk. i, ch. 2.
[We should consider what is natural not in things which are depraved
but in those which are rightly ordered according to nature.]
Dedication
to the
Republic of Geneva
Most Honourable, Magnificent And Sovereign Lords, convinced that only a
virtuous citizen can confer on his country honours which it can accept, I
have been for thirty years past working to make myself worthy to offer you
some public homage; and, this fortunate opportunity supplementing in some
degree the insufficiency of my efforts, I have thought myself entitled to
follow in embracing it the dictates of the zeal which inspires me, rather than
the right which should have been my authorisation. Having had the
happiness to be born among you, how could I reflect on the equality which
nature has ordained between men, and the inequality which they have
introduced, without reflecting on the profound wisdom by which both are in
this State happily combined and made to coincide, in the manner that is
most in conformity with natural law, and most favourable to society, to the
maintenance of public order and to the happiness of individuals? In my
researches after the best rules common sense can lay down for the
constitution of a government, I have been so struck at finding them all in
actuality in your own, that even had I not been born within your walls I
should have thought it indispensable for me to offer this picture of human
society to that people, which of all others seems to be possessed of its
greatest advantages, and to have best guarded against its abuses.
If I had had to make choice of the place of my birth, I should have
preferred a society which had an extent proportionate to the limits of the
human faculties; that is, to the possibility of being well governed: in which
every person being equal to his occupation, no one should be obliged to
commit to others the functions with which he was entrusted: a State, in
which all the individuals being well known to one another, neither the secret
machinations of vice, nor the modesty of virtue should be able to escape the
notice and judgment of the public; and in which the pleasant custom of
seeing and knowing one another should make the love of country rather a
love of the citizens than of its soil.
I should have wished to be born in a country in which the interest of the
Sovereign and that of the people must be single and identical; to the end
that all the movements of the machine might tend always to the general
happiness. And as this could not be the case, unless the Sovereign and the
people were one and the same person, it follows that I should have wished
to be born under a democratic government, wisely tempered.
I should have wished to live and die free: that is, so far subject to the
laws that neither I, nor anybody else, should be able to cast off their
honourable yoke: the easy and salutary yoke which the haughtiest necks
bear with the greater docility, as they are made to bear no other.
I should have wished then that no one within the State should be able to
say he was above the law; and that no one without should be able to dictate
so that the State should be obliged to recognise his authority. For, be the
constitution of a government what it may, if there be within its jurisdiction a
single man who is not subject to the law, all the rest are necessarily at his
discretion. And if there be a national ruler within, and a foreign ruler
without, however they may divide their authority, it is impossible that both
should be duly obeyed, or that the State should be well governed.
I should not have chosen to live in a republic of recent institution,
however excellent its laws; for fear the government, being perhaps
otherwise framed than the circumstances of the moment might require,
might disagree with the new citizens, or they with it, and the State run the
risk of overthrow and destruction almost as soon as it came into being. For
it is with liberty as it is with those solid and succulent foods, or with those
generous wines which are well adapted to nourish and fortify robust
constitutions that are used to them, but ruin and intoxicate weak and
delicate constitutions to which they are not suited. Peoples once accustomed
to masters are not in a condition to do without them. If they attempt to
shake off the yoke, they still more estrange themselves from freedom, as, by
mistaking for it an unbridled license to which it is diametrically opposed,
they nearly always manage, by their revolutions, to hand themselves over to
seducers, who only make their chains heavier than before. The Roman
people itself, a model for all free peoples, was wholly incapable of
governing itself when it escaped from the oppression of the Tarquins.
Debased by slavery, and the ignominious tasks which had been imposed
upon it, it was at first no better than a stupid mob, which it was necessary to
control and govern with the greatest wisdom; in order that, being
accustomed by degrees to breathe the health-giving air of liberty, minds
which had been enervated or rather brutalised under tyranny, might
gradually acquire that severity of morals and spirit of fortitude which made
it at length the people of all most worthy of respect. I should, then, have
sought out for my country some peaceful and happy Republic, of an
antiquity that lost itself, as it were, in the night of time: which had
experienced only such shocks as served to manifest and strengthen the
courage and patriotism of its subjects; and whose citizens, long accustomed
to a wise independence, were not only free, but worthy to be so.
I should have wished to choose myself a country, diverted, by a
fortunate impotence, from the brutal love of conquest, and secured, by a
still more fortunate situation, from the fear of becoming itself the conquest
of other States: a free city situated between several nations, none of which
should have any interest in attacking it, while each had an interest in
preventing it from being attacked by the others; in short, a Republic which
should have nothing to tempt the ambition of its neighbours, but might
reasonably depend on their assistance in case of need. It follows that a
republican State so happily situated could have nothing to fear but from
itself; and that, if its members trained themselves to the use of arms, it
would be rather to keep alive that military ardour and courageous spirit
which are so proper among free-men, and tend to keep up their taste for
liberty, than from the necessity of providing for their defence.
I should have sought a country, in which the right of legislation was
vested in all the citizens; for who can judge better than they of the
conditions under which they had best dwell together in the same society?
Not that I should have approved of Plebiscita, like those among the
Romans; in which the rulers in the State, and those most interested in its
preservation, were excluded from the deliberations on which in many cases
its security depended; and in which, by the most absurd inconsistency, the
magistrates were deprived of rights which the meanest citizens enjoyed.
On the contrary, I should have desired that, in order to prevent self-
interested and ill-conceived projects, and all such dangerous innovations as
finally ruined the Athenians, each man should not be at liberty to propose
new laws at pleasure; but that this right should belong exclusively to the
magistrates; and that even they should use it with so much caution, the
people, on its side, be so reserved in giving its consent to such laws, and the
promulgation of them be attended with so much solemnity, that before the
constitution could be upset by them, there might be time enough for all to
be convinced, that it is above all the great antiquity of the laws which
makes them sacred and venerable, that men soon learn to despise laws
which they see daily altered, and that States, by accustoming themselves to
neglect their ancient customs under the pretext of improvement, often
introduce greater evils than those they endeavour to remove.
I should have particularly avoided, as necessarily ill-governed, a
Republic in which the people, imagining themselves in a position to do
without magistrates, or at least to leave them with only a precarious
authority, should imprudently have kept for themselves the administration
of civil affairs and the execution of their own laws. Such must have been
the rude constitution of primitive governments, directly emerging from a
state of nature; and this was another of the vices that contributed to the
downfall of the Republic of Athens.
But I should have chosen a community in which the individuals, content
with sanctioning their laws, and deciding the most important public affairs
in general assembly and on the motion of the rulers, had established
honoured tribunals, carefully distinguished the several departments, and
elected year by year some of the most capable and upright of their fellow-
citizens to administer justice and govern the State; a community, in short, in
which the virtue of the magistrates thus bearing witness to the wisdom of
the people, each class reciprocally did the other honour. If in such a case
any fatal misunderstandings arose to disturb the public peace, even these
intervals of blindness and error would bear the marks of moderation, mutual
esteem, and a common respect for the laws; which are sure signs and
pledges of a reconciliation as lasting as sincere. Such are the advantages,
most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, which I should have
sought in the country in which I should have chosen to be born. And if
providence had added to all these a delightful situation, a temperate climate,
a fertile soil, and the most beautiful countryside under Heaven, I should
have desired only, to complete my felicity, the peaceful enjoyment of all
these blessings, in the bosom of this happy country; to live at peace in the
sweet society of my fellow-citizens, and practising towards them, from their
own example, the duties of friendship, humanity, and every other virtue, to
leave behind me the honourable memory of a good man, and an upright and
virtuous patriot.
But, if less fortunate or too late grown wise, I had seen myself reduced
to end an infirm and languishing life in other climates, vainly regretting that
peaceful repose which I had forfeited in the imprudence of youth, I should
at least have entertained the same feelings in my heart, though denied the
opportunity of making use of them in my native country. Filled with a
tender and disinterested love for my distant fellow-citizens, I should have
addressed them from my heart, much in the following terms.
"My dear fellow-citizens, or rather my brothers, since the ties of blood,
as well as the laws, unite almost all of us, it gives me pleasure that I cannot
think of you, without thinking, at the same time, of all the blessings you
enjoy, and of which none of you, perhaps, more deeply feels the value than
I who have lost them. The more I reflect on your civil and political
condition, the less can I conceive that the nature of human affairs could
admit of a better. In all other governments, when there is a question of
ensuring the greatest good of the State, nothing gets beyond projects and
ideas, or at best bare possibilities. But as for you, your happiness is
complete, and you have nothing to do but enjoy it; you require nothing
more to be made perfectly happy, than to know how to be satisfied with
being so. Your sovereignty, acquired or recovered by the sword, and
maintained for two centuries past by your valour and wisdom, is at length
fully and universally acknowledged. Your boundaries are fixed, your rights
confirmed and your repose secured by honourable treaties. Your
constitution is excellent, being not only dictated by the profoundest
wisdom, but guaranteed by great and friendly powers. Your State enjoys
perfect tranquillity; you have neither wars nor conquerors to fear; you have
no other master than the wise laws you have yourselves made; and these are
administered by upright magistrates of your own choosing. You are neither
so wealthy as to be enervated by effeminacy, and thence to lose, in the
pursuit of frivolous pleasures, the taste for real happiness and solid virtue;
nor poor enough to require more assistance from abroad than your own
industry is sufficient to procure you. In the meantime the precious privilege
of liberty, which in great nations is maintained only by submission to the
most exorbitant impositions, costs you hardly anything for its preservation.
May a Republic, so wisely and happily constituted, last for ever, for an
example to other nations, and for the felicity of its own citizens! This is the
only prayer you have left to make, the only precaution that remains to be
taken. It depends, for the future, on yourselves alone (not to make you
happy, for your ancestors have saved you that trouble), but to render that
happiness lasting, by your wisdom in its enjoyment. It is on your constant
union, your obedience to the laws, and your respect for their ministers, that
your preservation depends. If there remains among you the smallest trace of
bitterness or distrust, hasten to destroy it, as an accursed leaven which
sooner or later must bring misfortune and ruin on the State. I conjure you all
to look into your hearts, and to hearken to the secret voice of conscience. Is
there any among you who can find, throughout the universe, a more upright,
more enlightened and more honourable body than your magistracy? Do not
all its members set you an example of moderation, of simplicity of manners,
of respect for the laws, and of the most sincere harmony? Place, therefore,
without reserve, in such wise superiors, that salutary confidence which
reason ever owes to virtue. Consider that they are your own choice, that
they justify that choice, and that the honours due to those whom you have
dignified are necessarily yours by reflexion. Not one of you is so ignorant
as not to know that, when the laws lose their, force and those who defend
them their authority, security and liberty are universally impossible. Why,
therefore, should you hesitate to do that cheerfully and with just confidence
which you would all along have been bound to do by your true interest,
your duty and reason itself?
Let not a culpable and pernicious indifference to the maintenance of the
constitution ever induce you to neglect, in case of need, the prudent advice
of the most enlightened and zealous of your fellow-citizens; but let equity,
moderation and firmness of resolution continue to regulate all your
proceedings, and to exhibit you to the whole universe as the example of a
valiant and modest people, jealous equally of their honour and of their
liberty. Beware particularly, as the last piece of advice I shall give you, of
sinister constructions and venomous rumours, the secret motives of which
are often more dangerous than the actions at which they are levelled. A
whole house will be awake and take the first alarm given by a good and
trusty watch-dog, who barks only at the approach of thieves; but we hate
the importunity of those noisy curs, which are perpetually disturbing the
public repose, and whose continual ill-timed warnings prevent our attending
to them, when they may perhaps be necessary."
And you, most honourable and magnificent lords, the worthy and
revered magistrates of a free people, permit me to offer you in particular my
duty and homage. If there is in the world a station capable of conferring
honour on those who fill it, it is undoubtedly that which virtue and talents
combine to bestow, that of which you have made yourselves worthy, and to
which you have been promoted by your fellow-citizens. Their worth adds a
new lustre to your own; while, as you have been chosen, by men capable of
governing others, to govern themselves, I cannot but hold you as much
superior to all other magistrates, as a free people, and particularly that over
which you have the honour to preside, is by its wisdom and its reason
superior to the populace of other States.
Be it permitted me to cite an example of which there ought to have
existed better records, and one which will be ever near to my heart. I cannot
recall to mind, without the sweetest emotions, the memory of that virtuous
citizen, to whom I owe my being, and by whom I was often instructed, in
my infancy, in the respect which is due to you. I see him still, living by the
work of his hands, and feeding his soul on the sublimest truths. I see the
works of Tacitus, Plutarch and Grotius, lying before him in the midst of the
tools of his trade. At his side stands his dear son, receiving, alas with too
little profit, the tender instructions of the best of fathers. But, if the follies of
youth made me for a while forget his wise lessons, I have at length the
happiness to be conscious that, whatever propensity one may have to vice,
it is not easy for an education, with which love has mingled, to be entirely
thrown away.
Such, my most honourable and magnificent lords, are the citizens, and
even the common inhabitants of the State which you govern; such are those
intelligent and sensible men, of whom, under the name of workmen and the
people, it is usual, in other nations, to have a low and false opinion. My
father, I own with pleasure, was in no way distinguished among his fellow-
citizens. He was only such as they all are; and yet, such as he was, there is
no country, in which his acquaintance would not have been coveted, and
cultivated even with advantage by men of the highest character. It would
not become me, nor is it, thank Heaven, at all necessary for me to remind
you of the regard which such men have a right to expect of their
magistrates, to whom they are equal both by education and by the rights of
nature and birth, and inferior only, by their own will, by that preference
which they owe to your merit, and, for giving you, can claim some sort of
acknowledgment on your side. It is with a lively satisfaction I understand
that the greatest candour and condescension attend, in all your behaviour
towards them, on that gravity which becomes the ministers of the law; and
that you so well repay them, by your esteem and attention, the respect and
obedience which they owe to you. This conduct is not only just but prudent;
as it happily tends to obliterate the memory of many unhappy events, which
ought to be buried in eternal oblivion. It is also so much the more judicious,
as it tends to make this generous and equitable people find a pleasure in
their duty; to make them naturally love to do you honour, and to cause those
who are the most zealous in the maintenance of their own rights to be at the
same time the most disposed to respect yours.
It ought not to be thought surprising that the rulers of a civil society
should have the welfare and glory of their communities at heart: but it is
uncommonly fortunate for the peace of men, when those persons who look
upon themselves as the magistrates, or rather the masters of a more holy
and sublime country, show some love for the earthly country which
maintains them. I am happy in having it in my power to make so singular an
exception in our favour, and to be able to rank, among its best citizens,
those zealous depositaries of the sacred articles of faith established by the
laws, those venerable shepherds of souls whose powerful and captivating
eloquence are so much the better calculated to bear to men's hearts the
maxims of the gospel, as they are themselves the first to put them into
practice. All the world knows of the great success with which the art of the
pulpit is cultivated at Geneva; but men are so used to hearing divines preach
one thing and practise another, that few have a chance of knowing how far
the spirit of Christianity, holiness of manners, severity towards themselves
and indulgence towards their neighbours, prevail throughout the whole
body of our ministers. It is, perhaps, given to the city of Geneva alone, to
produce the edifying example of so perfect a union between its clergy and
men of letters. It is in great measure on their wisdom, their known
moderation, and their zeal for the prosperity of the State that I build my
hopes of its perpetual tranquillity. At the same time, I notice, with a
pleasure mingled with surprise and veneration, how much they detest the
frightful maxims of those accursed and barbarous men, of whom history
furnishes us with more than one example; who, in order to support the
pretended rights of God, that is to say their own interests, have been so
much the less greedy of human blood, as they were more hopeful their own
in particular would be always respected.
I must not forget that precious half of the Republic, which makes the
happiness of the other; and whose sweetness and prudence preserve its
tranquillity and virtue. Amiable and virtuous daughters of Geneva, it will be
always the lot of your sex to govern ours. Happy are we, so long as your
chaste influence, solely exercised within the limits of conjugal union, is
exerted only for the glory of the State and the happiness of the public. It
was thus the female sex commanded at Sparta; and thus you deserve to
command at Geneva. What man can be such a barbarian as to resist the
voice of honour and reason, coming from the lips of an affectionate wife?
Who would not despise; the vanities of luxury, on beholding the simple and
modest attire which, from the lustre it derives from you, seems the most
favourable to beauty? It is your task to perpetuate, by your insinuating
influence and your innocent and amiable rule, a respect for the laws of the
State, and harmony among the citizens. It is yours to reunite divided
families by happy marriages; and, above all things, to correct, by the
persuasive sweetness of your lessons and the modest graces of your
conversation, those extravagancies which our young people pick up in other
countries, whence, instead of many useful things by which they might
profit, they bring home hardly anything, besides a puerile air and a
ridiculous manner, acquired among loose women, but an admiration for I
know not what so-called grandeur, and paltry recompenses for being slaves,
which can never come near the real greatness of liberty. Continue, therefore,
always to be what you are, the chaste guardians of our morals, and the
sweet security for our peace, exerting on every occasion the privileges of
the heart and of nature, in the interests of duty and virtue.
I flatter myself that I shall never be proved to have been mistaken, in
building on such a foundation my hopes of the general happiness of the
citizens and the glory of the Republic. It must be confessed, however, that
with all these advantages, it will not shine with that lustre, by which the
eyes of most men are dazzled; a puerile and fatal taste for which is the most
mortal enemy of happiness and liberty.
Let our dissolute youth seek elsewhere light pleasures and long
repentances. Let our pretenders to taste admire elsewhere the grandeur of
palaces, the beauty of equipages, sumptuous furniture, the pomp of public
entertainments, and all the refinements of luxury and effeminacy. Geneva
boasts nothing but men; such a sight has nevertheless a value of its own,
and those who have a taste for it are well worth the admirers of all the rest.
Deign, most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, to receive,
and with equal goodness, this respectful testimony of the interest I take in
your common prosperity. And, if I have been so unhappy as to be guilty of
any indiscreet transport in this glowing effusion of my heart, I beseech you
to pardon me, and to attribute it to the tender affection of a true patriot, and
to the ardent and legitimate zeal of a man, who can imagine for himself no
greater felicity than to see you happy.
Most honourable, magnificent and sovereign lords, I am, with the most
profound respect,
Your most humble and obedient servant and fellow-citizen.
J. J. ROUSSEAU.
Chambéry,
June 12, 1754.
Preface
Of all human sciences the most useful and most imperfect appears to me to
be that of mankind: and I will venture to say, the single inscription on the
Temple of Delphi contained a precept more difficult and more important
than is to be found in all the huge volumes that moralists have ever written.
I consider the subject of the following discourse as one of the most
interesting questions philosophy can propose, and unhappily for us, one of,
the most thorny that philosophers can have to solve. For how shall we know
the source of inequality between men, if we do not begin by knowing
mankind? And how shall man hope to see himself as nature made him,
across all the changes which the succession of place and time must have
produced in his original constitution? How can he distinguish what is
fundamental in his nature from the changes and additions which his
circumstances and the advances he has made have introduced to modify his
primitive condition? Like the statue of Glaucus, which was so disfigured by
time, seas and tempests, that it looked more like a wild beast than a god, the
human soul, altered in society by a thousand causes perpetually recurring,
by the acquisition of a multitude of truths and errors, by the changes
happening to the constitution of the body, and by the continual jarring of the
passions, has, so to speak, changed in appearance, so as to be hardly
recognisable. Instead of a being, acting constantly from fixed and invariable
principles, instead of that celestial and majestic simplicity, impressed on it
by its divine Author, we find in it only the frightful contrast of passion
mistaking itself for reason, and of understanding grown delirious.
It is still more cruel that, as every advance made by the human species
removes it still farther from its primitive state, the more discoveries we
make, the more we deprive ourselves of the means of making the most
important of all. Thus it is, in one sense, by our very study of man, that the
knowledge of him is put out of our power.
It is easy to perceive that it is in these successive changes in the
constitution of man that we must look for the origin of those differences
which now distinguish men, who, it is allowed, are as equal among
themselves as were the animals of every kind, before physical causes had
introduced those varieties which are now observable among some of them.
It is, in fact, not to be conceived that these primary changes, however
they may have arisen, could have altered, all at once and in the same
manner, every individual of the species. It is natural to think that, while the
condition of some of them grew better or worse, and they were acquiring
various good or bad qualities not inherent in their nature, there were others
who continued a longer time in their original condition. Such was doubtless
the first source of the inequality of mankind, which it is much easier to
point out thus in general terms, than to assign with precision to its actual
causes.
Let not my readers therefore imagine that I flatter myself with having
seen what it appears to me so difficult to discover. I have here entered upon
certain arguments, and risked some conjectures, less in the hope of solving
the difficulty, than with a view to throwing some light upon it, and reducing
the question to its proper form. Others may easily proceed farther on the
same road, and yet no one find it very easy to get to the end. For it is by no
means a light undertaking to distinguish properly between what is original
and what is artificial in the actual nature of man, or to form a true idea of a
state which no longer exists, perhaps never did exist, and probably never
will exist; and of which, it is, nevertheless, necessary to have true ideas, in
order to form a proper judgment of our present state. It requires, indeed,
more philosophy than can be imagined to enable any one to determine
exactly what precautions he ought to take, in order to make solid
observations on this subject; and it appears to me that a good solution of the
following problem would be not unworthy of the Aristotles and Plinys of
the present age. What experiments would have to be made, to discover the
natural man? And how are those experiments to be made in a state of
society?
So far am I from undertaking to solve this problem, that I think I have
sufficiently, considered the subject, to venture to declare beforehand that
our greatest philosophers would not be too good to direct such experiments,
and our most powerful sovereigns to make them. Such a combination we
have very little reason to expect, especially attended with the perseverance,
or rather succession of intelligence and good-will necessary on both sides to
success.
These investigations, which are so difficult to make, and have been
hitherto so little thought of, are, nevertheless, the only means that remain of
obviating a multitude of difficulties which deprive us of the knowledge of
the real foundations of human society. It is this ignorance of the nature of
man, which casts so much uncertainty and obscurity on the true definition
of natural right: for, the idea of right, says Burlamaqui, and more
particularly that of natural right, are ideas manifestly relative to the nature
of man. It is then from this very nature itself, he goes on, from the
constitution and state of man, that we must deduce the first principles of
this science.
We cannot see without surprise and disgust how little agreement there is
between the different authors who have treated this great subject. Among
the more important writers there are scarcely two of the same mind about it.
Not to speak of the ancient philosophers, who seem to have done their best
purposely to contradict one another on the most fundamental principles, the
Roman jurists subjected man and the other animals indiscriminately to the
same natural law, because they considered, under that name, rather the law
which nature imposes on herself than that which she prescribes to others; or
rather because of the particular acceptation of the term law among those
jurists; who seem on this occasion to have understood nothing more by it
than the general relations established by nature between all animated
beings, for their common preservation. The moderns, understanding, by the
term law, merely a rule prescribed to a moral being, that is to say intelligent,
free and considered in his relations to other beings, consequently confine
the jurisdiction of natural law to man, an the only animal endowed with
reason. But, defining this law, each after his own fashion, they have
established it on such metaphysical principles, that there are very few
persons among us capable of comprehending them, much less of
discovering them for themselves. So that the definitions of these learned
men, all differing in everything else, agree only in this, that it is impossible
to comprehend the law of nature, and consequently to obey it, without being
a very subtle casuist and a profound metaphysician. All which is as much as
to say that mankind must have employed, in the establishment of society, a
capacity which is acquired only with great difficulty, and by very few
persons, even in a state of society.
Knowing so little of nature, and agreeing so ill about the meaning of the
word law, it would be difficult for us to fix on a good definition of natural
law. Thus all the definitions we meet with in books, setting: aside their
defect in point of uniformity, have yet another fault, in that they are derived
from many kinds of knowledge, which men do not possess naturally, and
from advantages of which they can have no idea until they have already
departed from that state. Modern writers begin by inquiring what rules it
would be expedient for men to agree on for their common interest, and then
give the name of natural law to a collection of these rules, without any other
proof than the good that would result from their being universally practised.
This is undoubtedly a simple way of making definitions, and of explaining
the nature of things by almost arbitrary conveniences.
But as long as we are ignorant of the natural man, it is in vain for us to
attempt to determine either the law originally prescribed to him, or that
which is best adapted to his constitution. All we can know with any
certainty respecting this law is that, if it is to be a law, not only the wills of
those it obliges must be sensible of their submission to it; but also, to be
natural, it must come directly from the voice of nature.
Throwing aside, therefore, all those scientific books, which teach us
only to see men such as they have made themselves, and contemplating the
first and most simple operations of the human soul, I think I can perceive in
it two principles prior to reason, one of them deeply interesting us in our
own welfare and preservation, and the other exciting a natural repugnance
at seeing any other sensible being, and particularly any of our own species,
suffer pain or death. It is from the agreement and combination which the
understanding is in a position to establish between these two principles,
without its being necessary to introduce that of sociability, that all the rules
of natural right appear to me to be derived—rules which our reason is
afterwards obliged to establish on other foundations, when by its successive
developments it has been led to suppress nature itself.
In proceeding thus, we shall not be obliged to make man a philosopher
before he is a man. His duties toward others are not dictated to him only by
the later lessons of wisdom and, so long as he does not resist the internal
impulse of compassion, he will never hurt any other man, nor even any
sentient being; except on those lawful occasions on which his own
preservation is concerned and he is obliged to give himself the preference.
By this method also we put an end to the time-honoured disputes
concerning the participation of animals in natural law: for it is clear that,
being destitute of intelligence and liberty, they cannot recognise that law; as
they partake, however, in some measure of our nature, in consequence of
the sensibility with which they are endowed, they ought to partake of
natural rights so that mankind is subjected to a kind of obligation even
toward the brutes. It appears, in fact, that if I am bound to do no injury to
my fellow-creatures, this is less because they are rational than because they
are sentient beings: and this quality, being common both to men and beasts,
ought to entitle the latter at least to the privilege of not being wantonly ill-
treated by the former.
The very study of the original man, of his real wants, and the
fundamental principles of his duty, is besides the only proper method we
can adopt to obviate all the difficulties which the origin of moral inequality
presents, on the true foundations of the body politic, on the reciprocal rights
of its members, and on many other similar topics equally important and
obscure.
If we look at human society with a calm and disinterested eye, it seems,
at first, to show us only the violence of the powerful and the oppression of
the weak. The mind is shocked at the cruelty of the one, or is induced to
lament the blindness of the other; and as nothing is less permanent in life
than those external relations, which are more frequently produced by
accident than wisdom, and which are called weakness or power, riches or
poverty, all human institutions seem at first glance to be founded merely on
banks of shifting sand. It is only by taking a closer look, and removing the
dust and sand that surround the edifice, that we perceive the immovable
basis on which it is raised, and learn to respect its foundations. Now,
without a serious study of man, his natural faculties and their successive
development, we shall never be able to make these necessary distinctions,
or to separate, in the actual constitution of things, that which is the effect of
the divine will, from the innovations attempted by human art. The political
and moral investigations, therefore, to which the important question before
us leads, are in every respect useful; while the hypothetical history of
governments affords a lesson equally instructive to mankind.
In considering what we should have become, had we been left to
ourselves, we should learn to bless Him, whose gracious hand, correcting
our institutions, and giving them an immovable basis, has prevented those
disorders which would otherwise have arisen from them, and caused our
happiness to come from those very sources which seemed likely to involve
us in misery.
Quem te deus esse
Jussit, et humanâ quâ parte locatus es in re,
Disce.
Persius, Satire iii, 71.
A DISSERTATION
ON THE ORIGIN AND FOUNDATION OF THE INEQUALITY OF
MANKIND
It is of man that I have to speak; and the question I am investigating shows
me that it is to men that I must address myself: for questions of this sort are
not asked by those who are afraid to honour truth. I shall then confidently
uphold the cause of humanity before the wise men who invite me to do so,
and shall not be dissatisfied if I acquit myself in a manner worthy of my
subject and of my judges.
I conceive that there are two kinds of inequality among the human
species; one, which I call natural or physical, because it is established by
nature, and consists in a difference of age, health, bodily strength, and the
qualities of the mind or of the soul: and another, which may be called moral
or political inequality, because it depends on a kind of convention, and is
established, or at least authorised by the consent of men. This latter consists
of the different privileges, which some men enjoy to the prejudice of others;
such as that of being more rich, more honoured, more powerful or even in a
position to exact obedience.
It is useless to ask what is the source of natural inequality, because that
question is answered by the simple definition of the word. Again, it is still
more useless to inquire whether there is any essential connection between
the two inequalities; for this would be only asking, in other words, whether
those who command are necessarily better than those who obey, and if
strength of body or of mind, wisdom or virtue are always found in
particular individuals, in proportion to their power or wealth: a question fit
perhaps to be discussed by slaves in the hearing of their masters, but highly
unbecoming to reasonable and free men in search of the truth.
The subject of the present discourse, therefore, is more precisely this. To
mark, in the progress of things, the moment at which right took the place of
violence and nature became subject to law, and to explain by what sequence
of miracles the strong came to submit to serve the weak, and the people to
purchase imaginary repose at the expense of real felicity.
The philosophers, who have inquired into the foundations of society,
have all felt the necessity of going back to a state of nature; but not one of
them has got there. Some of them have not hesitated to ascribe to man, in
such a state, the idea of just and unjust, without troubling themselves to
show that he must be possessed of such an idea, or that it could be of any
use to him. Others have spoken of the natural right of every man to keep
what belongs to him, without explaining what they meant by belongs.
Others again, beginning by giving the strong authority over the weak,
proceeded directly to the birth of government, without regard to the time
that must have elapsed before the meaning of the words authority and
government could have existed among men. Every one of them, in short,
constantly dwelling on wants, avidity, oppression, desires and pride, has
transferred to the state of nature ideas which were acquired in society; so
that, in speaking of the savage, they described the social man. It has not
even entered into the heads of most of our writers to doubt whether the state
of nature ever existed; but it is clear from the Holy Scriptures that the first
man, having received his understanding and commandments immediately
from God, was not himself in such a state; and that, if we give such credit to
the writings of Moses as every Christian philosopher ought to give, we must
deny that, even before the deluge, men were ever in the pure state of nature;
unless, indeed, they fell back into it from some very extraordinary
circumstance; a paradox which it would be very embarrassing to defend,
and quite impossible to prove.
Let us begin then by laying facts aside, as they do not affect the
question. The investigations we may enter into, in treating this subject, must
not be considered as historical truths, but only as mere conditional and
hypothetical reasonings, rather calculated to explain the nature of things,
than to ascertain their actual origin; just like the hypotheses which our
physicists daily form respecting the formation of the world. Religion
commands us to believe that, God Himself having taken men out of a state
of nature immediately after the creation, they are unequal only because it is
His will they should be so: but it does not forbid us to form conjectures
based solely on the nature of man, and the beings around him, concerning
what might have become of the human race, if it had been left to itself. This
then is the question asked me, and that which I propose to discuss in the
following discourse. As my subject interests mankind in general, I shall
endeavour to make use of a style adapted to all nations, or rather, forgetting
time and place, to attend only to men to whom I am speaking. I shall
suppose myself in the Lyceum of Athens, repeating the lessons of my
masters, with Plato and Xenocrates for judges, and the whole human race
for audience.
O man, of whatever country you are, and whatever your opinions may
be, behold your history, such as I have thought to read it, not in books
written by your fellow-creatures, who are liars, but in nature, which never
lies. All that comes from her will be true; nor will you meet with anything
false, unless I have involuntarily put in something of my own. The times of
which I am going to speak are very remote: how much are you changed
from what you once were! It is so to speak, the life of your species which I
am going to write, after the qualities which you have received, which your
education and habits may have depraved, but cannot have entirely
destroyed. There is, I feel, an age at which the individual man would wish
to stop; you are about to inquire about the age at which you would have
liked your whole species to stand still. Discontented with your present state,
for reasons which threaten your unfortunate descendants with still greater
discontent, you will perhaps wish it were in your power to go back; and this
feeling should be a panegyric on your first ancestors, a criticism of your
contemporaries, and a terror to the unfortunates who will come after you.
The First Part
Important as it may be, in order to judge rightly of the natural state of man,
to consider him from his origin, and to examine him, as it were, in the
embryo of his species; I shall not follow his organisation through its
successive developments, nor shall I stay to inquire what his animal system
must have been at the beginning, in order to become at length what it
actually is. I shall not ask whether his long nails were at first, as Aristotle
supposes, only crooked talons; whether his whole body, like that of a bear,
was not covered with hair; or whether the fact that he walked upon all fours,
with his looks directed toward the earth, confined to a horizon of a few
paces, did not at once point out the nature and limits of his ideas. On this
subject I could form none but vague and almost imaginary conjectures.
Comparative anatomy has as yet made too little progress, and the
observations of naturalists are too uncertain, to afford an adequate basis for
any solid reasoning. So that, without having recourse to the supernatural
information given us on this head, or paying any regard to the changes
which must have taken place in the internal, as well as the external,
conformation of man, as he applied his limbs to new uses, and fed himself
on new kinds of food, I shall suppose his conformation to have been at all
times what it appears to us at this day; that he always walked on two legs,
made use of his hands as we do, directed his looks over all nature, and
measured with his eyes the vast expanse of Heaven.
If we strip this being, thus constituted, of all the supernatural gifts he
may have received, and all the artificial faculties he can have acquired only
by a long process; if we consider him, in a word, just as he must have come
from the hands of nature, we behold in him an animal weaker than some,
and less agile than others; but, taking him all round, the most
advantageously organised of any. I see him satisfying his hunger at the first
oak, and slaking his thirst at the first brook; finding his bed at the foot of the
tree which afforded him a repast; and, with that, all his wants supplied.
While the earth was left to its natural fertility and covered with
immense forests, whose trees were never mutilated by the axe, it would
present on every side both sustenance and shelter for every species of
animal. Men dispersed up and down among the rest, would observe and
imitate their industry, and thus attain even to the instinct of the beasts, with
the advantage that, whereas every species of brutes was confined to one
particular instinct, man, who perhaps has not any one peculiar to himself,
would appropriate them all, and live upon most of those different foods,
which other animals shared among themselves; and thus would find his
subsistence much more easily than any of the rest.
Accustomed from their infancy to the inclemencies of the weather and
the rigour of the seasons, inured to fatigue, and forced, naked and unarmed,
to defend themselves and their prey from other ferocious animals, or to
escape them by flight, men would acquire a robust and almost unalterable
constitution. The children, bringing with them into the world the excellent
constitution of their parents, and fortifying it by the very exercises which
first produced it, would thus acquire all the vigour of which the human
frame is capable. Nature in this case treats them exactly as Sparta treated
the children of her citizens: those who come well formed into the world she
renders strong and robust, and all the rest she destroys; differing in this
respect from our modern communities, in which the State, by making
children a burden to their parents, kills them indiscriminately before they
are born.
The body of a savage man being the only instrument he understands, he
uses it for various purposes, of which ours, for want of practice, are
incapable: for our industry deprives us of that force and agility, which
necessity obliges him to acquire. If he had had an axe, would he have been
able with his naked arm to break so large a branch from a tree? If he had
had a sling, would he have been able to throw a stone with so great
velocity? If he had had a ladder, would he have been so nimble in climbing
a tree? If he had had a horse, would he have been himself so swift of foot?
Give civilised man time to gather all his machines about him, and he will no
doubt easily beat the savage; but if you would see a still more unequal
contest, set them together naked and unarmed, and you will soon see the
advantage of having all our forces constantly at our disposal, of being
always prepared for every event, and of carrying one's self, as it were,
perpetually whole and entire about one.
Hobbes contends that man is naturally intrepid, and is intent only upon
attacking and fighting. Another illustrious philosopher holds the opposite,
and Cumberland and Puffendorf also affirm that nothing is more timid and
fearful than man in the state of nature; that he is always in a tremble, and
ready to fly at the least noise or the slightest movement. This may be true of
things he does not know; and I do not doubt his being terrified by every
novelty that presents itself, when he neither knows the physical good or evil
he may expect from it, nor can make a comparison between his own
strength and the dangers he is about to encounter. Such circumstances,
however, rarely occur in a state of nature, in which all things proceed in a
uniform manner, and the face of the earth is not subject to those sudden and
continual changes which arise from the passions and caprices of bodies of
men living together. But savage man, living dispersed among other animals
and finding himself betimes in a situation to measure his strength with
theirs, soon comes to compare himself with them; and, perceiving that he
surpasses them more in adroitness than they surpass him in strength, learns
to be no longer afraid of them. Set a bear, or a wolf, against a robust, agile,
and resolute savage, as they all are, armed with stones and a good cudgel,
and you will see that the danger will be at least on both sides, and that, after
a few trials of this kind, wild beasts, which are not fond of attacking each
other, will not be at all ready to attack man, whom they will have found to
be as wild and ferocious as themselves. With regard to such animals as have
really more strength than man has adroitness, he is in the same situation as
all weaker animals, which notwithstanding are still able to subsist; except
indeed that he has the advantage that, being equally swift of foot, and
finding an almost certain place of refuge in every tree, he is at liberty to
take or leave it at every encounter, and thus to fight or fly, as he chooses.
Add to this that it does not appear that any animal naturally makes war on
man, except in case of self-defence or excessive hunger, or betrays any of
those violent antipathies, which seem to indicate that one species is
intended by nature for the food of another.
This is doubtless why negroes and savages are so little afraid of the wild
beasts they may meet in the woods. The Caraibs of Venezuela among others
live in this respect in absolute security and without the smallest
inconvenience. Though they are almost naked, Francis Correal tells us, they
expose themselves freely in the woods, armed only with bows and arrows;
but no one has ever heard of one of them being devoured by wild beasts.
But man has other enemies more formidable, against which he is not
provided with such means of defence: these are the natural infirmities of
infancy, old age, and illness of every kind, melancholy proofs of our
weakness, of which the two first are common to all animals, and the last
belongs chiefly to man in a state of society. With regard to infancy, it is
observable that the mother, carrying her child always with her, can nurse it
with much greater ease than the females of many other animals, which are
forced to be perpetually going and coming, with great fatigue, one way to
find subsistence, and another to suckle or feed their young. It is true that if
the woman happens to perish, the infant is in great danger of perishing with
her; but this risk is common to many other species of animals, whose young
take a long time before they are able to provide for themselves. And if our
infancy is longer than theirs, our lives are longer in proportion; so that all
things are in this respect fairly equal; though there are other rules to be
considered regarding the duration of the first period of life, and the number
of young, which do not affect the present subject. In old age, when men are
less active and perspire little, the need for food diminishes with the ability
to provide it. As the savage state also protects them from gout and
rheumatism, and old age is, of all ills, that which human aid can least
alleviate, they cease to be, without others perceiving that they are no more,
and almost without perceiving it themselves.
With respect to sickness, I shall not repeat the vain and false
declamations which most healthy people pronounce against medicine; but I
shall ask if any solid observations have been made from which it may be
justly concluded that, in the countries where the art of medicine is most
neglected, the mean duration of man's life is less than in those where it is
most cultivated. How indeed can this be the case, if we bring on ourselves
more diseases than medicine can furnish remedies? The great inequality in
manner of living, the extreme idleness of some, and the excessive labour of
others, the easiness of exciting and gratifying our sensual appetites, the too
exquisite foods of the wealthy which overheat and fill them with
indigestion, and, on the other hand, the unwholesome food of the poor,
often, bad as it is, insufficient for their needs, which induces them, when
opportunity offers, to eat voraciously and overcharge their stomachs; all
these, together with sitting up late, and excesses of every kind, immoderate
transports of every passion, fatigue, mental exhaustion, the innumerable
pains and anxieties inseparable from every condition of life, by which the
mind of man is incessantly tormented; these are too fatal proofs that the
greater part of our ills are of our own making, and that we might have
avoided them nearly all by adhering to that simple, uniform and solitary
manner of life which nature prescribed. If she destined man to be healthy, I
venture to declare that a state of reflection is a state contrary to, nature, and
that a thinking man is a depraved animal. When we think of the good
constitution of the savages, at least of those whom we have not ruined with
our spirituous liquors, and reflect that they are troubled with hardly any
disorders, save wounds and old age, we are tempted to believe that, in
following the history of civil society, we shall be telling also that of human
sickness. Such, at least, was the opinion of Plato, who inferred from certain
remedies prescribed, or approved, by Podalirius and Machaon at the siege
of Troy, that several sicknesses which these remedies gave rise to in his
time, were not then known to mankind: and Celsus tells us that diet, which
is now so necessary, was first invented by Hippocrates.
Being subject therefore to so few causes of sickness, man, in the state of
nature, can have no need of remedies, and still less of physicians: nor is the
human race in this respect worse off than other animals, and it is easy to
learn from hunters whether they meet with many infirm animals in the
course of the chase. It is certain they frequently meet with such as carry the
marks of having been considerably wounded, with many that have had
bones or even limbs broken, yet have been healed without any Other
surgical assistance than that of time, or any other regimen than that of their
ordinary life. At the same time their cures seem not to have been less
perfect, for their not having been tortured by incisions, poisoned with drugs,
or wasted by fasting. In short, however useful medicine, properly
administered, may be among us, it is certain that, if the savage, when he is
sick and left to himself, has nothing to hope but from nature, he has, on the
other hand, nothing to fear but from his disease; which renders his situation
often preferable to our own.
We should beware, therefore, of confounding the savage man with the
men we have daily before our eyes. Nature treats all the animals left to her
care with a predilection that seems to show how jealous she is of that right.
The horse, the cat, the bull, and even the ass are generally of greater stature,
and always more robust, and have more vigour, strength and courage, when
they run wild in the forests than when bred in the stall. By becoming
domesticated, they lose half these advantages; and it seems as if all our care
to feed and treat them well serves only to deprave them. It is thus with man
also: as he becomes sociable and a slave, he grows weak, timid and servile;
his effeminate way of life totally enervates his strength and courage. To this
it may be added that there is still a greater difference between savage and
civilised man, than between wild and tame beasts: for men and brutes
having been treated alike by nature, the several conveniences in which men
indulge themselves still more than they do their beasts, are so many
additional causes of their deeper degeneracy.
It is not therefore so great a misfortune to these primitive men, nor so
great an obstacle to their preservation, that they go naked, have no
dwellings and lack all the superfluities which we think so necessary. If their
skins are not covered with hair, they have no need of such covering in warm
climates; and, in cold countries, they soon learn to appropriate the skins of
the beasts they have overcome. If they have but two legs to run with, they
have two arms to defend themselves with, and provide for their wants. Their
children are slowly and with difficulty taught to walk; but their mothers are
able to carry them with ease; advantage which other animals lack, as the
mother, if pursued, is forced either to abandon her young, or to regulate her
pace by theirs. Unless, in short, we suppose a singular and fortuitous
concurrence of circumstances of which I shall speak later, and which would
be unlikely to exist, it is plain in every state of the case, that the man who
first made himself clothes or a dwelling was furnishing himself with things
not at all necessary; for he had till then done without them, and there is no
reason why he should not have been able to put up in manhood with the
same kind of life as had been his in infancy.
Solitary, indolent, and perpetually accompanied by danger, the savage
cannot but be fond of sleep; his sleep too must be light, like that of the
animals, which think but little and may be said to slumber all the time they
do not think. Self-preservation being his chief and almost sole concern, he
must exercise most those faculties which are most concerned with attack or
defence, either for overcoming his prey, or for preventing him from
becoming the prey of other animals. On the other hand, those organs which
are perfected only by softness and sensuality will remain in a gross and
imperfect state, incompatible with any sort of delicacy; so that, his senses
being divided on this head, his touch and taste will be extremely coarse, his
sight, hearing and smell exceedingly fine and subtle. Such in general is the
animal condition, and such, according to the narratives of travellers, is that
of most savage nations. It is therefore no matter for surprise that the
Hottentots of the Cape of Good Hope distinguish ships at sea, with the
naked eye, at as great a distance as the Dutch can do with their telescopes;
or that the savages of America should trace the Spaniards, by their smell, as
well as the best dogs could have done; or that these barbarous peoples feel
no pain in going naked, or that they use large quantities of piemento with
their food, and drink the strongest European liquors like water.
Hitherto I have considered merely the physical man; let us now take a
view of him on his metaphysical and moral side.
I see nothing in any animal but an ingenious machine, to which nature
hath given senses to wind itself up, and to guard itself, to a certain degree,
against anything that might tend to disorder or destroy it. I perceive exactly
the same things in the human machine, with this difference, that in the
operations of the brute, nature is the sole agent, whereas man has some
share in his own operations, in his character as a free agent. The one
chooses and refuses by instinct, the other from an act of free-will: hence the
brute cannot deviate from the rule prescribed to it, even when it would be
advantageous for it to do so; and, on the contrary, man frequently deviates
from such rules to his own prejudice. Thus a pigeon would be starved to
death by the side of a dish of the choicest meats, and a cat on a heap of fruit
or grain; though it is certain that either might find nourishment in the foods
which it thus rejects with disdain, did it think of trying them. Hence it is
that dissolute men run into excesses which bring on fevers and death;
because the mind depraves the senses, and the will continues to speak when
nature is silent.
Every animal has ideas, since it has senses; it even combines those ideas
in a certain degree; and it is only in degree that man differs, in this respect,
from the brute. Some philosophers have even maintained that there is a
greater difference between one man and another than between some men
and some beasts. It is not, therefore, so much the understanding that
constitutes the specific difference between the man and the brute, as the
human quality of free-agency. Nature lays her commands on every animal,
and the brute obeys her voice. Man receives the same impulsion, but at the
same time knows himself at liberty to acquiesce or resist: and it is
particularly in his consciousness of this liberty that the spirituality of his
soul is displayed. For physics may explain, in some measure, the
mechanism of the senses and the formation of ideas; but in the power of
willing or rather of choosing, and in the feeling of this power, nothing is to
be found but acts which are purely spiritual and wholly inexplicable by the
laws of mechanism.
However, even if the difficulties attending all these questions should
still leave room for difference in this respect between men and brutes, there
is another very specific quality which distinguishes them, and which will
admit of no dispute. This is the faculty of self-improvement, which, by the
help of circumstances, gradually develops all the rest of our faculties, and is
inherent in the species as in the individual: whereas a brute is, at the end of
a few months, all he will ever be during his whole life, and his species, at
the end of a thousand years, exactly what it was the first year of that
thousand. Why is man alone liable to grow into a dotard? Is it not because
he returns, in this, to his primitive state; and that, while the brute, which has
acquired nothing and has therefore nothing to lose, still retains the force of
instinct, man, who loses, by age or accident, all that his perfectibility had
enabled him to gain, falls by this means lower than the brutes themselves?
It would be melancholy, were we forced to admit that this distinctive and
almost unlimited faculty is the source of all human misfortunes; that it is
this which, in time, draws man out of his original state, in which he would
have spent his days insensibly in peace and innocence; that it is this faculty,
which, successively producing in different ages his discoveries and his
errors, his vices and his virtues, makes him at length a tyrant both over
himself and over nature.1 It would be shocking to be obliged to regard as a
benefactor the man who first suggested to the Oroonoko Indians the use of
the boards they apply to the temples of their children, which secure to them
some part at least of their imbecility and original happiness.
Savage man, left by nature solely to the direction of instinct, or rather
indemnified for what he may lack by faculties capable at first of supplying
its place, and afterwards of raising him much above it, must accordingly
begin with purely animal functions: thus seeing and feeling must be his first
condition, which would be common to him and all other animals. To will,
and not to will, to desire and to fear, must be the first, and almost the only
operations of his soul, till new circumstances occasion new developments
of his faculties.
Whatever moralists may hold, the human understanding is greatly
indebted to the passions, which, it is universally allowed, are also much
indebted to the understanding. It is by the activity of the passions that pur
reason is improved; for we desire knowledge only because we wish to
enjoy; and it is impossible to conceive any reason why a person who has
neither fears nor desires should give himself the trouble of reasoning. The
passions, again, originate in our wants, and their progress depends on that
of our knowledge; for we cannot desire or fear anything, except from the
idea we have of it, or from the simple impulse of nature. Now savage man,
being destitute of every species of intelligence, can have no passions save
those of the latter kind: his desires never go beyond his physical wants. The
only goods he recognises in the universe are food, a female, and sleep: the
only evils he fears are pain and hunger. I say pain, and not death: for no
animal can know what it is to die; the knowledge of death and its terrors
being one of the first acquisitions made by man in departing from an animal
state.
It would be easy, were it necessary, to support this opinion by facts, and
to show that, in all the nations of the world, the progress of the
understanding has been exactly proportionate to the wants which the
peoples had received from nature, or been subjected to by circumstances,
and in consequence to the passions that induced them to provide for those
necessities. I might instance the arts, rising up in Egypt and expanding with
the inundation of the Nile. I might follow their progress into Greece, where
they took root afresh, grew up and towered to the skies, among the rocks
and sands of Attica, without being able to germinate on the fertile banks of
the Eurotas: I might observe that in general, the people of the North are
more industrious than those of the South, because they cannot get on so
well without being so: as if nature wanted to equalise matters by giving
their understandings the fertility she had refused to their soil.
But who does not see, without recurring to the uncertain testimony of
history, that everything seems to remove from savage man both the
temptation and the means of changing his condition? His imagination paints
no pictures; his heart makes no demands on him. His few wants are so
readily supplied, and he is so far from having the knowledge which is
needful to make him want more, that he can have neither foresight nor
curiosity. The face of nature becomes indifferent to him as it grows familiar.
He sees in it always the same order, the same successions: he has not
understanding enough to wonder at the greatest miracles; nor is it in his
mind that we can expect to find that philosophy man needs, if he is to know
how to notice for once what he sees every day. His soul, which nothing
disturbs, is wholly wrapped up in the feeling of its present existence,
without any idea of the future, however near at hand; while his projects, as
limited as his views, hardly extend to the close of day. Such, even at
present, is the extent of the native Caribean's foresight: he will
improvidently sell you his cotton-bed in the morning, and come crying in
the evening to buy it again, not having foreseen he would want it again the
next night.
The more we reflect on this subject, the greater appears the distance
between pure sensation and the most simple knowledge: it is impossible
indeed to conceive how a man, by his own powers alone, without the aid of
communication and the spur of necessity, could have bridged so great a gap.
How many ages may have elapsed before mankind were in a position to
behold any other Are than that of the heavens. What a multiplicity of
chances must have happened to teach them the commonest uses of that
element! How often must they have let it out before they acquired the art of
reproducing it? and how often may not such a secret have died with him
who had discovered it? What shall we say of agriculture, an art which
requires so much labour and foresight, which is so dependent on others that
it is plain it could only be practised in a society which had at least begun,
and which does not serve so much to draw the means of subsistence from
the earth —for these it would produce of itself—but to compel it to produce
what is most to our taste? But let us suppose that men had so multiplied that
the natural produce of the earth was no longer sufficient for their support; a
supposition, by the way, which would prove such a life to be very
advantageous for the human race; let us suppose that, without forges or
workshops, the instruments of husbandry had dropped from the sky into the
hands of savages; that they had overcome their natural aversion to continual
labour; that they had learnt so much foresight for their needs; that they had
divined how to cultivate the earth, to sow grain and plant trees; that they
had discovered the arts of grinding corn, and of setting the grape to ferment
—all being things that must have been taught them by the gods, since it is
not to be conceived how they could discover them for themselves—yet after
all this, what man among them would be so absurd as to take the trouble of
cultivating a field, which might be stripped of its crop by the first comer,
man or beast, that might take a liking to it; and how should each of them
resolve to pass his life in wearisome labour, when, the more necessary to
him the reward of his labour might be, the surer he would be of not getting
it? In a word, how could such a situation induce men to cultivate the earth,
till it was regularly parcelled out among them; that is to say, till the state of
nature had been abolished?
Were we to suppose savage man as trained in the art of thinking as
philosophers make him; were we, like them, to suppose him a very
philosopher capable of investigating the sublimest truths, and of forming,
by highly abstract chains of reasoning, maxims of reason and justice,
deduced from the love of order in general, or the known will of his Creator;
in a word, were we to suppose him as intelligent and enlightened, as he
must have been, and is in fact found to have been, dull and stupid, what
advantage Would accrue to the species, from all such metaphysics, which
could not be communicated by one to another, but must end with him who
made them? What progress could be made by mankind, while dispersed in
the woods among other animals? and how far could men improve or
mutually enlighten one another, when, having no fixed habitation, and no
need of one another's assistance, the same persons hardly met twice in their
lives, and perhaps then, without knowing one another or speaking together?
Let it be considered how many ideas we owe to the use of speech; how
far grammar exercises the understanding and facilitates its operations. Let
us reflect on the inconceivable pains and the infinite space of time that the
first invention of languages must have cost. To these reflections add what
preceded, and then judge how many thousand ages must have elapsed in the
successive development in the human mind of those operations of which it
is capable.
I shall here take the liberty for a moment, of considering the difficulties
of the origin of languages, on which subject I might content myself with a
simple repetition of the Abbé Condillac's investigations, as they fully
confirm my system, and perhaps even first suggested it. But it is plain, from
the manner in which this philosopher solves the difficulties he himself
raises, concerning the origin of arbitrary signs, that he assumes what I
question, viz. that a kind of society, must already have existed among the
first inventors of language. While I refer, therefore, to his observations on
this head, I think it right to give my own, in order to exhibit the same
difficulties in a light adapted to my subject. The first which presents itself is
to conceive how language can have become necessary; for as there was no
communication among men and no need for any, we can neither conceive
the necessity of this invention, nor the possibility of it, if it was not
somehow indispensable. I might affirm, with many others, that languages
arose in the domestic intercourse between parents and their children. But
this expedient would not obviate the difficulty, and would besides involve
the blunder made by those who, in reasoning on the state of nature, always
import into it ideas gathered in a state of society. Thus they constantly
consider families as living together under one roof, and the individuals of
each as observing among themselves a union as intimate and permanent as
that which exists among us, where so many common interests unite them:
whereas, in this primitive state, men had neither houses, nor huts, nor any
kind of property whatever; every one lived where he could, seldom for
more than a single night; the sexes united without design, as accident,
opportunity or inclination brought them together, nor had they any great
need of words to communicate their designs to each other; and they parted
with the same indifference. The mother gave suck to her children at first for
her own sake; and afterwards, when habit had made them dear, for theirs:
but as soon as they were strong enough to go in search of their own food,
they forsook her of their own accord; and, as they had hardly any other
method of not losing one another than that of remaining continually within
sight, they soon became quite incapable of recognising one another when
they happened to meet again. It is farther to be observed that the child,
having all his wants to explain, and of course more to say to his mother than
the mother could have to say to him, must have borne the brunt of the task
of invention, and the language he used would be of his own device, so that
the number of languages would be equal to that of the individuals speaking
them, and the variety would be increased by the vagabond and roving life
they led, which would not give time for any idiom to become constant. For
to say that the mother dictated to her child the words he was to use in
asking her for one thing or another, is an explanation of how languages
already formed are taught, but by no means explains how languages were
originally formed.
We will suppose, however, that this first difficulty is obviated. Let us for
a moment then take ourselves as being on this side of the vast space which
must lie between a pure state of nature and that in which languages had
become necessary, and, admitting their necessity, let us inquire how they
could first be established. Here we have a new and worse difficulty to
grapple with; for if men need speech to learn to think, they must have stood
in much greater need of the art of thinking, to be able to invent that of
speaking. And though we might conceive how the articulate sounds of the
voice came to be taken as the conventional interpreters of our ideas, it
would still remain for us to inquire what could have been the interpreters of
this convention for those ideas, which, answering to no sensible objects,
could not be indicated either by gesture or voice; so that we can hardly form
any tolerable conjectures about the origin of this art of communicating our
thoughts and establishing a correspondence between minds: an art so
sublime, that far distant as it is from its origin, philosophers still behold it at
such an immeasurable distance from perfection, that there is none rash
enough to affirm it will ever reach it, even though the revolutions time
necessarily produces were suspended in its favour, though prejudice should
be banished from our academies or condemned to silence, and those learned
societies should devote themselves uninterruptedly for whole ages to this
thorny question.
The first language of mankind, the most universal and vivid, in a word
the only language man needed, before he had occasion to exert his
eloquence to persuade assembled multitudes, was the simple cry of nature.
But as this was excited only by a sort of instinct on urgent occasions, to
implore assistance in case of danger, or relief in case of suffering, it could
be of little use in the ordinary course of life, in which more moderate
feelings prevail. When the ideas of men began to expand and multiply, and
closer communication took place among them, they strove to invent more
numerous signs and a more copious language. They multiplied the
inflections of the voice, and added gestures, which are in their own nature
more expressive, and depend less for their meaning on a prior
determination. Visible and movable objects were therefore expressed by
gestures, and audible ones by imitative sounds: but, as hardly anything can
be indicated by gestures, except objects actually present or easily described,
and visible actions; as they are not universally useful—for darkness or the
interposition of a material object destroys their efficacy—and as besides
they rather request than secure our attention; men at length bethought
themselves of substituting for them the articulate sounds of the voice,
which, without bearing the same relation to any particular ideas, are better
calculated to express them all, as conventional signs. Such an institution
could only be made by common consent, and must have been effected in a
manner not very easy for men whose gross organs had not been accustomed
to any such exercise. It is also in itself still more difficult to conceive, since
such a common agreement must have had motives, and speech seems to
have been highly necessary to establish the use of it.
It is reasonable to suppose that the words first made use of by mankind
had a much more extensive signification than those used in languages
already formed, and that ignorant as they were of the division of discourse
into its constituent parts, they at first gave every single word the sense of a
whole proposition. When they began to distinguish subject and attribute,
and noun and verb, which was itself no common effort of genius,
substantives were at first only so many proper names; the present infinitive
was the only tense of verbs; and the very idea of adjectives must have been
developed with great difficulty; for every adjective is an abstract idea, and
abstractions are painful and unnatural operations.
Every object at first received a particular name without regard to genus
or species, which these primitive originators were not in a position to
distinguish; every individual presented itself to their minds in isolation, as
they are in the picture of nature. If one oak was called A, another was called
B; for the primitive idea of two things is that they are not the same, and it
often takes a long time for what they have in common to be seen: so that,
the narrower the limits of their knowledge of things, the more copious their
dictionary must have been. The difficulty of using such a vocabulary could
not be easily removed; for, to arrange beings under common and generic
denominations, it became necessary to know their distinguishing properties:
the need arose for observation and definition, that is to say, for natural
history and metaphysics of a far more developed kind than men can at that
time have possessed.
Add to this, that general ideas cannot be introduced into the mind
without the assistance of words, nor can the understanding seize them
except by means of propositions. This is one of the reasons why animals
cannot form such ideas, or ever acquire that capacity for self-improvement
which depends on them. When a monkey goes from one nut to another, are
we to conceive that he entertains any general idea of that kind of fruit, and
compares its archetype with the two individual nuts? Assuredly he does not;
but the sight of one of these nuts recalls to his memory the sensations which
he received from the other, and his eyes, being modified after a certain
manner, give information to the palate of the modification it is about to
receive. Every general idea is purely intellectual; if the imagination meddles
with it ever so little, the idea immediately becomes particular. If you
endeavour to trace in your mind the image of a tree in general, you never
attain to your end. In spite of all you can do, you will have to see it as great
or little, bare or leafy, light or dark, and were you capable of seeing nothing
in it but what is common to all trees, it would no longer be like a tree at all.
Purely abstract beings are perceivable in the same manner, or are only
conceivable by the help of language. The definition of a triangle alone gives
you a true idea of it: the moment you imagine a triangle in your mind, it is
some particular triangle and not another, and you cannot avoid giving it
sensible lines and a coloured area. We must then make use of propositions
and of language in order to form general ideas. For no sooner does the
imagination cease to operate than the understanding proceeds only by the
help of words. If then the first inventors of speech could give names only to
ideas they already had, it follows that the first substantives could be nothing
more than proper names.
But when our new grammarians, by means of which I have no
conception, began to extend their ideas and generalise their terms, the
ignorance of the inventors must have confined this method within very
narrow limits; and, as they had at first gone too far in multiplying the names
of individuals, from ignorance of their genus and species, they made
afterwards too few of these, from not having considered beings in all their
specific differences. It would indeed have needed more knowledge and
experience than they could have, and more pains and inquiry than they
would have bestowed, to carry these distinctions to their proper length. If,
even to-day, we are continually discovering new species, which have
hitherto escaped observation, let us reflect how many of them must have
escaped men who judged things merely from their first appearance! It is
superfluous to add that the primitive classes and the most general notions
must necessarily have escaped their notice also. How, for instance, could
they have understood or thought of the words matter, spirit, substance,
mode, figure, motion, when even our philosophers, who have so long been
making use of them, have themselves the greatest difficulty in
understanding them; and when, the ideas attached to them being purely
metaphysical, there are no models of them to be found in nature?
But I stop at this point, and ask my judges to suspend their reading a
while, to consider, after the invention of physical substantives, which is the
easiest part of language to invent, that there is still a great way to go, before
the thoughts of men will have found perfect expression and constant form,
such as would answer the purposes of public speaking, and produce their
effect on society. I beg of them to consider how much time must have been
spent, and how much knowledge needed, to find out numbers, abstract
terms, aorists and all the tenses of verbs, particles, syntax, the method of
connecting propositions, the forms of reasoning, and all the logic of speech.
For myself, I am so aghast at the increasing difficulties which present
themselves, and so well convinced of the almost demonstrable impossibility
that languages should owe their original institution to merely human means,
that I leave, to any one who will undertake it, the discussion of the difficult
problem, which was most necessary, the existence of society to the
invention of language, or the invention of language to the establishment of
society. But be the origin of language and society what they may, it may be
at least inferred, from the little care which nature has taken to unite
mankind by mutual wants, and to facilitate the use of speech, that she has
contributed little to make them sociable, and has put little of her own into
all they have done to create such bonds of union. It is in fact impossible to
conceive why, in a state of nature, one man should stand more in need of
the assistance of another, than a monkey or a wolf of the assistance of
another of its kind: or, granting that he did, what motives could induce that
other to assist him; or, even then, by what means they could agree about the
conditions. I know it is incessantly repeated that man would in such a state
have been the most miserable of creatures; and indeed, if it be true, as I
think I have proved, that he must have lived many ages, before he could
have either desire or an opportunity of emerging from it, this would only be
an accusation against nature, and not against the being which she had thus
unhappily constituted. But as I understand the word miserable, it either has
no meaning at all, or else signifies only a painful privation of something, or
a state of suffering either in body or soul. I should be glad to have explained
to me, what kind of misery a free being, whose heart is at ease and whose
body is in health, can possibly suffer. I would ask also, whether a social or a
natural life is most likely to become insupportable to those who enjoy it. We
see around us hardly a creature in civil society, who does not lament his
existence: we even see many deprive themselves of as much of it as they
can, and laws human and divine together can hardly put a stop to the
disorder. I ask, if it was ever known that a savage took it into his head,
when at liberty, to complain of life or to make away with himself. Let us
therefore judge, with less vanity, on which side the real misery is found. On
the other hand, nothing could be more unhappy than savage man, dazzled
by science, tormented by his passions, and reasoning about a state different
from his own. It appears that Providence most wisely determined that the
faculties, which he potentially possessed, should develop themselves only
as occasion offered to exercise them, in order that they might not be
superfluous or perplexing to him, by appearing before their time, nor slow
and useless when the need for them arose. In instinct alone, he had all he
required for living in the state of nature; and with a developed
understanding he has only just enough to support life in society.
It appears, at first view, that men in a state of nature, having no moral
relations or determinate obligations one with another, could not be either
good nor bad, virtuous or vicious; unless we take these terms in a physical
sense, and call, in an individual, those qualities vices which may be
injurious to his preservation, and those virtues which contribute to it; in
which case, he would have to be accounted most virtuous, who put least
check on the pure impulses of nature. But without deviating from the
ordinary sense of the words, it will be proper to suspend the judgment we
might be led to form on such a state, and be on our guard against our
prejudices, till we have weighed the matter in the scales of impartiality, and
seen whether virtues or vices preponderate among civilised men; and
whether their virtues do them more good than their vices do harm; till we
have discovered, whether the progress of the sciences sufficiently
indemnifies them for the mischiefs they do one another, in proportion as
they are better informed of the good they ought to do; or whether they
would not be, on the whole, in a much happier condition if they had nothing
to fear or to hope from any one, than as they are, subjected to universal
dependence, and obliged to take everything from those who engage to give
them nothing in return.
Above all, let us not conclude, with Hobbes, that because man has no
idea of goodness, he must be naturally wicked; that he is vicious because he
does not know virtue; that he always refuses to do his fellow-creatures
services which he does not think they have a right to demand; or that by
virtue of the right he truly claims to everything he needs, he foolishly
imagines himself the sole proprietor of the whole universe. Hobbes had
seen clearly the defects of all the modern definitions of natural right: but the
consequences which he deduces from his own show that he understands it
in an equally false sense. In reasoning on the principles he lays down, he
ought to have said that the state of nature, being that in which the care for
our own preservation is the least prejudicial to that of others, was
consequently the best calculated to promote peace, and the most suitable for
mankind. He does say the exact opposite, in consequence of having
improperly admitted, as a part of savage man's care for self-preservation,
the gratification of a multitude of passions which are the work of society,
and have made laws necessary. A bad man, he says, is a robust child. But it
remains to be proved whether man in a state of nature is this robust child:
and, should we grant that he is, what would he infer? Why truly, that if this
man, when robust and strong, were dependent on others as he is when
feeble, there is no extravagance he would not be guilty of; that he would
beat his mother when she was too slow in giving him her breast; that he
would strangle one of his younger brothers, if he should be troublesome to
him, or bite the arm of another, if he put him to any inconvenience. But that
man in the state of nature is both strong and dependent involves two
contrary suppositions. Man is weak when he is dependent, and is his own
master before he comes to be strong. Hobbes did not reflect that the same
cause, which prevents a savage from making use of his reason, as our jurists
hold, prevents him also from abusing his faculties, as Hobbes himself
allows: so that it may be justly said that savages are not bad merely because
they do not know what it is to be good: for it is neither the development of
the understanding nor the restraint of law that hinders them from doing ill;
but the peacefulness of their passions, and their ignorance of vice: tanto
plus in illis proficit vitiorum ignoratio, quam in his cognitio virtutis.2 There
is another principle which has escaped Hobbes; which, having been
bestowed on mankind, to moderate, on certain occasions, the impetuosity of
egoism, or, before its birth, the desire of self-preservation, tempers the
ardour with which he pursues his own welfare, by an innate repugnance at
seeing a fellow-creature suffer.3 I think I need not fear contradiction in
holding man to be possessed of the only natural virtue, which could not be
denied him by the most violent detractor of human virtue. I am speaking of
compassion which is a disposition suitable to creatures so weak and subject
to so many evils as we certainly are: by so much the more universal and
useful to mankind, as it comes before any kind of reflection; and at the
same time so natural, that the very brutes themselves sometimes give
evident proofs of it. Not to mention the tenderness of mothers for their
offspring and the perils they encounter to save them from danger, it is well
known that horses show a reluctance to trample on living bodies. One
animal never passes by the dead body of another of its species: there are
even some which give their fellows a sort of burial; while the mournful
lowings of the cattle when they enter the slaughter-house show the
impressions made on them by the horrible spectacle which meets them. We
find, with pleasure, the author of the Fable of the Bees obliged to own that
man is a compassionate and sensible being, and laying aside his cold
subtlety of style, in the example he gives, to present us with the pathetic
description of a man who, from a place of confinement, is compelled to
behold a wild beast tear a child from the arms of its mother, grinding its
tender limbs with its murderous teeth, and tearing its palpitating entrails
with its claws. What horrid agitation must not the eye-witness of such a
scene experience, although he would not be personally concerned! What
anxiety would he not suffer at not being able to give any assistance to the
fainting mother and the dying infant!
Such is the pure emotion of nature, prior to all kinds of reflection! Such
is the force of natural compassion, which the greatest depravity of morals
has as yet hardly been able to destroy! for we daily find at our theatres men
affected, nay shedding tears at the sufferings of a wretch who, were he in
the tyrant's place, would probably even add to the torments of his enemies;
like the bloodthirsty Sulla, who was so sensitive to ills he had not caused, or
that Alexander of Pheros who did not dare to go and see any tragedy acted,
for fear of being seen weeping with Andromache and Priam, though he
could listen without emotion to the cries of all the citizens who were daily
strangled at his command.
Mollissima corda
Humano generi dare se natura fatetur,
Qua lacrimas dedit.
Juvenal, Satire xv, 151.4
Mandeville well knew that, in spite of all their morality, men would
have never been better than monsters, had not nature bestowed on them a
sense of compassion, to aid their reason: but he did not see that from this
quality alone flow all those social virtues, of which he denied man the
possession. But what is generosity, clemency or humanity but compassion
applied to the weak, to the guilty, or to mankind in general? Even
benevolence and friendship are, if we judge rightly, only the effects of
compassion, constantly set upon a particular object: for how is it different to
wish that another person may not suffer pain and uneasiness and to wish
him happy? Were it even true that pity is no more than a feeling, which puts
us in the place of the sufferer, a feeling, obscure yet lively in a savage,
developed yet feeble in civilised man; this truth would have no other
consequence than to confirm my argument. Compassion must, in fact, be
the stronger, the more the animal beholding any kind of distress identifies
himself with the animal that suffers. Now, it is plain that such identification
must have been much more perfect in a state of nature than it is in a state of
reason. It is reason that engenders self-respect, and reflection that confirms
it: it is reason which turns man's mind back upon itself, and divides him
from everything that could disturb or afflict him. It is philosophy that
isolates him, and bids him say, at sight of the misfortunes of others: "Perish
if you will, I am secure." Nothing but such general evils as threaten the
whole community can disturb the tranquil sleep of the philosopher, or tear
him from his bed. A murder may with impunity be committed under his
window; he has only to put his hands to his ears and argue a little with
himself, to prevent nature, which is shocked within him, from identifying
itself with the unfortunate sufferer. Uncivilised man has not this admirable
talent; and for want of reason and wisdom, is always foolishly ready to
obey the first promptings of humanity. It is the populace that flocks together
at riots and street-brawls, while the wise man prudently makes off. It is the
mob and the market-women, who part the combatants, and hinder gentle-
folks from cutting one another's throats.
It is then certain that compassion is a natural feeling which, by
moderating the violence of love of self in each individual, contributes to the
preservation of the whole species. It is this compassion that hurries us
without reflection to the relief of those who are in distress: it is this which
in a state of nature supplies the place of laws, morals and virtues, with the
advantage that none are tempted to disobey its gentle voice: it is this which
will always prevent a sturdy savage from robbing a weak child or a feeble
old man of the sustenance they may have with pain and difficulty acquired,
if he sees a possibility of providing for himself by other means: it is this
which, instead of inculcating that sublime maxim of rational justice, Do to
others as you would have them do unto you, inspires all men with that other
maxim of natural goodness, much less perfect indeed, but perhaps more
useful; Do good to yourself with as little evil as possible to others. In a
word, it is rather in this natural feeling than in any subtle arguments that we
must look for the cause of that repugnance, which every man would
experience in doing evil, even independently of the maxims of education.
Although it might belong to Socrates and other minds of the like craft to
acquire virtue by reason, the human race would long since have ceased to
be, had its preservation depended only on the reasonings of the individuals
composing it.
With passions so little active, and so good a curb, men, being rather
wild than wicked, and more intent to guard themselves against the mischief
that might be done them, than to do mischief to others, were by no means
subject to very perilous dissensions. They maintained no kind of intercourse
with one another, and were consequently strangers to vanity, deference,
esteem and contempt; they had not the least idea of meum and tuum, and no
true conception of justice; they looked upon every violence to which they
were subjected, rather as an injury that might easily be repaired than as a
crime that ought to be punished; and they never thought of taking revenge,
unless perhaps mechanically and on the spot, as a dog will sometimes bite
the stone which is thrown at him. Their quarrels therefore would seldom
have very bloody consequences; for the subject of them would be merely
the question of subsistence. But I am aware of one greater danger, which
remains to be noticed.
Of the passions that stir the heart of man, there is one which makes the
sexes necessary to each other, and is extremely ardent and impetuous; a
terrible passion that braves danger, surmounts all obstacles, and in its
transports seems calculated to bring destruction on the human race which it
is really destined to preserve. What must become of men who are left to this
brutal and boundless rage, without modesty, without shame, and daily
upholding their amours at the price of their blood?
It must, in the first place, be allowed that, the more violent the passions
are, the more are laws necessary to keep them under restraint. But, setting
aside the inadequacy of laws to effect this purpose, which is evident from
the crimes and disorders to which these passions daily give rise among us,
we should do well to inquire if these evils did not spring up with the laws
themselves; for in this case, even if the laws were capable of repressing
such evils, it is the least that could be expected from them, that they should
check a mischief which would not have arisen without them.
Let us begin by distinguishing between the physical and moral
ingredients in the feeling of love. The physical part of love is that general
desire which urges the sexes to union with each other. The moral part is that
which determines and fixes this desire exclusively upon one particular
object; or at least gives it a greater degree of energy toward the object thus
preferred. It is easy to see that the moral part of love is a factitious feeling,
born of social usage, and enhanced by the women with much care and
cleverness, to establish their empire, and put in power the sex which ought
to obey. This feeling, being founded on certain ideas of beauty and merit
which a savage is not in a position to acquire, and on comparisons which he
is incapable of making, must be for him almost non-existent; for, as his
mind cannot form abstract ideas of proportion and regularity, so his heart is
not susceptible of the feelings of love and admiration, which are even
insensibly produced by the application of these ideas. He follows solely the
character nature has implanted in him, and not tastes which he could never
have acquired; so that every woman equally answers his purpose.
Men in a state of nature being confined merely to what is physical in
love, and fortunate enough to be ignorant of those excellences, which whet
the appetite while they increase the difficulty of gratifying it, must be
subject to fewer and less violent fits of passion, and consequently fall into
fewer and less violent disputes. The imagination, which causes such ravages
among us, never speaks to the heart of savages, who quietly await the
impulses of nature, yield to them involuntarily, with more pleasure than
ardour, and, their wants once satisfied, lose the desire. It is therefore
incontestable that love, as well as all other passions, must have acquired in
society that glowing impetuosity, which makes it so often fatal to mankind.
And it is the more absurd to represent savages as continually cutting one
another's throats to indulge their brutality, because this opinion is directly
contrary to experience; the Caribeans, who have as yet least of all deviated
from the state of nature, being in fact the most peaceable of people in their
amours, and the least subject to jealousy, though they live in a hot climate
which seems always to inflame the passions.
With regard to the inferences that might be drawn, in the case of several
species of animals, the males of which fill our poultry-yards with blood and
slaughter, or in spring make the forests resound with their quarrels over
their females; we must begin by excluding all those species, in which nature
has plainly established, in the comparative power of the sexes, relations
different from those which exist among us: thus we can base no conclusion
about men on the habits of fighting cocks. In those species where the
proportion is better observed, these battles must be entirely due to the
scarcity of females in comparison with males; or, what amounts to the same
thing, to the intervals during which the female constantly refuses the
advances of the male: for if each female admits the male but during two
months in the year, it is the same as if the number of females were five-
sixths less. Now, neither of these two cases is applicable to the human
species, in which the number of females usually exceeds that of males, and
among whom it has never been observed, even among savages, that the
females have, like those of other animals, their stated times of passion and
indifference. Moreover, in several of these species, the individuals all take
fire at once, and there comes a fearful moment of universal passion, tumult
and disorder among them; a scene which is never beheld in the human
species, whose love is not thus seasonal. We must not then conclude from
the combats of such animals for the enjoyment of the females, that the case
would be the same with mankind in a state of nature: and, even if we drew
such a conclusion, we see that such contests do not exterminate other kinds
of animals, and we have no reason to think they would be more fatal to
ours. It is indeed clear that they would do still less mischief than is the case
in a state of society; especially in those countries in which, morals being
still held in some repute, the jealousy of lovers and the vengeance of
husbands are the daily cause of duels, murders, and even worse crimes;
where the obligation of eternal fidelity only occasions adultery, and the very
laws of honour and continence necessarily increase debauchery and lead to
the multiplication of abortions.
Let us conclude then that man in a state of nature, wandering up and
down the forests, without industry, without speech, and without home, an
equal stranger to war and to all ties, neither standing in need of his fellow-
creatures nor having any desire to hurt them, and perhaps even not
distinguishing them one from another; let us conclude that, being self-
sufficient and subject to so few passions, he could have no feelings or
knowledge but such as befitted his situation; that he felt only his actual
necessities, and disregarded everything he did not think himself
immediately concerned to notice, and that his understanding made no
greater progress than his vanity. If by accident he made any discovery, he
was the less able to communicate it to others, as he did not know even his
own children. Every art would necessarily perish with its inventor, where
there was no kind of education among men, and generations succeeded
generations without the least advance; when, all setting out from the same
point, centuries must have elapsed in the barbarism of the first ages; when
the race was already old, and man remained a child.
If I have expatiated at such length on this supposed primitive state, it is
because I had so many ancient errors and inveterate prejudices to eradicate,
and therefore thought it incumbent on me to dig down to their very root,
and show, by means of a true picture of the state of nature, how far even the
natural inequalities of mankind are from having that reality and influence
which modern writers suppose.
It is in fact easy to see that many of the differences which distinguish
men are merely the effect of habit and the different methods of life men
adopt in society. Thus a robust or delicate constitution, and the strength or
weakness attaching to it, are more frequently the effects of a hardy or
effeminate method of education than of the original endowment of the body.
It is the same with the powers of the mind; for education not only makes a
difference between such as are cultured and such as are not, but even
increases the differences which exist among the former, in proportion to
their respective degrees of culture: as the distance between a giant and a
dwarf on the same road increases with every step they take. If we compare
the prodigious diversity, which obtains in the education and manner of life
of the various orders of men in the state of society, with the uniformity and
simplicity of animal and savage life, in which every one lives on the same
kind of food and in exactly the same manner, and does exactly the same
things, it is easy to conceive how much less the difference between man and
man must be in a state of nature than in a state of society, and how greatly
the natural inequality of mankind must be increased by the inequalities of
social institutions.
But even if nature really affected, in the distribution of her gifts, that
partiality which is imputed to her, what advantage would the greatest of her
favourites derive from it, to the detriment of others, in a state that admits of
hardly any kind of relation between them? Where there is no love, of what
advantage is beauty? Of what use is wit to those who do not converse, or
cunning to those who have no business with others? I hear it constantly
repeated that, in such a state, the strong would oppress the weak; but what
is here meant by oppression? Some, it is said, would violently domineer
over others, who would groan under a servile submission to their caprices.
This indeed is exactly what I observe to be the case among us; but I do not
see how it can be inferred of men in a state of nature, who could not easily
be brought to conceive what we mean by dominion and servitude. One man,
it is true, might seize the fruits which another had gathered, the game he
had killed, or the cave he had chosen for shelter; but how would he ever be
able to exact obedience, and what ties of dependence could there be among
men without possessions? If, for instance, I am driven from one tree, I can
go to the next; if I am disturbed in one place, what hinders me from going
to another? Again, should I happen to meet with a man so much stronger
than myself, and at the same time so depraved, so indolent, and so
barbarous, as to compel me to provide for his sustenance while he himself
remains idle; he must take care not to have his eyes off me for a single
moment; he must bind me fast before he goes to sleep, or I shall certainly
either knock him on the head or make my escape. That is to say, he must in
such a case voluntarily expose himself to much greater trouble than he
seeks to avoid, or can give me. After all this, let him be off his guard ever so
little; let him but turn his head aside at any sudden noise, and I shall be
instantly twenty paces off, lost in the forest, and, my fetters burst asunder,
he would never see me again.
Without my expatiating thus uselessly on these details, every one must
see that as the bonds of servitude are formed merely by the mutual
dependence of men on one another and the reciprocal needs that unite them,
it is impossible to make any man a slave, unless he be first reduced to a
situation in which he cannot do without the help of others: and, since such a
situation does not exist in a state of nature, every one is there his own
master, and the law of the strongest is of no effect.
Having proved that the inequality of mankind is hardly felt, and that its
influence is next to nothing in a state of nature, I must next show its origin
and trace its progress in the successive developments of the human mind.
Having shown that human perfectibility, the social virtues, and the other
faculties which natural man potentially possessed, could never develop of
themselves, but must require the fortuitous concurrence of many foreign
causes that might never arise, and without which he would have remained
for ever in his primitive condition, I must now collect and consider the
different accidents which may have improved the human understanding
while depraving the species, and made man wicked while making him
sociable; so as to bring him and the world from that distant period to the
point at which we now behold them.
I confess that, as the events I am going to describe might have happened
in various ways, I have nothing to determine my choice but conjectures: but
such conjectures become reasons, when they are the most probable that can
be drawn from the nature of things, and the only means of discovering the
truth. The consequences, however, which I mean to deduce will not be
barely conjectural; as, on the principles just laid down, it would be
impossible to form any other theory that would not furnish the same results,
and from which I could not draw the same conclusions.
This will be a sufficient apology for my not dwelling on the manner in
which the lapse of time compensates for the little probability in the events;
on the surprising power of trivial causes, when their action is constant; on
the impossibility, on the one hand, of destroying certain hypotheses, though
on the other we cannot give them the certainty of known matters of fact; on
its being within the province of history, when two facts are given as real,
and have to be connected by a series of intermediate facts, which are
unknown or supposed to be so, to supply such facts as may connect them;
and on its being in the province of philosophy when history is silent, to
determine similar facts to serve the same end; and lastly, on the influence of
similarity, which, in the case of events, reduces the facts to a much smaller
number of different classes than is commonly imagined. It is enough for me
to offer these hints to the consideration of my judges, and to have so
arranged that the general reader has no need to consider them at all.
1. See Appendix.
2. Justin. Hist, ii, 2. So much more does the ignorance of vice profit the one sort than the knowledge
of virtue the other.
3. Egoism must not be confused with self-respect: for they differ both in themselves and in their
effects. Self-respect is a natural feeling which leads every animal to look to its own
preservation, and which, guided in man by reason and modified by compassion, creates
humanity and virtue. Egoism is a purely relative and factitious feeling, which arises in the state
of society, leads each individual to make more of himself than of any other, causes all the
mutual damage men inflict one on another, and is the real source of the "sense of honour." This
being understood, I maintain that, in our primitive condition, in the true state of nature, egoism
did not exist; for as each man regarded himself as the only observer of his actions, the only
being in the universe who took any interest in him, and the sole judge of his deserts, no feeling
arising from comparisons he could not be led to make could take root in his soul; and for the
same reason, he could know neither hatred nor the desire for revenge, since these passions can
spring only from a sense of injury: and as it is the contempt or the intention to hurt, and not the
harm done, which constitutes the injury, men who neither valued nor compared themselves
could do one another much violence, when it suited them, without feeling any sense of injury. In
a word, each man, regarding his fellows almost as he regarded animals of different species,
might seize the prey of a weaker or yield up his own to a stronger, and yet consider these acts of
violence as mere natural occurrences, without the slightest emotion of insolence or despite, or
any other feeling than the joy or grief of success or failure.
4. Nature avows she gave the human race the softest hearts, who gave < them tears.
The Second Part
The first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, bethought himself of
saying This is mine, and found people simple enough to believe him, was
the real founder of civil society. From how many crimes, wars and murders,
from how many horrors and misfortunes might not any one have saved
mankind, by pulling up the stakes, or filling up the ditch, and crying to his
fellows, "Beware of listening to this impostor; you are undone if you once
forget that the fruits of the earth, belong to us all, and the earth itself to
nobody." But there is great probability that things had then already come to
such a pitch, that they could no longer continue as they were; for the idea of
property depends on many prior ideas, which could only be acquired
successively, and cannot have been formed all at once in the human mind.
Mankind must have made very considerable progress, and acquired
considerable knowledge and industry which they must also have transmitted
and increased from age to age, before they arrived at this last point of the
state of nature. Let us then go farther back and endeavour to unify under a
single point of view that slow succession of events and discoveries in the
most natural order.
Man's first feeling was that of his own existence, and his first care that
of self-preservation. The produce of the earth furnished him with all he
needed, and instinct told him how to use it. Hunger and other appetites
made him at various times experience various modes of existence; and
among these was one which urged him to propagate his species—a blind
propensity that, having nothing to do with the heart, produced a merely
animal act. The want once gratified, the two sexes knew each other no
more; and even the offspring was nothing to its mother, as soon as it could
do without her.
Such was the condition of infant man; the life of an animal limited at
first to mere sensations, and hardly profiting by the gifts nature bestowed on
him, much less capable of entertaining a thought of forcing anything from
her. But difficulties soon presented themselves, and it became necessary to
learn how to surmount them: the height of the trees, which prevented him
from gathering their fruits, the competition of other animals desirous of the
same fruits, and the ferocity of those who needed them for their own
preservation, all obliged him to apply himself to bodily exercises. He had to
be active, swift of foot, and vigorous in light. Natural weapons, stones and
sticks, were easily found: he learnt to surmount the obstacles of nature, to
contend in case of necessity with other animals, and to dispute for the
means of subsistence even with other men, or to indemnify himself for what
he was forced to give up to a stronger.
In proportion as the human race grew more numerous, men's cares
increased. The difference of soils, climates and seasons, must have
introduced some differences into their manner of living. Barren years, long
and sharp winters, scorching summers which parched the fruits of the earth,
must have demanded a new industry. On the sea-shore and the banks of
rivers, they invented the hook and line, and became fishermen and eaters of
fish. In the forests they made bows and arrows, and became huntsmen and
warriors. In cold countries they clothed themselves with the skins of the
beasts they had slain. The lightning, a volcano, or some lucky chance
acquainted them with fire, a new resource against the rigours of winter: they
next learned how to preserve this element, then how to reproduce it, and
finally how to prepare with it the flesh of animals which before they had
eaten raw.
This repeated relevance of various beings to himself, and one to another,
would naturally give rise in the human mind to the perceptions of certain
relations between them. Thus the relations which we denote by the terms,
great, small, strong, weak, swift, slow, fearful, bold, and the like, almost
insensibly compared at need, must have at length produced in him a kind of
reflection, or rather a mechanical prudence, which would indicate to him
the precautions most necessary to his security.
The new intelligence which resulted from this development increased
his superiority over other animals, by making him sensible of it. He would
now endeavour, therefore, to ensnare them, would play them a thousand
tricks, and though many of them might surpass him in swiftness or in
strength, would in time become the master of some and the scourge of
others. Thus, the first time he looked into himself, he felt the first emotion
of pride; and, at a time when he scarce knew how to distinguish the
different orders of beings, by looking upon his species as of the highest
order, he prepared the way for assuming pre-eminence as an individual.
Other men, it is true, were not then to him what they now are to us, and
he had no greater intercourse with them than with other animals; yet they
were not neglected in his observations. The conformities, which he would
in time discover between them, and between himself and his female, led
him to judge of others which were not then perceptible; and finding that
they all behaved as he himself would have done in like circumstances, he
naturally inferred that their manner of thinking and acting was altogether in
conformity with his own. This important truth, once deeply impressed on
his mind, must have induced him, from an intuitive feeling more certain and
much more rapid than any kind of reasoning, to pursue the rules of conduct,
which he had best observe towards them, for his own security and
advantage.
Taught by experience that the love of well-being is the sole motive of
human actions, he found himself in a position to distinguish the few cases,
in which mutual interest might justify him in relying upon the assistance of
his fellows; and also the still fewer cases in which a conflict of interests
might give cause to suspect them. In the former case, he joined in the same
herd with them, or at most in some kind of loose association, that laid no
restraint on its members, and lasted no longer than the transitory occasion
that formed it. In the latter case, every one sought his own private
advantage, either by open force, if he thought himself strong enough, or by
address and cunning, if he felt himself the weaker.
In this manner, men may have insensibly acquired some gross ideas of
mutual undertakings, and of the advantages of fulfilling them: that is, just
so far as their present and apparent interest was concerned: for they were
perfect strangers to foresight, and were so far from troubling themselves
about the distant future, that they hardly thought of the morrow. If a deer
was to be taken, every one saw that, in order to succeed, he must abide
faithfully by his post: but if a hare happened to come within the reach of
any one of them, it is not to be doubted that he pursued it without scruple,
and, having seized his prey, cared very little, if by so doing he caused his
companions to miss theirs.
It is easy to understand that such intercourse would not require a
language much more refined than that of rooks or monkeys, who associate
together for much the same, purpose. Inarticulate cries, plenty of gestures
and some imitative sounds, must have been for a long time the universal
language; and by the addition, in every country, of some conventional
articulate sounds (of which, as I have already intimated, the first institution
is not too easy to explain) particular languages were produced; but these
were rude and imperfect, and nearly such as now to be found among some
savage nations.
Hurried on by the rapidity of time, by the abundance of things I have to
say, and by the almost insensible progress of things in their beginnings, I
pass over in an instant a multitude of ages; for the slower the events were in
their succession, the more rapidly may they be described.
These first advances enabled men to make others with greater rapidity.
In proportion as they grew enlightened, they grew industrious. They ceased
to fall asleep under the first tree, or in the first cave that afforded them
shelter; they invented several kinds of implements of hard and sharp stones,
which they used to dig up the earth, and to cut wood; they then made huts
out of branches, and afterwards learnt to plaster them over with mud and
clay. This was the epoch of a first revolution, which established and
distinguished families, and introduced a kind of property, in itself the source
of a thousand quarrels and conflicts. As, however, the strongest were
probably the first to build themselves huts which they felt themselves able
to defend, it may be concluded that the weak found it much easier and safer
to imitate, than to attempt to dislodge them: and of those who were once
provided with huts, none could have any inducement to appropriate that of
his neighbour; not indeed so much because it did not belong to him, as
because it could be of no use, and he could not make himself master of it
without exposing himself to a desperate battle with the family which
occupied it.
The first expansions of the human heart were the effects of a novel
situation, which united husbands and wives, fathers and children, under one
roof. The habit of living together soon gave rise to the finest feelings known
to humanity, conjugal love and paternal affection. Every family became a
little society, the more united because liberty—and reciprocal attachment
were the only bonds of its union. The sexes, whose manner of life had been
hitherto the same, began now to adopt different ways of living. The women
became more sedentary, and accustomed themselves to mind the hut and
their children, while the men went abroad in search of their common
subsistence. From living a softer life, both sexes also began to lose
something of their strength and ferocity: but, if individuals became to some
extent less able to encounter wild beasts separately, they found it, on the
other hand, easier to assemble and resist in common.
The simplicity and solitude of man's life in this new condition, the
paucity of his wants, and the implements he had invented to satisfy them,
left him a great deal of leisure, which he employed to furnish himself with
many conveniences unknown to his fathers: and this was the first yoke he
inadvertently imposed on himself, and the first source of the evils he
prepared for his descendants. For, besides continuing thus to enervate both
body and mind, these conveniences lost with use almost all their power to
please, and even degenerated into real needs, till the want of them became
far more disagreeable than the possession of them had been pleasant. Men
would have been unhappy at the loss of them, though the possession did not
make them happy.
We can here see a little better how the use of speech became
established, and insensibly improved in each family, and we may form a
conjecture also concerning the manner in which various causes may have
extended and accelerated the progress of language, by making it more and
more necessary. Floods or earthquakes surrounded inhabited districts with
precipices or waters: revolutions of the globe tore off portions from the
continent, and made them islands. It is readily seen that among men thus
collected and compelled to live together, a common idiom must have arisen
much more easily than among those who still wandered through the forests
of the continent. Thus it is very possible that after their first essays in
navigation the islanders brought over the use of speech to the continent: and
it is at least very probable that communities and languages were first
established in islands, and even came to perfection there before they were
known on the mainland.
Everything now begins to change its aspect. Men, who have up to now
been roving in the woods, by taking to a more settled manner of life, come
gradually together, form separate bodies, and at length in every country
arises a distinct nation, united in character and manners, not by regulations
or laws, but by uniformity of life and food, and the common influence of
climate. Permanent neighbourhood could not fail to produce, in time, some
connection between different families. Among young people of opposite
sexes, living in neighbouring huts, the transient commerce required by
nature soon led, through mutual intercourse, to another kind not less
agreeable, and more permanent. Men began now to take the difference
between objects into account, and to make comparisons; they acquired
imperceptibly the ideas of beauty and merit, which soon gave rise to
feelings of preference. In consequence of seeing each other often, they
could not do without seeing each other constantly. A tender and pleasant
feeling insinuated itself into their souls, and the least opposition turned it
into an impetuous fury: with love arose jealousy; discord triumphed, and
human blood was sacrificed to the gentlest of all passions.
As ideas and feelings succeeded one another, and heart and head were
brought into play, men continued to lay aside their original wildness; their
private connections became every day more intimate as their limits
extended. They accustomed themselves to assemble before their huts round
a large tree; singing and dancing, the true offspring of love and leisure,
became the amusement, or rather the occupation, of men and women thus
assembled together with nothing else to do. Each one began to consider the
rest, and to wish to be considered in turn; and thus a—value came to be
attached to public esteem. Whoever sang or danced best, whoever was the
handsomest, the strongest, the most dexterous, or the most eloquent, came
to be of most consideration; and this was the first step towards inequality,
and at the same time towards vice. From these first distinctions arose on the
one side vanity and contempt and on the other shame and envy: and the
fermentation caused by these new leavens ended by producing
combinations fatal to innocence and happiness.
As soon as men began to value one another, and the idea of
consideration had got a footing in the mind, every one put in his claim to it,
and it became impossible to refuse it to any with impunity. Hence arose the
first obligations of civility even among savages; and every intended injury
became an affront; because, besides the hurt which might result from it, the
party injured was certain to find in it a contempt for his person, which was
often more insupportable than the hurt itself.
Thus, as every man punished the contempt shown him by others, in
proportion to his opinion of himself, revenge became terrible, and men
bloody and cruel. This is precisely the state reached by most of the savage
nations known to us: and it is for want of having made a proper distinction
in our ideas, and seen how very far they already are from the state of nature,
that so many writers have hastily concluded that man is naturally cruel, and
requires civil institutions to make him more mild; whereas nothing is more
gentle than man in his primitive state, as he is placed by nature at an equal
distance from the stupidity of brutes, and the fatal ingenuity of civilised
man. Equally confined by instinct and reason to the sole care of guarding
himself against the mischiefs which threaten him, he is restrained by natural
compassion from doing any injury to others, and is not led to do such a
thing even in return for injuries received. For, according to the axiom of the
wise Locke, There can be no injury, where there is no property.
But it must be remarked that the society thus formed, and the relations
thus established among men, required of them qualities different from those
which they possessed from their primitive constitution. Morality began to
appear in human actions, and every one, before the institution of law, was
the only judge and avenger of the injuries done him, so that the goodness
which was suitable in the pure state of nature was no longer proper in the
new-born state of society. Punishments had to be made more severe, as
opportunities of offending became more frequent, and the dread of
vengeance had to take the place of the rigour of the law. Thus, though men
had become less patient, and their natural compassion had already suffered
some diminution, this period of expansion of the human faculties, keeping a
just mean between the indolence of the primitive state and the petulant
activity of our egoism, must have been the happiest and most stable of
epochs. The more we reflect on it, the more we shall find that this state was
the least subject to revolutions, and altogether the very best man could
experience; so that he can have departed from it only through some fatal
accident, which, for the public good, should never have happened. The
example of savages, most of whom have been found in this state, seems to
prove that men were meant to remain in it, that it is the real youth of the
world, and that all subsequent advances have been apparently so many steps
towards the perfection of the individual, but in reality towards the
decrepitude of the species.
So long as men remained content with their rustic huts, so long as they
were satisfied with clothes made of the skins of animals and sewn together
with thorns and fish-bones, adorned themselves only with feathers and
shells, and continued to paint their bodies different colours, to improve and
beautify their bows and arrows and to make with sharp-edged stones fishing
boats or clumsy musical instruments; in a word, so long as they undertook
only what a single person could accomplish, and confined themselves to
such arts as did not require the joint labour of several hands, they lived free,
healthy, honest and happy lives, so long as their nature allowed, and as they
continued to enjoy the pleasures of mutual and independent intercourse. But
from the moment one man began to stand in need of the help of another;
from the moment it appeared advantageous to any one man to have enough
provisions for two, equality disappeared, property was introduced, work
became indispensable, and vast forests became smiling fields, which man
had to water with the sweat of his brow, and where slavery and misery were
soon seen to germinate and grow up with the crops.
Metallurgy and agriculture were the two arts which produced this great
revolution. The poets tell us it was gold and silver, but, for the philosophers,
it was iron and corn, which first civilised men, and ruined humanity. Thus
both were unknown to the savages of America, who for that reason are still
savage; the other nations also seem to have continued in a state of
barbarism while they practised only one of these arts. One of the best
reasons, perhaps, why Europe has been, if not longer, at least more
constantly and highly civilised than the rest of the world, is that it is at once
the most abundant in iron and the most fertile in corn.
It is difficult to conjecture how men first came to know and use iron; for
it is impossible to suppose they would of themselves think of digging the
ore out of the mine, and preparing it for smelting, before they knew what
would be the result. On the other hand, we have the less reason to suppose
this discovery the effect of any accidental fire, as mines are only formed in
barren places, bare of trees and plants; so that it looks as if nature had taken
pains to keep the fatal secret from us. There remains, therefore, only the
extraordinary accident of some volcano which, by ejecting metallic
substances already in fusion, suggested to the spectators the idea of
imitating the natural operation. And we must further conceive them as
possessed of uncommon courage and foresight, to undertake so laborious a
work, with so distant a prospect of drawing advantage from it; yet these
qualities are united only in minds more advanced than we can suppose
those of these first discoverers to have been.
With regard to agriculture, the principles of it were known long before
they were put in practice; and it is indeed hardly possible that men,
constantly employed in drawing their subsistence from plants and trees,
should not readily acquire a knowledge of the means made use of by nature
for the propagation of vegetables. It was in all probability very fang,
however, before their industry took that turn, either because trees, which
together with hunting and fishing afforded them food, did not require their
attention; or because they were ignorant of the use of corn, or without
instruments to cultivate it; or because they lacked foresight to future needs;
or lastly, because they were without means of preventing others from
robbing them of the fruit of their labour.
When they grew more industrious, it is natural to believe that they
began, with the help of sharp stones and pointed sticks, to cultivate a few
vegetables or roots around their huts; though it was long before they knew
how to prepare corn, or were provided with the implements necessary for
raising it in any large quantity; not to mention how essential it is, for
husbandry, to consent to immediate loss, in order to reap a future gain—a
precaution very foreign to the turn of a savage's mind; for, as I have said, he
hardly foresees in the morning what he will need at night.
The invention of the other arts must therefore have been necessary to
compel mankind to apply themselves to agriculture. No sooner were
artificers wanted to smelt and forge iron, than others were required to
maintain them; the more hands that were employed in manufactures, the
fewer were left to provide for the common subsistence, though the number
of mouths to be furnished with food remained the same: and as some
required commodities in exchange for their iron, the rest at length
discovered the method of making iron serve for the multiplication of
commodities. By this means the arts of husbandry and agriculture were
established on the one hand, and the art of working metals and multiplying
their uses on the other.
The cultivation of the earth necessarily brought about its distribution;
and property, once recognised, gave rise to the first rules of justice; for, to
secure each man his own, it had to be possible for each to have something.
Besides, as men began to look forward to the future, and all had something
to lose, every one had reason to apprehend that reprisals would follow any
injury he might do to another. This origin is so much the more natural, as it
is impossible to conceive how property can come from anything but manual
labour: for what else can a man add to things which he does not originally
create, so as to make them his own property? It is the husbandman's labour
alone that, giving him a title to the produce of the ground he has tilled,
gives him a claim also to the land itself, at least till harvest; and so, from
year to year, a constant possession which is easily transformed into
property. When the ancients, says Grotius, gave to Ceres the title of
Legislatrix, and to a festival celebrated in her honour the name of
Thesmophoria, they meant by that that the distribution of lands had
produced a new kind of right: that is to say, the right of property, which is
different from the right deducible from the law of nature.
In this state of affairs, equality might have been sustained, had the
talents of individuals been equal, and had, for example, the use of iron and
the consumption of commodities always exactly balanced each other; but,
as there was nothing to preserve this balance, it was soon disturbed; the
strongest did most work; the most skilful turned his labour to best account;
the most ingenious devised methods of diminishing his labour: the
husbandman wanted more iron, or the smith more corn, and, while both
laboured equally, the one gained a great deal by his work, while the other
could hardly support himself. Thus natural inequality unfolds itself
insensibly with that of combination, and the difference between men,
developed by their different circumstances, becomes more sensible and
permanent in its effects, and begins to have an influence, in the same
proportion, over the lot of individuals.
Matters once at this pitch, it is easy to imagine the rest. I shall not detain
the reader with a description of the successive invention of other arts, the
development of language, the trial and utilisation of talents, the inequality
of fortunes, the use and abuse of riches, and all the details connected with
them which the reader can easily supply for himself. I shall confine myself
to a glance at mankind in this new situation.
Behold then all human faculties developed, memory and imagination in
full play, egoism interested, reason active, and the mind almost at the
highest point of its perfection. Behold all the natural qualities in action, the
rank and condition of every man assigned him; not merely his share of
property and his power to serve or injure others, but also his wit, beauty,
strength or skill, merit or talents: and these being the only qualities capable
of commanding respect, it soon became necessary to possess or to affect
them.
It now became the interest of men to appear what they really were not.
To be and to seem became two totally different things; and from this
distinction sprang insolent pomp and cheating trickery, with all the
numerous vices that go in their train. On the other hand, free and
independent as men were before, they were now, in consequence of a
multiplicity of new wants, brought into subjection, as it were, to all nature,
and particularly to one another; and each became in some degree a slave
even in becoming the master of other men: if rich, they stood in need of the
services of others; if poor, of their assistance; and even a middle condition
did not enable them to do without one another. Man must now, therefore,
have been perpetually employed in getting others to interest themselves in
his lot, and in making them, apparently at least, if not really, find their
advantage in promoting his own. Thus he must have been sly and artful in
his behaviour to some, and imperious and cruel to others; being under a
kind of necessity to ill-use all the persons of whom he stood in need, when
he could not frighten them into compliance, and did not judge it his interest
to be useful to them. Insatiable ambition, the thirst of raising their
respective fortunes, not so much from real want as from the desire to
surpass others, inspired all men with a vile propensity to injure one another,
and with a secret jealousy, which is the more dangerous, as it puts on the
mask of benevolence, to carry its point with greater security. In a word,
there arose rivalry and competition on the one hand, and conflicting
interests on the other, together with a secret desire on both of profiting at
the expense of others. All these evils were the first effects of property, and
the inseparable attendants of growing inequality.
Before the invention of signs to represent riches, wealth could hardly
consist in anything but lands and cattle, the only real possessions men can
have. But, when inheritances so increased in number and extent as to
occupy the whole of the land, and to border on one another, one man could
aggrandise himself only at the expense of another; at the same time the
supernumeraries, who had been too weak or too indolent to make such
acquisitions, and had grown poor without sustaining any loss, because,
while they saw everything change around them, they remained still the
same, were obliged to receive their subsistence, or steal it, from the rich;
and this soon bred, according to their different characters, dominion and
slavery, or violence and rapine. The wealthy, on their part, had no sooner
begun to taste the pleasure of command, than they disdained all others, and,
using their old slaves to acquire new, thought of nothing but subduing and
enslaving their neighbours; like ravenous wolves, which, having once tasted
human flesh, despise every other food and thenceforth seek only men to
devour.
Thus, as the most powerful or the most miserable considered their might
or misery as a kind of right to the possessions of others, equivalent, in their
opinion, to that of property, the destruction of equality was attended by the
most terrible disorders. Usurpations by the rich, robbery by the poor, and
the unbridled passions of both, suppressed the cries of natural compassion
and the still feeble voice of justice, and filled men with avarice, ambition
and vice. Between the title of the strongest and that of the first occupier,
there arose perpetual conflicts, which never ended but in battles and
bloodshed. The new-born state of society thus gave rise to a horrible state of
war; men thus harassed and depraved were no longer capable of retracing
their steps or renouncing the fatal acquisitions they had made, but,
labouring by the abuse of the faculties which do them honour, merely to
their own confusion, brought themselves to the brink of ruin.
Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque,
Effugere optat opes; et quæ modô voverat odit.5
It is impossible that men should not at length have reflected on so
wretched a situation, and on the calamities that overwhelmed them. The
rich, in particular, must have felt how much they suffered by a constant
state of war, of which they bore all the expense; and in which, though all
risked their lives, they alone risked their property. Besides, however
speciously they might disguise their usurpations, they knew that they were
founded on precarious and false titles; so that, if others took from them by
force what they themselves had gained by force, they would have no reason
to complain. Even those who had been enriched by their own industry,
could hardly base their proprietorship on better claims. It was in vain to
repeat, "I built this well; I gained this spot by my industry." Who gave you
your standing, it might be answered, and what right have you to demand
payment of us for doing what we never asked you to do? Do you not know
that numbers of your fellow-creatures are starving, for want of what you
have too much of? You ought to have had the express and universal consent
of mankind, before appropriating more of the common subsistence than you
needed for your own maintenance. Destitute of valid reasons to justify and
sufficient strength to defend himself, able to crush individuals with ease,
but easily crushed himself by a troop of bandits, one against all, and
incapable, on account of mutual jealousy, of joining with his equals against
numerous enemies united by the common hope of plunder, the rich man,
thus urged by necessity, conceived at length the profoundest plan that ever
entered the mind of man: this was to employ in his favour the forces of
those who attacked him, to make allies of his adversaries, to inspire them
with different maxims, and to give them other institutions as favourable to
himself as the law of nature was unfavourable.
With this view, after having represented to his neighbours the horror of
a situation which armed every man against the rest, and made their
possessions as burdensome to them as their wants, and in which no safety
could be expected either in riches or in poverty, he readily devised plausible
arguments to make them close with his design. "Let us join," said he, "to
guard the weak from oppression, to restrain the ambitious, and secure to
every man the possession of what belongs to him: let us institute rules of
justice and peace, to which all without exception may be obliged to
conform; rules that may in some measure make amends for the caprices of
fortune, by subjecting equally the powerful and the weak to the observance
of reciprocal obligations. Let us, in a word, instead of turning our forces
against ourselves, collect them in a supreme power which may govern us by
wise laws, protect and defend all the members of the association, repulse
their common enemies, and maintain eternal harmony among us."
Far fewer words to this purpose would have been enough to impose on
men so barbarous and easily seduced; especially as they had too many
disputes among themselves to do without arbitrators, and too much
ambition and avarice to go long without masters. All ran headlong to their
chains, in hopes of securing their liberty; for they had just wit enough to
perceive the advantages of political institutions, without experience enough
to enable them to foresee the dangers. The most capable of fore-seeing the
dangers were the very persons who expected to benefit by them; and even
the most prudent judged it not inexpedient to sacrifice one part of their
freedom to ensure the rest; as a wounded man has his arm cut off to save the
rest of his body.
Such was, or may well have been, the origin of society and law, which
bound new fetters on the poor, and gave new powers to the rich; which
irretrievably destroyed natural liberty, eternally fixed the law of property
and inequality, converted clever usurpation into unalterable right, and, for
the advantage of a few ambitious individuals, subjected all mankind to
perpetual labour, slavery and wretchedness. It is easy to see how the
establishment of one community made that of all the rest necessary, and
how, in order to make head against united forces, the rest of mankind had to
unite in turn. Societies soon multiplied and spread over the face of the earth,
till hardly a corner of the world was left in which a man could escape the
yoke, and withdraw his head from beneath the sword which he saw
perpetually hanging over him by a thread. Civil right having thus become
the common rule among the members of each community, the law of nature
maintained its place only between different communities, where, under the
name of the right of nations, it was qualified by certain tacit conventions, in
order to make commerce practicable, and serve as a substitute for natural
compassion, which lost, when applied to societies, almost all the influence
it had over individuals, and survived no longer except in some great
cosmopolitan spirits, who, breaking down the imaginary barriers that
separate different peoples, follow the example of our Sovereign Creator,
and include the whole human race in their benevolence.
But bodies politic, remaining thus in a state of nature among
themselves, presently experienced the inconveniences which had obliged
individuals to forsake it; for this state became still more fatal to these great
bodies than it had been to the individuals of whom they were composed.
Hence arose national wars, battles, murders, and reprisals, which shock
nature and outrage reason; together with all those horrible prejudices which
class among the virtues the honour of shedding human blood. The most
distinguished men hence learned to consider cutting each other's throats a
duty; at length men massacred their fellow-creatures by thousands without
so much as knowing why, and committed more murders in a single day's
fighting, and more violent outrages in the sack of a single town, than were
committed in the state of nature during whole ages over the whole earth.
Such were the first effects which we can see to have followed the division
of mankind into different communities. But let us return to their institutions.
I know that some writers have given other explanations of the origin of
political societies, such as the conquest of the powerful, or the association
of the weak. It is, indeed, indifferent to my argument which of these causes
we choose. That which I have just laid down, however, appears to me the
most natural for the following reasons. First: because, in the first case, the
right of conquest, being no right, in itself, could not serve as a foundation
on which to build any other; the victor and the vanquished people still
remained with respect to each other in the state of war, unless the
vanquished, restored to the full possession of their liberty, voluntarily made
choice of the victor for their chief. For till then, whatever capitulation may
have been made being founded on violence, and therefore ipso facto void,
there could not have been on this hypothesis either a real society or body
politic, or any law other than that of the strongest. Secondly: because the
words strong and weak are, in the second case, ambiguous; for during the
interval between the establishment of a right of property, or prior
occupancy, and that of political government, the meaning of these words is
better expressed by the terms rich and poor: because, in fact, before the
institution of laws, men had no other way of reducing their equals to
submission, than by attacking their goods, or making some of their own
over to them. Thirdly: because, as the poor had nothing but their freedom to
lose, it would have been in the highest degree absurd for them to resign
voluntarily the only good they still enjoyed, without getting anything in
exchange: whereas the rich having feelings, if I may so express myself, in
every part of their possessions, it was much easier to harm them, and
therefore more necessary for them to take precautions against it; and, in
short, because it is more reasonable to suppose a thing to have been
invented by those to whom it would be of service, than by those whom it
must have harmed.
Government had, in its infancy, no regular and constant form. The want
of experience and philosophy prevented men from seeing any but present
inconveniences, and they thought of providing against others only as they
presented themselves. In spite of the endeavours of the wisest legislators,
the political state remained imperfect, because it was little more than the
work of chance; and, as it had begun ill, though time revealed its defects
and suggested remedies, the original faults were never repaired. It was
continually being patched up, when the first task should have been to get
the site cleared and all the old materials removed, as was done by Lycurgus
at Sparta, if a stable and lasting edifice was to be erected. Society consisted
at first merely of a few general conventions, which every member bound
himself to observe; and for the performance of covenants the whole body
went security to each individual. Experience only could show the weakness
of such a constitution, and how easily it might be infringed with impunity,
from the difficulty of convicting men of faults, where the public alone was
to be witness and judge: the laws could not but be eluded in many ways;
disorders and inconveniences could not but multiply continually, till it
became necessary to commit the dangerous trust of public authority to
private persons, and the care of enforcing obedience to the deliberations of
the people to the magistrate. For to say that chiefs were chosen before the
confederacy was formed, and that the administrators of the laws were there
before the laws themselves, is too absurd a supposition to consider
seriously.
It would be as unreasonable to suppose that men at first threw
themselves irretrievably and unconditionally into the arms of an absolute
master, and that the first expedient which proud and unsubdued men hit
upon for their common security was to run headlong into slavery. For what
reason, in fact, did they take to themselves superiors, if it was not in order
that they might be defended from oppression, and have protection for their
lives, liberties and properties, which are, so to speak, the constituent
elements of their being? Now, in the relations between man and man, the
worst that can happen is for one to find himself at the mercy of another, and
it would have been inconsistent with common-sense to begin by bestowing
on a chief the only things they wanted his help to preserve. What equivalent
could he offer them for so great a right? And if he had presumed to exact it
under pretext of defending them, would he not have received the answer
recorded in the fable: "What more can the enemy do to us?" It is therefore
beyond dispute, and indeed the fundamental maxim of all political right,
that people have set up chiefs to protect their liberty, and not to enslave
them. If we have a prince, said Pliny to Trajan, it is to save ourselves from
having a master.
Politicians indulge in the same sophistry about the love of liberty as
philosophers about the state of nature. They judge, by what they see, of very
different things, which they have not seen; and attribute to man a natural
propensity to servitude, because the slaves within their observation are seen
to bear the yoke with patience; they fail to reflect that it is with liberty as
with innocence and virtue; the value is known only to those who possess
them, and the taste for them is forfeited when they are forfeited themselves.
"I know the charms of your country," said Brasidas to a Satrap, who was
comparing the life at Sparta with that at Persepolis, "but you cannot know
the pleasures of mine."
An unbroken horse erects his mane, paws the ground and starts back
impetuously at the sight of the bridle; while one which is properly trained
suffers patiently even whip and spur: so savage man will not bend his neck
to the yoke to which civilised man submits without a murmur, but prefers
the most turbulent state of liberty to the most peaceful slavery. We cannot
therefore, from the servility of nations already enslaved, judge of the natural
disposition of mankind for or against slavery; we should go by the
prodigious efforts of every free people to save itself from oppression. I
know that the former are for ever holding forth in praise of the tranquillity
they enjoy in their chains, and that they call a state of wretched servitude a
state of peace: miserrimam servitutem pacem appellant.6 But when I
observe the latter sacrificing pleasure, peace, wealth, power and life itself to
the preservation of that one treasure, which is so disdained by those who
have lost it; when I see free-born animals dash their brains out against the
bars of their cage, from an innate impatience of captivity; when I behold
numbers of naked savages, that despise European pleasures, braving
hunger, fire, the sword and death, to preserve nothing but their
independence, I feel that it is not for slaves to argue about liberty.
With regard to paternal authority, from which some writers have derived
absolute government and all society, it is enough, without going back to the
contrary arguments of Locke and Sidney, to remark that nothing on earth
can be further from the ferocious spirit of despotism than the mildness of
that authority which looks more to the advantage of him who obeys than to
that of him who commands; that, by the law of nature, the father is the
child's master no longer than his help is necessary; that from that time they
are both equal, the son being perfectly independent of the father, and owing
him only respect and not obedience. For gratitude is a duty which ought to
be paid, but not a right to be exacted: instead of saying that civil society is
derived from paternal authority, we ought to say rather that the latter derives
its principal force from the former. No individual was ever acknowledged
as the father of many, till his sons and daughters remained settled around
him. The goods of the father, of which he is really the master, are the ties
which keep his children in dependence, and he may bestow on them, if he
pleases, no share of his property, unless they merit it by constant deference
to his will. But the subjects of an arbitrary despot are so far from having the
like favour to expect from their chief, that they themselves and everything
they possess are his property, or at least are considered by him as such; so
that they are forced to receive, as a favour, the little of their own he is
pleased to leave them. When he despoils them, he does but justice, and
mercy in that he permits them to live.
By proceeding thus to test fact by right, we should discover as little
reason as truth in the voluntary establishment of tyranny. It would also be
no easy matter to prove the validity of a contract binding on only one of the
parties, where all the risk is on one side, and none on the other; so that no
one could suffer but he who bound himself. This hateful system is indeed,
even in modern times, very far from being that of wise and good monarchs,
and especially of the kings of France; as may be seen from several passages
in their edicts; particularly from the following passage in a celebrated edict
published in 1667 in the name and by order of Louis XIV.
"Let it not, therefore, be said that the Sovereign is not subject to the
laws of his State; since the contrary is a true proposition of the right of
nations, which flattery has sometimes attacked but good princes have
always defended as the tutelary divinity of their dominions. How much
more legitimate is it to say with the wise Plato, that the perfect felicity of a
kingdom consists in the obedience of subjects to their prince, and of the
prince to the laws, and in the laws being just and constantly directed to the
public good!"7
I shall not stay here to inquire whether, as liberty is the noblest faculty
of man, it is not degrading our very nature, reducing ourselves to the level
of the brutes, which are mere slaves of instinct, and even an affront to the
Author of our being, to renounce without reserve the most precious of all
His gifts, and to bow to the necessity of committing all the crimes He has
forbidden, merely to gratify a mad or a cruel master; or if this sublime
craftsman ought not to be less angered at seeing His workmanship entirely
destroyed than thus dishonoured. I will waive (if my opponents please) the
authority of Barbeyrac, who, following Locke, roundly declares that no man
can so far sell his liberty as to submit to an arbitrary power which may use
him as it likes. For, he adds, this would be to sell his own life, of which he is
not master. I shall ask only what right those who were not afraid thus to
debase themselves could have to subject their posterity to the same
ignominy, and to renounce for them those blessings which they do not owe
to the liberality of their progenitors, and without which life itself must be a
burden to all who are worthy of it.
Puffendorf says that we may divest ourselves of our liberty in favour of
other men, just as we transfer our property from one to another by contracts
and agreements. But this seems a very weak argument. For in the first place,
the property I alienate becomes quite foreign to me, nor can I suffer from
the abuse of it; but it very nearly concerns me that my liberty should not be
abused, and I cannot without incurring the guilt of the crimes I may be
compelled to commit, expose myself to become an instrument of crime.
Besides, the right of property being only a convention of human institution,
men may dispose of what they possess as they please: but this is not the
case with the essential gifts of nature, such as life and liberty, which every
man is permitted to enjoy, and of which it is at least doubtful whether any
have a right to divest themselves. By giving up the one, we degrade our
being; by giving up the other, we do our best to annul it; and, as no
temporal good can indemnify us for the loss of either, it would be an
offence against both reason and nature to renounce them at any price
whatsoever. But, even if we could transfer our liberty, as we do our
property, there would be a great difference with regard to the children, who
enjoy the father's substance only by the transmission of his right; whereas,
liberty being a gift which they hold from nature as being men, their parents
have no right whatever to deprive them of it. As then, to establish slavery, it
was necessary to do violence to nature, so, in order to perpetuate such a
right, nature would have to be changed. Jurists, who have gravely
determined that the child of a slave comes into the world a slave, have
decided, in other words, that a man shall come into the world not a man.
I regard it then as certain, that government did not begin with arbitrary
power, but that this is the depravation, the extreme term, of government,
and brings it back, finally, to just the law of the strongest, which it was
originally designed to remedy. Supposing, however, it had begun in this
manner, such power, being in itself illegitimate, could not have served as a
basis for the laws of society, nor, consequently, for the inequality they
instituted.
Without entering at present upon the investigations which still remain to
be made into the nature of the fundamental compact underlying all
government, I content myself with adopting the common opinion
concerning it, and regard the establishment of the political body as a real
contract between the people and the chiefs chosen by them: a contract by
which both parties bind themselves to observe the laws therein expressed,
which form the ties of their union. The people having in respect of their
social relations concentrated all their wills in one, the several articles,
concerning which this will is explained, become so many fundamental laws,
obligatory on all the members of the State without exception, and one of
these articles regulates the choice and power of the magistrates appointed to
watch over the execution of the rest. This power extends to everything
which may maintain the constitution, without going so far as to alter it. It is
accompanied by honours, in order to bring the laws and their administrators
into respect. The ministers are also distinguished by personal prerogatives,
in order to recompense them for the cares and labour which good
administration involves. The magistrate, on his side, binds himself to use
the power he is entrusted with only in conformity with the intention of his
constituents, to maintain them all in the peaceable possession of what
belongs to them, and to prefer on every occasion the public interest to his
own.
Before experience had shown, or knowledge of the human heart enabled
men to foresee, the unavoidable abuses of such a constitution, it must have
appeared so much the more excellent, as those who were charged with the
care of its preservation had themselves most interest in it; for magistracy
and the rights attaching to it being based solely on the fundamental laws,
the magistrates would cease to be legitimate as soon as these ceased to
exist; the people would no longer owe them obedience; and as not the
magistrates, but the laws, are essential to the being of a State, the members
of it would regain the right to their natural liberty.
If we reflect with ever so little attention on this subject, we shall find
new arguments to confirm this truth, and be convinced from the very nature
of the contract that it cannot be irrevocable: for, if there were no superior
power capable of ensuring the fidelity of the contracting parties, or
compelling them to perform their reciprocal engagements, the parties would
be sole judges in their own cause, and each would always have a right to
renounce the contract, as soon as he found that the other had violated its
terms, or that they no longer suited his convenience. It is upon this principle
that the right of abdication may possibly be founded. Now, if, as here, we
consider only what is human in this institution, it is certain that, if the
magistrate, who has all the power in his own hands, and appropriates to
himself all the advantages of the contract, has none the less a right to
renounce his authority, the people, who suffer for all the faults of their
chief, must have a much better right to renounce their dependence. But the
terrible and innumerable quarrels and disorders that would necessarily arise
from so dangerous a privilege, show, more than anything else, how much
human governments stood in need of a more solid basis than mere reason,
and how expedient it was for the public tranquillity that the divine will
should interpose to invest the sovereign authority with a sacred and
inviolable character, which might deprive subjects of the fatal right of
disposing of it. If the world had received no other advantages from religion,
this would be enough to impose on men the duty of adopting and cultivating
it, abuses and all, since it has been the means of saving more blood than
fanaticism has ever spilt. But let us follow the thread of our hypothesis.
The different forms of government owe their origin to the differing
degrees of inequality which existed between individuals at the time of their
institution. If there happened to be any one man among them pre-eminent in
power, virtue, riches or personal influence, he became sole magistrate, and
the State assumed the form of monarchy. If several, nearly equal in point of
eminence, stood above the rest, they were elected jointly, and formed an
aristocracy. Again, among a people who had deviated less from a state of
nature, and between whose fortune or talents there was less disproportion,
the supreme administration was retained in common, and a democracy was
formed. It was discovered in process of time which of these forms suited
men the best. Some peoples remained altogether subject to the laws; others
soon came to obey their magistrates. The citizens laboured to preserve their
liberty; the subjects, irritated at seeing others enjoying a blessing they had
lost, thought only of making slaves of their neighbours. In a word, on the
one side arose riches and conquests, and on the other happiness and I virtue.
In these different governments, all the offices were at first elective; and
when the influence of wealth was out of the question, the preference was
given to merit, which gives a natural ascendancy, and to age, which is
experienced in business and deliberate in council. The Elders of the
Hebrews, the Gerontes at Sparta, the Senate at Rome, and the very
etymology of our word Seigneur, show how old age was once held in
veneration. But the more often the choice fell upon old men, the more often
elections had to be repeated, and the more they became a nuisance;
intrigues set in, factions were formed, party feeling grew—bitter, civil wars
broke out; the lives of individuals were sacrificed to the pretended
happiness of the State; and at length men were on the point of relapsing into
their primitive anarchy. Ambitious chiefs profited by these circumstances to
perpetuate their offices in their own families: at the same time the people,
already used to dependence, ease, and the conveniences of life, and already
incapable of breaking its fetters, agreed to an increase of its slavery, in order
to secure its tranquillity. Thus magistrates, having become hereditary,
contracted the habit of considering their offices as a family estate, and
themselves as proprietors of the communities of which they were at first
only the officers, of regarding their fellow-citizens as their slaves, and
numbering them, like cattle, among their belongings, and of calling
themselves the equals of the gods and longs of kings.
If we follow the progress of inequality in these various revolutions, we
shall find that the establishment of laws and of the right of property was its
first term, the institution of magistracy the second, and the conversion of
legitimate into arbitrary power the third and last; so that the condition of
rich and poor was authorised by the first period; that of powerful and weak
by the second; and only by the third that of master and slave, which is the
last degree of inequality, and the term at which all the rest remain, when
they have got so far, till the government is either entirely dissolved by new
revolutions, or brought back again to legitimacy.
To understand this progress as necessary we must consider not so much
the motives for the establishment of the body politic, as the forms it
assumes in actuality, and the faults that necessarily attend it: for the flaws
which make social institutions necessary are the same as make the abuse of
them unavoidable. If we except Sparta, where the laws were mainly
concerned with the education of children, and where Lycurgus established
such morality as practically made laws needless—for laws as a rule, being
weaker than the passions, restrain men without altering them—it would not
be difficult to prove that every government, which scrupulously complied
with the ends for which it was instituted, and guarded carefully against
change and corruption, was set up unnecessarily. For a country, in which no
one either evaded the laws or made a bad use of magisterial power, could
require neither laws nor magistrates.
Political distinctions necessarily produce civil distinctions. The growing
equality between the chiefs and the people is soon felt by individuals, and
modified in a thousand ways according to passions, talents and
circumstances. The magistrate could not usurp any illegitimate power,
without giving distinction to the creatures with whom he must share it.
Besides, individuals only allow themselves to be oppressed so far as they
are hurried on by blind ambition, and, looking rather below than above
them, come to love authority more than independence, and submit to
slavery, that they may in turn enslave others. It is no easy matter to reduce
to obedience a man who has no ambition to command; nor would the most
adroit politician find it possible to enslave a people whose only desire was
to be independent. But inequality easily makes its way among cowardly and
ambitious minds, which are ever ready to run the risks of fortune, and
almost indifferent whether they command or obey, as it is favourable or
adverse. Thus, there must have been; a time, when the eyes of the people
were so fascinated, that their rulers had only to say to the least of men, "Be
great, you and all your posterity," to make him immediately appear great in
the eyes of every one as well as in his own. His descendants took still more
upon them, in proportion to their distance from him; the more obscure; and
uncertain the cause, the greater the effect: the greater—the number of idlers
one could count in a family, the more illustrious it was held to be.
If this were the place to go into details, I could readily explain how,
even without the intervention of government, inequality of credit and
authority became unavoidable among private persons, as soon as their union
in a single society made them compare themselves one with another, and
take into account the differences which they found out from the continual
intercourse every man had to have with his neighbours.8 These differences
are of several kinds; but riches, nobility or rank, power and personal merit
being the principal distinctions by which men form an estimate "of each
other in society, I could prove that the harmony or conflict of these different
forces is the surest indication of the good or bad constitution of a State. I
could show that among these four kinds of inequality, personal qualities
being the origin of all the others, wealth is the one to which they are all
reduced in the end; for, as riches tend most immediately to the prosperity of
individuals, and are easiest to communicate, they are used to purchase every
other distinction. By this observation we are enabled to judge pretty exactly
how far a people has departed from its primitive constitution, and of its
progress towards the extreme term of corruption. I could explain how much
this universal desire for reputation, honours and advancement, which
inflames us all, exercises and holds up to comparison our faculties and
powers; how it excites and multiplies our passions, and, by creating
universal competition and rivalry, or rather enmity, among men, occasions
numberless failures, successes and disturbances of all kinds by making so
many aspirants run the same course. I could show that it is to this desire of
being talked about, and this unremitting rage of distinguishing ourselves,
that we owe the best and the worst things we possess, both our virtues and
our vices, our science and our errors, our conquerors and our philosophers;
that is to say, a great many bad things, and a very few good ones. In a word,
I could prove that, if we have a few rich and powerful men on the pinnacle
of fortune and grandeur, while the crowd grovels in want and obscurity, it is
because the former prize what they enjoy only in so far as others are
destitute of it; and because, without changing their condition, they would
cease to be happy the moment the people ceased to be wretched.
These details alone, however, would furnish matter for a considerable
work, in which the advantages and disadvantages of every kind of
government might be weighed, as they are related to man in the state of
nature, and at the same time all the different aspects, under which inequality
has up to the present appeared, or may appear in ages yet to come,
according to the nature of the several governments, and the alterations
which time must unavoidably occasion in them, might be demonstrated. We
should then see the multitude oppressed from within, in consequence of the
very precautions it had taken to guard against foreign tyranny. We should
see oppression continually gain ground without it being possible for the
oppressed to know where it would stop, or what legitimate means was left
them of checking its progress. We should see the rights of citizens, and the
freedom of nations slowly extinguished, and the complaints, protests and
appeals of the weak treated as seditious murmurings. We should see the
honour of defending the common cause confined by statecraft to a
mercenary part of the people. We should see taxes made necessary by such
means, and the disheartened husbandman deserting his fields even in the
midst of peace, and leaving the plough to gird on the sword. We should see
fatal and capricious codes of honour established; and the champions of their
country sooner or later becoming its enemies, and for ever holding their
daggers to the breasts of their fellow-citizens. The time would come when
they would be heard saying to the oppressor of their country—
Pectore si fratris gladium juguloque parentis
Condere me jubeas, gravidæque in viscera partu
Conjugis, invitâ peragam tamen omnia dextrâ.
Lucan. i, 376.
From great inequality of fortunes and conditions, from the vast variety
of passions and of talents, of useless and pernicious arts, of vain sciences,
would arise a multitude of prejudices equally contrary to reason, happiness
and virtue. We should see the magistrates fomenting everything that might
weaken men united in society, by promoting dissension among them;
everything that might sow in it the seeds of actual division, while it gave
society the air of harmony; everything that might inspire the different ranks
of people with mutual hatred and distrust, by setting the rights and interests
of one against those of another, and so strengthen the power which
comprehended them all.
It is from the midst of this disorder and these revolutions, that
despotism, gradually raising up its hideous head and devouring everything
that remained sound and untainted in any part of the State, would at length
trample on both the laws and the people, and establish itself on the ruins of
the republic. The times which immediately preceded this last change would
be times of trouble and calamity; but at length the monster would swallow
up everything, and the people would no longer have either chiefs or laws,
but only tyrants. From this moment there would be no question of virtue or
morality; for despotism cui ex honesto nulla est spes, wherever it prevails,
admits no other master; it no sooner speaks than probity and duty lose their
weight and blind obedience is the only virtue which slaves can still practise.
This is the last term of inequality, the extreme points that closes the
circle, and meets that from which we set out. Here all private persons return
to their first equality, because they are nothing; and, subjects having no law
but the will of their master, and their master no restraint but his passions, all
notions of good and all principles of equity again vanish. There is here a
complete return to the law of the strongest, and so to a new state of nature,
differing from that we set out from; for the one was a state of nature in its
first purity, while this is the consequence of excessive corruption. There is
so little difference between the two states in other respects, and the contract
of government is so completely dissolved by despotism, that the despot is
master only so long as he remains the strongest; as soon as he can be
expelled, he has no right to complain of violence. The popular insurrection
that ends in the death or deposition of a Sultan is as lawful an act as those
by which he disposed, the day before, of the lives and fortunes of his
subjects. As he was maintained by force alone, it is force alone that
overthrows him. Thus everything takes place according to the natural order;
and, whatever may be the result of such frequent and precipitate
revolutions, no one man has reason to complain of the injustice of another,
but only of his own ill-fortune or indiscretion.
If the reader thus discovers and retraces the lost and forgotten road, by
which man must have passed from the state of nature to the state of society;
if he carefully restores, along with the intermediate situations which I have
just described, those which want of time has compelled me to suppress, or
my imagination has failed to suggest, he cannot fail to be struck by the vast
distance which separates the two states. It is in tracing this slow succession
that he will find the solution of a number of problems of politics and
morals, which philosophers cannot settle. He will feel that, men being
different in different ages, the reason why Diogenes could not find a man
was that he sought among his contemporaries a man of an earlier period. He
will see that Cato died with Rome and liberty, because he did not fit the age
in which he lived; the greatest of men served only to astonish a world which
he would certainly have ruled, had he lived five hundred years sooner. In a
word, he will explain how the soul and the passions of men insensibly
change their very nature; why our wants and pleasures in the end seek new
objects; and why, the original man having vanished by degrees, society
offers to us only an assembly of artificial men and factitious passions,
which are the work of all these new relations, and without any real
foundation in nature. We are taught nothing on this subject, by reflection,
that is not entirely confirmed by observation. The savage and the civilised
man differ so much in the bottom of their hearts and in their inclinations,
that what constitutes the supreme happiness of one would reduce the other
to despair. The former breathes only peace and liberty; he desires only to
live and be free from labour; even the ataraxia of the Stoic falls far short of
his profound indifference to every other object. Civilised man, on the other
hand, is always moving, sweating, toiling and racking his brains to find still
more laborious occupations: he goes on in drudgery to his last moment, and
even seeks death to put himself in a position to live, or renounces life to
acquire immortality. He pays his court to men in power, whom he hates, and
to the wealthy, whom he despises; he stops at nothing to have the honour of
serving them; he is not ashamed to value himself on his own meanness and
their protection; and, proud of his slavery, he speaks with disdain of those,
who have not the honour of sharing it. What a sight would the perplexing
and envied labours of a European minister of State present to the eyes of a
Caribean! How many cruel deaths would not this indolent savage prefer to
the horrors of such a life, which is seldom even sweetened by the pleasure
of doing good! But, for him to see into the motives of all this solicitude, the
words power and reputation, would have to bear some meaning in his mind;
he would have to know that there are men who set a value on the opinion of
the rest of the world; who can be made happy and satisfied with themselves
rather on the testimony of other people than on their own. In reality, the
source, of all these differences is, that the savage lives within himself, while
social man lives constantly outside himself, and only knows how to live in
the opinion of others, so that he seems to receive the consciousness of his
own existence merely from the judgment of others concerning him. It is not
to my present purpose to insist on the indifference to good and evil which
arises from this disposition, in spite of our many fine works on morality, or
to show how, everything being reduced to appearances, there is but art and
mummery in even honour, friendship, virtue, and often vice itself, of which
we at length learn the secret of boasting; to show, in short, how, always
asking others what, we are, and never daring to ask ourselves, in the midst
of so much philosophy, humanity and civilisation, and of such sublime
codes of morality, we have nothing to show for ourselves but a frivolous
and deceitful appearance, honour without virtue, reason without wisdom,
and pleasure without happiness. It is sufficient that I have proved that this is
not by any means the original state of man, but that it is merely the spirit of
society, and the inequality which society produces, that thus transform and
alter all our natural inclinations.
I have endeavoured to trace the origin and progress of inequality, and
the institution and abuse of political societies, as far as these are capable of
being deduced from the nature of man merely by the light of reason, and
independently of those sacred dogmas which give the sanction of divine
right to sovereign authority. It follows from this survey that, as there is
hardly any inequality in the state of nature, all the inequality which now
prevails owes its strength and growth to the development of our faculties
and the advance of the human mind, and becomes at last permanent and
legitimate by the establishment of property and laws. Secondly, it follows
that moral inequality authorised by positive right alone, clashes with natural
right, whenever it is not proportionate to physical inequality; a distinction
which sufficiently determines what we ought to think of that species of
inequality which prevails in all civilised countries; since it is plainly
contrary to the law of nature, however defined, that children should
command old men, fools wise men, and that the privileged few should
gorge themselves with superfluities, while the starving multitude are in
want of the bare necessities of life.
5. Ovid, Metamorphoses xi, 127.
Both rich and poor, shocked at their new-found ills,
Would fly from wealth, and lose what they had sought.
6. Tacitus, Hist. iv, 17. The most wretched slavery they call peace.
7. Of the Rights of the Most Christian Queen over various States of the Monarchy of Spain, 1667.
8. Distributive justice would oppose this rigorous equality of the state of nature, even were it
practicable in civil society; as all the members of the State owe it their services in proportion to
their talents and abilities, they ought, on their side, to be distinguished and favoured in
proportion to the services they have actually rendered. It is in this sense we must understand that
passage of Isocrates, in which he extols the primitive Athenians, for having determined which of
the two kinds of equality was the most useful, viz. that which consists in dividing the same
advantages indiscriminately among all the citizens, or that which consists in distributing them to
each according to his deserts. These able politicians, adds the orator, banishing that unjust
inequality which makes no distinction between good and bad men, adhered inviolably to that
which rewards and punishes every man according to his deserts.
But in the first place, there never existed a society, however corrupt some may have become,
where no difference was made between the good and the bad; and with regard to morality, where
no measures can be prescribed by law exact enough to serve as a practical rule for a magistrate,
it is with great prudence that, in order not to leave the fortune or quality of the citizens to his
discretion, it prohibits him from passing judgment on persons and confines his judgment to
actions. Only morals such as those of the ancient Romans can bear censors, and such a tribunal
among us would throw everything into confusion. The difference between good and bad men is
determined by public esteem; the magistrate being strictly a judge of right alone; whereas the
public is the truest judge of morals, and is of such integrity and penetration on this head, that
although it may be sometimes deceived, it can never be corrupted. The rank of citizens ought,
therefore, to be regulated, not according to their personal merit—for this would put it in the
power of the magistrate to apply the law almost arbitrarily—but according to the actual services
done to the State, which are capable of being more exactly estimated.
Appendix1
Table of Contents
A famous author, reckoning up the good and evil of human life, and
comparing the aggregates, finds that our pains greatly exceed our pleasures:
so that, all things considered, human life is not at all a valuable gift. This
conclusion does not surprise me; for the writer drew all his arguments from
man in civilisation. Had he gone back to the state of nature, his inquiries
would clearly have had a different result, and man would have been seen to
be subject to very few evils not of his own creation. It has indeed cost us
not a little trouble to make ourselves as wretched as we are. When we
consider, on the one hand, the immense labours of mankind, the many
sciences brought to perfection, the arts invented, the powers employed, the
deeps filled up, the mountains levelled, the rocks shattered, the rivers made
navigable, the tracts of land cleared, the lakes emptied, the marshes drained,
the enormous structures erected on land, and the teeming vessels that cover
the sea; and, on the other hand, estimate with ever so little thought, the real
advantages that have accrued from all these works to mankind, we cannot
help being amazed at the vast disproportion there is between these things,
and deploring the infatuation of man, which, to gratify his silly pride and
vain self-admiration, induces him eagerly to pursue all the miseries he is
capable of feeling, though beneficent nature had kindly placed them out of
his way.
That men are actually wicked, a sad and continual experience of them
proves beyond doubt: but all the same, I think I've shown that man is
naturally good. What then can have depraved him to such an extent, except
the changes that have happened in his constitution, the advances he has
made, and the knowledge he has acquired? We may admire human society
as much as we please; it will be none the less true that it necessarily leads
men to hate each other in proportion as their interests clash, and to do one
another apparent services, while they are really doing every imaginable
mischief. What can be thought of a relation, in which the interest of every
individual dictates rules directly opposite to those the public reason dictates
to the community in general—in which every man finds his profit in the
misfortunes of his neighbour? There is not perhaps any man in a
comfortable position who has not greedy heirs, and perhaps even children,
secretly wishing for his death; not a ship at sea, of which the loss would not
be good news to some merchant or other; not a house, which some debtor of
bad faith would not be glad to see reduced to ashes with all the papers it
contains; not a nation which does not rejoice at the disasters that befall its
neighbours. Thus it is that we find our advantage in the misfortunes of our
fellow-creatures, and that the loss of one man almost always constitutes the
prosperity of another. But it is still more pernicious that public calamities
are the objects of the hopes and expectations of innumerable individuals.
Some desire sickness, some mortality, some war, and some famine. I have
seen men wicked enough to weep for sorrow at the prospect of a plentiful
season; and the great and fatal fire of London, which cost so many unhappy
persons their lives or their fortunes, made the fortunes of perhaps ten
thousand others. I know that Montaigne; censures Demades the Athenian
for having caused to be I punished a workman who, by selling his coffins
very dear, was a great gainer by the deaths of his fellow-citizens; but, the
reason alleged by Montaigne being that everybody ought to be punished,
my point is clearly confirmed by it. Let us penetrate, therefore, the
superficial appearances of benevolence, and survey what passes in the
inmost recesses of the heart. Let us reflect what must be the state of things,
when men are forced to caress and destroy one another at the same time;
when they are born enemies by duty, and knaves by interest. It will perhaps
be said that society is so formed that every man gains by serving the rest.
That would be all very well, if he did not gain still more by injuring them.
There is no legitimate profit so great, that it cannot be greatly exceeded by
what may be made illegitimately; we always gain more by hurting our
neighbours than by doing them good. Nothing is required but to know how
to act with impunity; and to this end the powerful employ all their strength,
and the weak all their cunning.
Savage man, when he has dined, is at peace with all nature, and the
friend of all his fellow-creatures. If a dispute arises about a meal, he rarely
comes to blows, without having first compared the difficulty of conquering
his antagonist with the trouble of finding subsistence elsewhere: and, as
pride does not come in, it all ends in a few blows; the victor eats, and the
vanquished seeks provision somewhere else, and all is at peace. The case is
quite different with man in the state of society, for whom first necessaries
have to be provided, and then superfluities; delicacies follow next, then
immense wealth, then subjects, and then slaves. He enjoys not a moments
relaxation; and what is yet stranger, the less natural and pressing his wants,
the more headstrong are his passions, and, still worse, the more he has it in
his power to gratify them; so that after a long course of prosperity, after
having swallowed up treasures and ruined multitudes, the hero ends up by
cutting every throat till he finds himself, at last, sole master of the world.
Such is in miniature the moral picture, if not of human life, at least of the
secret pretensions of the heart of civilised man.
Compare without partiality the state of the citizen with that of the
savage, and trace out, if you can, how many inlets the former has opened to
pain and death, besides those of his vices, his wants and his misfortunes. If
you reflect on the mental afflictions that prey on us, the violent passions
that waste and exhaust us, the excessive labour with which the poor are
burdened, the still more dangerous indolence to which the wealthy give
themselves up, so that the poor perish of want, and the rich of surfeit; if you
reflect but a moment on the heterogeneous mixtures and pernicious
seasonings of foods; the corrupt state in which they are frequently eaten; on
the adulteration of medicines, the wiles of those who sell them, the mistakes
of those who administer them, and the poisonous vessels in which they are
prepared; on the epidemics bred by foul air in consequence of great
numbers of men being crowded together, or those which are caused by our
delicate way of living, by our passing from our houses into the open air and
back again, by the putting on or throwing off our clothes with too little care,
and by all the precautions which sensuality has converted into necessary
habits, and the neglect of which sometimes costs us our life or health; if you
take into account the conflagrations and earthquakes, which, devouring or
overwhelming whole cities, destroy the inhabitants by thousands; in a word,
if you add together all the dangers with which these causes are always
threatening us, you will see how dearly nature makes us pay for the
contempt with which we have treated her lessons.
I shall not here repeat, what I have elsewhere said of the calamities of
war; but wish that those, who have sufficient knowledge, were willing or
bold enough to make public the details of the villainies committed in armies
by the contractors for commissariat, and hospitals: we should see plainly
that their monstrous frauds, already none too well concealed, which cripple
the finest armies in less than no time, occasion greater destruction among
the soldiers than the swords of the enemy.
The number of people who perish annually at sea, by famine, the
scurvy, pirates, fire and shipwrecks, affords matter for another shocking
calculation. We must also place to the credit of the establishment of
property, and consequently to the institution of society, assassinations,
poisonings, highway robberies, and even the punishments inflicted on the
wretches guilty of these crimes; which, though expedient to prevent greater
evils, yet by making the murder of one man cost the lives of two or more,
double the loss to the human race.
What shameful methods are sometimes practised to prevent the birth of
men, and cheat nature; either by brutal and depraved appetites which insult
her most beautiful work—appetites unknown to savages or mere animals,
which can spring only from the corrupt imagination of mankind in civilised
countries; or by secret abortions, the fitting effects of debauchery and
vitiated notions of honour; or by the exposure or murder of multitudes of
infants, who fall victims to the poverty of their parents, or the cruel shame
of their mothers; or, finally, by the mutilation of unhappy wretches, part of
whose life, with their hope of posterity, is given up to vain singing, or, still
worse, the brutal jealousy of other men: a mutilation which, in the last case,
becomes a double outrage against nature from the treatment of those who
suffer it, and from the use to which they are destined. But is it not a
thousand times more common and more dangerous for paternal rights
openly to offend against humanity? How many talents have not been
thrown away, and inclinations forced, by the unwise constraint of fathers?
How many men, who would have distinguished themselves in a fitting
estate, have died dishonoured and wretched in another for which they had
no taste! How many happy, but unequal, marriages have been broken or
disturbed, and how many chaste wives have been dishonoured, by an order
of things continually in contradiction with that of nature! How many good
and virtuous husbands and wives are reciprocally punished for having been
ill-assorted! How many young and unhappy victims of their parents' avarice
plunge into vice, or pass their melancholy days in tears, groaning in the
indissoluble bonds which their hearts repudiate and gold alone has formed!
Fortunate sometimes are those whose courage and virtue remove them from
life before inhuman violence makes them spend it in crime or in despair.
Forgive me, father and mother, whom I shall ever regret: my complaint
embitters your griefs; but would they might be an eternal and terrible
example to every one who dares, in the name of nature, to violate her most
sacred right.
If I have spoken only of those ill-starred unions which are the result of
our system, is it to be thought that those over which love and sympathy
preside are free from disadvantages? What if I should undertake to show
humanity attacked in its very source, and even in the most sacred of all ties,
in which fortune is consulted before nature, and, the disorders of society
confounding all virtue and vice, continence becomes a criminal precaution,
and a refusal to give life to a fellow-creature, an act of humanity? But,
without drawing aside the veil which hides all these horrors, let us content
ourselves with pointing out the evil which others will have to remedy.
To all this add the multiplicity of unhealthy trades, which shorten men's
lives or destroy their bodies, such as working in the mines, and the
preparing of metals and minerals, particularly lead, copper, mercury, cobalt,
and arsenic: add those other dangerous trades which are daily fatal to many
tilers, carpenters, masons and miners: put all these together and we can see,
in the establishment and perfection of societies, the reasons for that
diminution of our species, which has been noticed by many philosophers.
Luxury, which cannot be prevented among men who are tenacious of
their own convenience and of the respect paid them by others, soon
completes the evil society had begun, and, under the pretence of giving
bread to the poor, whom it should never have made such, impoverishes all
the rest, and sooner or later depopulates the State. Luxury is a remedy much
worse than the disease it sets up to cure; or rather it is in itself the greatest
of all evils, for every State, great or small: for, in order to maintain all the
servants and vagabonds it creates, it brings oppression and ruin on the
citizen and the labourer; it is like those scorching winds, which, covering
the trees and plants with devouring insects, deprive useful animals of their
subsistence and spread famine and death wherever they blow.
From society and the luxury to which it gives birth arise the liberal and
mechanical arts, commerce, letters, and all those superfluities which make
industry flourish, and enrich and ruin nations. The reason for such
destruction is plain. It is easy to see, from the very nature of agriculture,
that it must be the least lucrative of all the arts; for, its produce being the
most universally necessary, the price must be proportionate to the abilities
of the very poorest of mankind.
From the same principle may be deduced this rule, that the arts in
general are more lucrative in proportion as they are less useful; and that, in
the end, the most useful becomes the most neglected. From this we may
learn what to think of the real advantages of industry and the actual effects
of its progress.
Such are the sensible causes of all the miseries, into which opulence at
length plunges the most celebrated nations. In proportion as arts and
industry flourish, the despised husbandman, burdened with the taxes
necessary for the support of luxury, and condemned to pass his days
between labour and hunger, forsakes his native field, to seek in towns the
bread he ought to carry thither. The more our capital cities strike the vulgar
eye with admiration, the greater reason is there to lament the sight of the
abandoned countryside, the large tracts of land that lie uncultivated, the
roads crowded with unfortunate citizens turned beggars or highwaymen,
and doomed to end their wretched lives either on a dunghill or on the
gallows. Thus the State grows rich on the one hand, and feeble and
depopulated on the other; the mightiest monarchies, after having taken
immense pains to enrich and depopulate themselves, fall at last a prey to
some poor nation, which has yielded to the fatal temptation of invading
them, and then, growing opulent and weak in its turn, is itself invaded and
ruined by some other.
Let any one inform us what produced the swarms of barbarians, who
overran Europe, Asia and Africa for so many ages. Was their prodigious
increase due to their industry and arts, to the wisdom of their laws, or to the
excellence of their political system? Let the learned tell us why, instead of
multiplying to such a degree, these fierce and brutal men, without sense or
science, without education, without restraint, did not destroy each other
hourly in quarrelling over the productions of their fields and woods. Let
them tell us how these wretches could have the presumption to oppose such
clever people as we were, so well trained in military discipline, and
possessed of such excellent laws and institutions: and why, since society
has been brought to perfection in northern countries, and so much pains
taken to instruct their inhabitants in their social duties and in the art of
living happily and peaceably together, we see them no longer produce such
numberless hosts as they used once to send forth to be the plague and terror
of other nations. I fear some one may at last answer me by saying, that all
these fine things, arts, sciences and laws, were wisely invented by men, as a
salutary plague, to prevent the too great multiplication of mankind, lest the
world, which was given us for a habitation, should in time be too small for
its inhabitants.
What, then, is to be done? Must societies be totally abolished? Must
meum and tuum be annihilated, and must we return again to the forests to
live among beasts? This is a deduction in the manner of my adversaries,
which I would as soon anticipate as let them have the shame of drawing. O
you, who have never heard the voice of heaven, who think man destined
only to live this little life and die in peace; you, who can resign in the midst
of populous cities your fatal acquisitions, your restless spirits, your corrupt
hearts and endless desires; resume, since it depends entirely on yourselves,
your ancient and primitive innocence: retire to the woods, there to lose the
sight and remembrance of the crimes of your contemporaries; and be not
apprehensive of degrading your species, by renouncing its advances in
order to renounce its vices. As for men like me whose passions have
destroyed their original simplicity, who can no longer subsist on plants or
acorns, or live without laws and magistrates those who were honoured in
their first father with supernatural instructions; those who discover, in the
design of giving human actions at the start a morality which they must
otherwise have been so long in acquiring, the reason for a precept in itself
indifferent and inexplicable on every other system; those, in short, who are
persuaded that the Divine Being has called all mankind to be partakers in
the happiness and perfection of celestial intelligences, all these will
endeavour to merit the eternal prize they are to expect from the practice of
those virtues, which they make themselves follow in learning to know them.
They will respect the sacred bonds of their respective communities; they
will love theft fellow-citizens, and serve them with all their might: they will
scrupulously obey the laws, and all those who make or administer them;
they will particularly honour those wise and good princes, who find means
of preventing, curing or even palliating all these evils and abuses, by which
we are constantly threatened; they will animate the zeal of their deserving
rulers, by showing them, without flattery or fear, the importance of their
office and the severity of their duty. But they will not therefore have less
contempt for a constitution that cannot support itself without the aid of so
many splendid characters, much oftener wished for than found; and from
which, notwithstanding all their pains and solicitude, there always arise
more real calamities than even apparent advantages.
1. See the "faculty of self-improvement".
A Discourse on Political Economy
Table of Contents
The word Economy, or Œconomy, is derived from οἰκός, a house, and
νόμος, law, and meant originally only the wise and legitimate government
of the house for the common good of the whole family. The meaning of the
term was then extended to the government of that great family, the State. To
distinguish these two senses of the word, the latter is called general or
political economy, and the former domestic or particular economy. The first
only is discussed in the present discourse.
Even if there were as close an analogy as many authors maintain
between the State and the family, it would not follow that the rules of
conduct proper for one of these societies would be also proper for the other.
They differ too much in extent to be regulated in the same manner; and
there will always be a great difference between domestic government, in
which a father can see everything for himself, and civil government, where
the chief sees hardly anything save through the eyes of others. To put both
on an equality in this respect, the talents, strength, and all the faculties of
the father would have to increase in proportion to the size of his family, and
the soul of a powerful monarch would have to be, to that of an ordinary
man, as the extent of his empire is to that of a private person's estate.
But how could the government of the State be like that of the family,
when the basis on which they rest is so different? The father being
physically stronger than his children, his paternal authority, as long as they
need his protection, may be reasonably said to be established by nature. But
in the great family, all the members of which are naturally equal, the
political authority, being purely arbitrary as far as its institution is
concerned, can be founded only on conventions, and the Magistrate can
have no authority over the rest, except by virtue of the laws. The duties of a
father are dictated to him by natural feelings, and in a manner that seldom
allows him to neglect them. For rulers there is no such principle, and they
are really obliged to the people only by what they themselves have
promised to do, and the people have therefore a right to require of them.
Another more important difference is that since the children have nothing
but what they receive from their father, it is plain that all the rights of
property belong to him, or emanate from him; but quite the opposite is the
case in the great family, where the general administration is established
only to secure individual property, which is antecedent to it. The principal
object of the work of the whole house is to preserve and increase the
patrimony of the father, in order that he may be able some day to distribute
it among his children without impoverishing them; whereas the wealth of
the exchequer is only a means, often ill understood, of keeping the
individuals in peace and plenty. In a word, the little family is destined to be
extinguished, and to resolve itself some day into several families of a
similar nature; but the great family, being constituted to endure for ever in
the same condition, need not, like the small one, increase for the purpose of
multiplying, but need only maintain itself; and it can easily be proved that
any increase does it more harm than good.
In the family, it is clear, for several reasons which lie in its very nature,
that the father ought to command. In the first place, the authority ought not
to be equally divided between father and mother; the government must be
single, and in every division of opinion there must be one preponderant
voice to decide. Secondly, however lightly we may regard the
disadvantages peculiar to women, yet, as they necessarily occasion intervals
of inaction, this is a sufficient reason for excluding them from this supreme
authority: for when the balance is perfectly even, a straw is enough to turn
the scale. Besides, the husband ought to be able to superintend his wife's
conduct, because it is of importance for him to be assured that the children,
whom he is obliged to acknowledge and maintain, belong to no-one but
himself. Thirdly, children should be obedient to their father, at first of
necessity, and afterwards from gratitude: after having had their wants
satisfied by him during one half of their lives, they ought to consecrate the
other half to providing for his. Fourthly, servants owe him their services in
exchange for the provision he makes for them, though they may break off
the bargain as soon as it ceases to suit them. I say nothing here of slavery,
because it is contrary to nature, and cannot be authorised by any right or
law.
There is nothing of all this in political society, in which the chief is so
far from having any natural interest in the happiness of the individuals, that
it is not uncommon for him to seek his own in their misery. If the
magistracy is hereditary, a community of men is often governed by a child.
If it be elective, innumerable inconveniences arise from such election; while
in both cases all the advantages of paternity are lost. If you have but a
single ruler, you lie at the discretion of a master who has no reason to love
you: and if you have several, you must bear at once their tyranny and their
divisions. In a word, abuses are inevitable and their consequences fatal in
every society where the public interest and the laws have no natural force,
and are perpetually attacked by personal interest and the passions of the
ruler and the members.
Although the functions of the father of a family and those of the chief
magistrate ought to make for the same object, they must do so in such
different ways, and their duty and rights are so essentially distinct, that we
cannot confound them without forming very false ideas about the
fundamental laws of society, and falling into errors which are fatal to
mankind. In fact, if the voice of nature is the best counsellor to which a
father can listen in the discharge of his duty, for the Magistrate it is a false
guide, which continually prevents him from performing his, and leads him
on sooner or later to the ruin of himself and of the State, if he is not
restrained by the most sublime virtue. The only precaution necessary for the
father of a family is to guard himself against depravity, and prevent his
natural inclinations from being corrupted; whereas it is these themselves
which corrupt the Magistrate. In order to act aright, the first has only to
consult his heart; the other becomes a traitor the moment he listens to his.
Even his own reason should be suspect to him, nor should he follow any
rule other than the public reason, which is the law. Thus nature has made a
multitude of good fathers of families; but it is doubtful whether, from the
very beginning of the world, human wisdom has made ten men capable of
governing their peers.
From all that has just been said, it follows that public economy, which is
my subject, has been rightly distinguished from private economy, and that,
the State having nothing in common with the family except the obligations
which their heads lie under of making both of them happy, the same rules of
conduct cannot apply to both. I have considered these few lines enough to
overthrow the detestable system which Sir Robert Filmer has endeavoured
to establish in his Patriarcha; a work to which two celebrated writers have
done too much honour in writing books to refute it. Moreover, this error is
of very long standing; for Aristotle himself thought proper to combat it with
arguments which may be found in the first book of his Politics.
I must here ask my readers to distinguish also between public economy,
which is my subject and which I call government, and the supreme
authority, which I call Sovereignty; a distinction which consists in the fact
that the latter has the right of legislation, and in certain cases binds the body
of the nation itself, while the former has only the right of execution, and is
binding only on individuals.
I shall take the liberty of making use of a very common, and in some
respects inaccurate, comparison, which will serve to illustrate my meaning.
The body politic, taken individually, may be considered as an organised,
living body, resembling that of man. The sovereign power represents the
head; the laws and customs are the brain, the source of the nerves and seat
of the understanding, will and senses, of which the Judges and Magistrates
are the organs: commerce, industry, and agriculture are the mouth and
stomach which prepare the common subsistence; the public income is the
blood, which a prudent economy, in performing the functions of the heart,
causes to distribute through the whole body nutriment and life: the citizens
are the body and the members, which make the machine live, move and
work; and no part of this machine can be damaged without the painful
impression being at once conveyed to the brain, if the animal is in a state of
health.
The life of both bodies is the self common to the whole, the reciprocal
sensibility and internal correspondence of all the parts. Where this
communication ceases, where the formal unity disappears, and the
contiguous parts belong to one another only by juxtaposition, the man is
dead, or the State is dissolved.
The body politic, therefore, is also a moral being possessed of a will;
and this general will, which tends always to the preservation and welfare of
the whole and of every part, and is the source of the laws, constitutes for all
the members of the State, in their relations to one another and to it, the rule
of what is just or unjust: a truth which shows, by the way, how idly some
writers have treated as theft the subtlety prescribed to children at Sparta for
obtaining their frugal repasts, as if everything ordained by the law were not
lawful.
It is important to observe that this rule of justice, though certain with
regard to all citizens, may be defective with regard to foreigners. The reason
is clear. The will of the State, though general in relation to its own
members, is no longer so in relation to other States and their members, but
becomes, for them, a particular and individual will, which has its rule of
justice in the law of nature. This, however, enters equally into the principle
here laid down; for in such a case, the great city of the world becomes the
body politic, whose general will is always the law of nature, and of which
the different States and peoples are individual members. From these
distinctions, applied to each political society and its members, are derived
the most certain and universal rules, by which we can judge whether a
government is good or bad, and in general of the morality of all human
actions.
Every political society is composed of other smaller societies of
different kinds, each of which has its interests and its rules of conduct: but
those societies which everybody perceives, because they have an external
and authorised form, are not the only ones that actually exist in the State: all
individuals who are united by a common interest compose as many others,
either transitory or permanent, whose influence is none the less real because
it is less apparent, and the proper observation of whose various relations is
the true knowledge of public morals and manners. The influence of all these
tacit or formal associations causes, by the influence of their will, as many
different modifications of the public will. The will of these particular
societies has always two relations; for the members of the association, it is a
general will; for the great society, it is a particular will; and it is often right
with regard to the first object, and wrong as to the second. An individual
may be a devout priest, a brave soldier, or a zealous senator, and yet a bad
citizen. A particular resolution may be advantageous to the smaller
community, but pernicious to the greater. It is true that particular societies
being always subordinate to the general society in preference to others, the
duty of a citizen takes precedence of that of a senator, and a man's duty of
that of a citizen: but unhappily personal interest is always found in inverse
ratio to duty, and increases in proportion as the association grows narrower,
and the engagement less sacred; which irrefragably proves that the most
general will is always the must just also, and that the voice of the people is
in fact the voice of God.
It does not follow that the public decisions are always equitable; they
may possibly, for reasons which I have given, not be so when they have to
do with foreigners. Thus it is not impossible that a Republic, though in itself
well governed, should enter upon an unjust war. Nor is it less possible for
the Council of a Democracy to pass unjust decrees, and condemn the
innocent; but this never happens unless the people is seduced by private
interests, which the credit or eloquence of some clever persons substitutes
for those of the State; in which case the general will will be one thing, and
the result of the public deliberation another. This is not contradicted by the
case of the Athenian Democracy; for Athens was in fact not a Democracy,
but a very tyrannical Aristocracy, governed by philosophers and orators.
Carefully determine what happens in every public deliberation, and it will
be seen that the general will is always for the common good; but very often
there is a secret division, a tacit confederacy, which, for particular ends,
causes the natural disposition of the assembly to be set at nought. In such a
case the body of society is really divided into other bodies, the members of
which acquire a general will, which is good and just with respect to these
new bodies, but unjust and bad with regard to the whole, from which each
is thus dismembered.
We see then how easy it is, by the help of these principles, to explain
those apparent contradictions, which are noticed in the conduct of many
persons who are scrupulously honest in some respects, and cheats and
scoundrels in others, who trample under foot the most sacred duties, and yet
are faithful to the death to engagements that are often illegitimate. Thus the
most depraved of men always pay some sort of homage to public faith; and
even robbers, who are the enemies of virtue in the great society, pay some
respect to the shadow of it in their secret caves.
In establishing the general will as the first principle of public economy,
and the fundamental rule of government, I have not thought it necessary to
inquire seriously whether the Magistrates belong to the people, or the
people to the Magistrates; or whether in public affairs the good of the State
should be taken into account, or only that of its rulers. That question indeed
has long been decided one way in theory, and another in practice; and in
general it would be ridiculous to expect that those who are in fact masters
will prefer any other interest to their own. It would not be improper,
therefore, further to distinguish public economy as popular or tyrannical.
The former is that of every State, in which there reigns between the people
and the rulers unity of interest and will: the latter will necessarily exist
wherever the government and the people have different interests, and,
consequently, opposing wills. The rules of the latter are written at length in
the archives of history, and in the satires of Macchiavelli. The rules of the
former are found only in the writings of those philosophers who venture to
proclaim the rights of humanity.
I. The first and most important rule of legitimate or popular
government, that is to say, of government whose object is the good of the
people, is therefore, as I have observed, to follow in everything the general
will. But to follow this will it is necessary to know it, and above all to
distinguish it from the particular will, beginning with one's self: this
distinction is always very difficult to make, and only the most sublime
virtue can afford sufficient illumination for it. As, in order to will, it is
necessary to be free, a difficulty no less great than the former arises—that
of preserving at once the public liberty and the authority of government.
Look into the motives which have induced men, once united by their
common needs in a general society, to unite themselves still more
intimately by means of civil societies: you will find no other motive than
that of assuring the property, life and liberty of each member by the
protection of all. But can men be forced to defend the liberty of any one
among them, without trespassing on that of others? And how can they
provide for the public needs, without alienating the individual property of
those who are forced to contribute to them? With whatever sophistry all this
may be covered over, it is certain that if any constraint can be laid on my
will, I am no longer free, and that I am no longer master of my own
property, if any one else can lay a hand on it. This difficulty, which would
have seemed insurmountable, has been removed, like the first, by the most
sublime of all human institutions, or rather by a divine inspiration, which
teaches mankind to imitate here below the unchangeable decrees of the
Deity. By what inconceivable art has a means been found of making men
free by making them subject; of using in the service of the State the
properties, the persons and even the lives of all its members, without
constraining and without consulting them; of confining their will by their
own admission; of overcoming their refusal by that consent, and forcing
them to punish themselves, when they act against their own will? How can
it be that all should obey, yet nobody take upon him to command, and that
all should serve, and yet have no masters, but be the more free, as, in
apparent subjection, each loses no part of his liberty but what might be
hurtful; to that of another? These wonders are the work of law. It is to law
alone that men owe justice and liberty. It is this salutary organ of the will of
all which establishes, in civil right, the natural equality between men. It is
this celestial voice which dictates to each citizen the precepts of public
reason, and teaches him to act according to the rules of his own judgment,
and not to behave inconsistently with himself. It is with this voice alone that
political rulers should speak when they command; for no sooner does one
man, setting aside the law, claim to subject another to his private will, than
he departs from the state of civil society, and confronts him face to face in
the pure state of nature, in which obedience is prescribed solely by
necessity.
The most pressing interest of the ruler, and even his most indispensable
duty, therefore, is to watch over the observation of the laws of which he is
the minister, and on which his whole authority is founded. At the same time,
if he exacts the observance of them from others, he is the more strongly
bound to observe them himself, since he enjoys all their favour. For his
example is of such force, that even if the people were willing to permit him
to release himself from the yoke of the law, he ought to be cautious in
availing himself of so dangerous a prerogative, which others might soon
claim to usurp in their turn, and often use to his prejudice. At bottom, as all
social engagements are mutual in nature, it is impossible for any one to set
himself above the law, without renouncing its advantages; for nobody is
bound by any obligation to one who claims that he is under no obligations
to others. For this reason no exemption from the law will ever be granted,
on any ground whatsoever, in a well-regulated government. Those citizens
who have deserved well of their country ought to be rewarded with
honours, but never with privileges: for the Republic is at the eve of its fall,
when any one can think it fine not to obey the laws. If the nobility or the
soldiery should ever adopt such a maxim, all would be lost beyond
redemption.
The power of the laws depends still more on their own wisdom than on
the severity of their administrators, and the public will derives its greatest
weight from the reason which has dictated it. Hence Plato looked upon it as
a very necessary precaution to place at the head of all edicts a preamble,
setting forth their justice and utility. In fact, the first of all laws is to respect
the laws: the severity of penalties is only a vain resource, invented by little
minds in order to substitute terror for that respect which they have no means
of obtaining. It has constantly been observed that in those countries where
legal punishments are most severe, they are also most frequent; so that the
cruelty of such punishments is a proof only of the multitude of criminals,
and, punishing everything with equal severity, induces those who are guilty
to commit crimes, in order to escape being punished for their faults.
But though the government be not master of the law, it is much to be its
guarantor, and to possess a thousand means of inspiring the love of it. In
this alone the talent of reigning consists. With force in one's hands, there is
no art required to make the whole world tremble, nor indeed much to gain
men's hearts; for experience has long since taught the people to give its
rulers great credit for all the evil they abstain from doing it, and to adore
them if they do not absolutely hate it. A fool, if he be obeyed, may punish
crimes as well as another: but the true statesman is he who knows how to
prevent them: it is over the wills, even more than the actions, of his subjects
that his honourable rule is extended. If he could secure that every one
should act aright, he would no longer have anything to do; and the
masterpiece of his labours would be to be able to remain unemployed. It is
certain, at least, that the greatest talent a ruler can possess is to disguise his
power, in order to render it less odious, and to conduct the State so
peaceably as to make it seem to have no need of conductors.
I conclude, therefore, that, as the first duty of the legislator is to make
the laws conformable to the general will, the first rule of public economy is
that the administration of justice should be conformable to the laws. It will
even be enough to prevent the State from being ill governed, that the
Legislator shall have provided, as he should, for every need of place,
climate, soil, custom, neighbourhood, and all the rest of the relations
peculiar to the people he had to institute. Not but what there still remains an
infinity of details of administration and economy, which are left to the
wisdom of the government: but there are two infallible rules for its good
conduct on these occasions; one is, that the spirit of the law ought to decide
in every particular case that could not be foreseen; the other is that the
general will, the source and supplement of all laws, should be consulted
wherever they fail. But how, I shall be asked, can the general will be known
in cases in which it has not expressed itself? Must the whole nation be
assembled together at every unforeseen event? Certainly not. It ought the
less to be assembled, because it is by no means certain that its decision
would be the expression of the general will; besides, the method would be
impracticable in a great people, and is hardly ever necessary where the
government is well-intentioned: for the rulers well know that the general
will is always on the side which is most favourable to the public interest,
that is to say, most equitable; so that it is needful only to act justly, to be
certain of following the general will. When this is flouted too openly, it
makes itself felt, in spite of the formidable restraint of the public authority. I
shall cite the nearest possible examples that may be followed in such cases.
In China, it is the constant maxim of the Prince to decide against his
officers, in every dispute that arises between them and the people. If bread
be too dear in any province, the Intendant of that province is thrown into
prison. If there be an insurrection in another, the Governor is dismissed, and
every Mandarin answers with his head for all the mischief that happens in
his department. Not that these affairs do not subsequently undergo a regular
examination; but long experience has caused the judgment to be thus
anticipated. There is seldom any injustice to be repaired; in the meantime,
the Emperor, being satisfied that public outcry does not arise without cause,
always discovers, through the seditious clamours which he punishes, just
grievances to redress.
It is a great thing to preserve the rule of peace and order through all the
parts of the Republic; it is a great thing that the State should be tranquil, and
the law respected: but if nothing more is done, there will be in all this more
appearance than reality; for that government which confines itself to mere
obedience will find difficulty in getting itself obeyed. If it is good to know
how to deal with men as they are, it is much better to make them what there
is need that they should be. The most absolute authority is that which
penetrates into a man's inmost being, and concerns itself no less with his
will than with his actions. It is certain that all peoples become in the long
run what the government makes them; warriors, citizens, men, when it so
pleases; or merely populace and rabble, when it chooses to make them so.
Hence every prince who despises his subjects, dishonours himself, in
confessing that he does not know how to make them worthy of respect.
Make men, therefore, if you would command men: if you would have them
obedient to the laws, make them love the laws, and then they will need only
to know what is their duty to do it. This was the great art of ancient
governments, in those distant times when philosophers gave laws to men,
and made use of their authority only to render them wise and happy. Thence
arose the numerous sumptuary laws, the many regulations of morals, and all
the public rules of conduct which were admitted or rejected with the
greatest care. Even tyrants did not forget this important part of
administration, but took as great pains to corrupt the morals of their slaves,
as Magistrates took to correct those of their fellow-citizens. But our modern
governments, which imagine they have done everything when they have
raised money, conceive that it is unnecessary and even impossible to go a
step further.
II. The second essential rule of public economy is no less important than
the first. If you would have the general will accomplished, bring all the
particular wills into conformity with it; in other words, as virtue is nothing
more than this conformity of the particular wills with the general will,
establish the reign of virtue.
If our politicians were less blinded by their ambition, they would see
how impossible it is for any establishment whatever to act in the spirit of its
institution, unless it is guided in accordance with the law of duty; they
would feel that the greatest support of public authority lies in the hearts of
the citizens, and that nothing can take the place of morality in the
maintenance of government. It is not only upright men who know how to
administer the laws; but at bottom only good men know how to obey them.
The man who once gets the better of remorse, will not shrink before
punishments which are less severe, and less lasting, and from which there is
at least the hope of escaping: whatever precautions are taken, those who
only require impunity in order to do wrong will not fail to find means of
eluding the law, and avoiding its penalties. In this case, as all particular
interests unite against the general interest, which is no longer that of any
individual, public vices have a greater effect in enervating the laws than the
laws in the repression of such vices: so that the corruption of the people and
of their rulers will at length extend to the government, however wise it may
be. The worst of all abuses is to pay an apparent obedience to the laws, only
in order actually to break them with security. For in this case the best laws
soon become the most pernicious; and it would be a hundred times better
that they should not exist. In such a situation, it is vain to add edicts to
edicts and regulations to regulations. Everything serves only to introduce
new abuses, without correcting the old. The more laws are multiplied, the
more they are despised, and all the new officials appointed to supervise
them are only so many more people to break them, and either to share the
plunder with their predecessors, or to plunder apart on their own. The
reward of virtue soon becomes that of robbery; the vilest of men rise to the
greatest credit; the greater they are the more despicable they become; their
infamy appears even in their dignities, and their very honours dishonour
them. If they buy the influence of the leaders or the protection of women, it
is only that they may sell justice, duty, and the State in their turn: in the
meantime, the people, feeling that its vices are not the first cause of its
misfortunes, murmurs and complains that all its misfortunes come solely
from those whom it pays to protect it from such things.
It is under these circumstances that the voice of duty no longer speaks in
men's hearts, and their rulers are obliged to substitute the cry of terror, or
the lure of an apparent interest, of which they subsequently trick their
creatures. In this situation they are compelled to have recourse to all the
petty and despicable shifts which they call rules of State and mysteries of
the cabinet. All the vigour that is left in the government is used by its
members in ruining and supplanting one another, while the public business
is neglected, or is transacted only as personal interest requires and directs.
In short, the whole art of those great politicians lies in so mesmerising those
they stand in need of, that each may think he is labouring for his own
interest in working for theirs: I say theirs on the false supposition that it is
the real interest of rulers to annihilate a people in order to make it subject,
and to; ruin their own property in order to secure their possession of it.
But when the citizens love their duty, and the guardians of the public
authority sincerely apply themselves to the fostering of that love by their
own example and assiduity, every difficulty vanishes; and government
becomes so easy that it needs none of that art of darkness, whose blackness
is its only mystery. Those enterprising spirits, so dangerous and so much
admired, all those great ministers, whose glory is inseparable from the
miseries of the people, are no longer regretted: public morality supplies
what is wanting in the genius of the rulers; and the more virtue reigns, the
less need there is for talent. Even ambition is better served by duty than by
usurpation: when the people is convinced that its rulers are labouring only
for its happiness, its deference saves them the trouble of labouring to
strengthen their power: and history shows us, in a thousand cases, that the
authority of one who is beloved over those whom he loves is a hundred
times more absolute than all the tyranny of usurpers. This does not mean
that the government ought to be afraid to make use of its power, but that it
ought to make use of it only in a lawful manner. We find in history a
thousand examples of pusillanimous or ambitious rulers, who were ruined
by their slackness or their pride; not one who suffered for having been
strictly just. But we ought not to confound negligence with moderation, or
clemency with weakness. To be just, it is necessary to be severe; to permit
vice, when one has the right and the power to suppress it, is to be oneself
vicious.
It is not enough to say to the citizens, be good; they must be taught to be
so; and even example, which is in this respect the first lesson, is not the sole
means to be employed; patriotism is the most efficacious: for, as I have said
already, every man is virtuous when his particular will is in all things
conformable to the general will, and we voluntarily will what is willed by
those whom we love. It appears that the feeling of humanity evaporates and
grows feeble in embracing all mankind, and that we cannot be affected by
the calamities of Tartary or Japan, in the same manner as we are by those of
European nations. It is necessary in some degree to confine and limit our
interest and compassion in order to make it active. Now, as this sentiment
can be useful only to those with whom we have to live, it is proper that our
humanity should confine itself to our fellow-citizens, and should receive a
new force because we are in the habit of seeing them, and by reason of the
common interest which unites them. It is certain that the greatest miracles
of virtue have been produced by patriotism: this fine and lively feeling,
which gives to the force of self-love all the beauty of virtue, lends it an
energy which, without disfiguring it, makes it the most heroic of all
passions. This it is that produces so many immortal actions, the glory of
which dazzles our feeble eyes; and so many great men, whose old-world
virtues pass for fables now that patriotism is made mock of. This is not
surprising; the transports of susceptible hearts appear altogether fanciful to
any one who has never felt them; and the love of one's country, which is a
hundred times more lively and delightful than the love of a mistress, cannot
be conceived except by experiencing it. But it is easy to perceive in every
heart that is warmed by it, in all the actions it inspires, a glowing and
sublime ardour which does not attend the purest virtue, when separated
from it. Contrast Socrates even with Cato; the one was the greater
philosopher, the other more of the citizen. Athens was already ruined in the
time of Socrates, and he had no other country than the world at large. Cato
had the cause of his country always at heart; he lived for it alone, and could
not bear to outlive it. The virtue of Socrates was that of the wisest of men;
but, compared with Cæsar and Pompey, Cato seems a God among mortals.
Socrates instructed a few individuals, opposed the Sophists, and died for
truth: but Cato defended his country, its liberty and its laws, against the
conquerors of the world, and at length departed from the earth, when he had
no longer a country to serve. A worthy pupil of Socrates would be the most
virtuous of his contemporaries; but a worthy follower of Cato would be one
of the greatest. The virtue of the former would be his happiness; the latter
would seek his happiness in that of all. We should be taught by the one, and
led by the other; and this alone is enough to determine which to prefer: for
no people has ever been made into a nation of philosophers, but it is not
impossible to make a people happy.
Do we wish men to be virtuous? Then let us begin by making them love
their country: but how can they love it, if their country be nothing more to
them than to strangers, and afford them nothing but what it can refuse
nobody? It would be still worse, if they did not enjoy even the privilege of
social security, and if their lives, liberties and property lay at the mercy of
persons in power, without their being permitted, or it being possible for
them, to get relief from the laws. For in that case, being subjected to the
duties of the state of civil society, without enjoying even the common
privileges of the state of nature, and without being able to use their strength
in their own defence, they would be in the worst, condition in which
freemen could possibly find themselves, and the word country would mean
for them something merely odious and ridiculous. It must not be imagined
that a man can break or lose an arm, without the pain being conveyed to his
head: nor is it any more credible that the general will should consent that
any one member of the State, whoever he might be, should wound or
destroy another, than it is that the fingers of a man in his senses should
wilfully scratch his eyes out. The security of individuals is so intimately
connected with the public confederation that, apart from the regard that
must be paid to human weakness, that convention would in point of right be
dissolved, if in the State a single citizen who might have been relieved were
allowed to perish, or if one were wrongfully confined in prison, or if in one
case an obviously unjust sentence were given. For the fundamental
conventions being broken, it is impossible to conceive of any right or
interest that could retain the people in the social union; unless they were
restrained by force, which alone causes the dissolution of the state of civil
society.
In fact, does not the undertaking entered into by the whole body of the
nation bind it to provide for the security of the least of its members with as
much care as for that of all the rest? Is the welfare of a single citizen any
less the common cause than that of the whole State? It may be said that it is
good that one should perish for all. I am ready to admire such a saying
when it comes from the lips of a virtuous and worthy patriot, voluntarily
and dutifully sacrificing himself for the good of his country: but if we are to
understand by it, that it is lawful for the government to sacrifice an innocent
man for the good of the multitude, I look upon it as one of the most
execrable rules tyranny ever invented, the greatest falsehood that can be
advanced, the most dangerous admission that can be made, and a direct
contradiction of the fundamental laws of society. So little is it the case that
any one person ought to perish for all, that all have pledged their lives and
properties for the defence of each, in order that the weakness of individuals
may always be protected by the strength of the public, and each member by
the whole State. Suppose we take from the whole people one individual
after another, and then press the advocates of this rule to explain more
exactly what they mean by the body of the State, and we shall see that it will
at length be reduced to a small number of persons, who are not the people,
but the officers of the people, and who, having bound themselves by
personal oath to perish for the welfare of the people, would thence infer that
the people is to perish for their own.
Need we look for examples of the protection which the State owes to its
members, and the respect it owes to their persons? It is only among the
most illustrious and courageous nations that they are to be found; it is only
among free peoples that the dignity of man is realised. It is well known into
what perplexity the whole republic of Sparta was thrown, when the question
of punishing a guilty citizen arose.
In Macedon, the life of a man was a matter of such importance, that
Alexander the Great, at the height of his glory, would not have dared to put
a Macedonian criminal to death in cold blood, till the accused had appeared
to make his defence before his fellow-citizens, and had been condemned by
them. But the Romans distinguished themselves above all other peoples by
the regard which their government paid to the individual, and by its
scrupulous attention to the preservation of the inviolable rights of all the
members of the State. Nothing was so sacred among them as the life of a
citizen; and no less than an assembly of the whole people was needed to
condemn one. Not even the Senate, nor the Consuls, in all their majesty,
possessed the right; but the crime and punishment of a citizen were
regarded as a public calamity among the most powerful people in the world.
So hard indeed did it seem to shed blood for any crime whatsoever, that by
the Lex Porcia, the penalty of death was commuted into that of banishment
for all those who were willing to survive the loss of so great a country.
Everything both at Rome, and in the Roman armies, breathed that love of
fellow-citizens one for another, and that respect for the Roman name, which
raised the courage and inspired the virtue of every one who had the honour
to bear it. The cap of a citizen delivered from slavery, the civic crown of
him who had saved the life of another, were looked upon with the greatest
pleasure amid the pomp of their triumphs; and it is remarkable that among
the crowns which were bestowed in honour of splendid actions in war, the
civic crown and that of the triumphant general alone were of laurel, all the
others being merely of gold. It was thus that Rome was virtuous and
became the mistress of the world. Ambitious rulers! A herdsman governs
his dogs and cattle, and yet is only the meanest of mankind. If it be a fine
thing to command, it is when those who obey us are capable of doing us
honour. Show respect, therefore, to your fellow-citizens, and you will
render yourselves worthy of respect; show respect to liberty, and your
power will increase daily. Never exceed your rights, and they will soon
become unlimited.
Let our country then show itself the common mother of her citizens; let
the advantages they enjoy in their country endear it to them; let the
government leave them enough share in the public administration to make
them feel that they are at home; and let the laws be in their eyes only the
guarantees of the common liberty. These rights, great as they are, belong to
all men: but without seeming to attack them directly, the ill-will of rulers
may in fact easily reduce their effect to nothing. The law, which they thus
abuse, serves the powerful at once as a weapon of offence, and as a shield
against the weak; and the pretext of the public good is always the most
dangerous scourge of the people. What is most necessary, and perhaps most
difficult, in government, is rigid integrity in doing strict justice to all, and
above all in protecting the poor against the tyranny of the rich. The greatest
evil has already come about, when there are poor men to be defended, and
rich men to be restrained. It is on the middle classes alone that the whole
force of the law is exerted; they are equally powerless against the treasures
of the rich and the penury of the poor. The first mocks them, the second
escapes them. The one breaks the meshes, the other passes through them.
It is therefore one of the most important functions of government to
prevent extreme inequality of fortunes; not by taking away wealth from its
possessors, but by depriving all men of means to accumulate it; not by
building hospitals for the poor, but by securing the citizens from becoming
poor. The unequal distribution of inhabitants over the territory, when men
are crowded together in one place, while other places are depopulated; the
encouragement of the arts that minister to luxury and of purely industrial
arts at the expense of useful and laborious crafts; the sacrifice of agriculture
to commerce; the necessitation of the tax-farmer by the mal-administration
of the funds of the State; and in short, venality pushed to such an extreme
that even public esteem is reckoned at a cash value, and virtue rated at a
market price: these are the most obvious causes of opulence and of poverty,
of public interest, of mutual hatred among citizens, of indifference to the
common cause, of the corruption of the people, and of the weakening of all
the springs of government. Such are the evils, which are with difficulty
cured when they make themselves felt, but which a wise administration
ought to prevent, if it is to maintain, along with good morals, respect for the
laws, patriotism, and the influence of the general will.
But all these precautions will be inadequate, unless rulers go still more
to the root of the matter. I conclude this part of public economy where I
ought to have begun it. There can be no patriotism without liberty, no
liberty without virtue, no virtue without citizens; create citizens, and you
have everything you need; without them, you will have nothing but debased
slaves, from the rulers of the State downwards. To form citizens is not the
work of a day; and in order to have men it is necessary to educate them
when they are children. It will be said, perhaps, that whoever has men to
govern, ought not to seek, beyond their nature, a perfection of which they
are incapable; that he ought not to desire to destroy their passions; and that
the execution of such an attempt is no more desirable than it is possible. I
will agree, further, that a man without passions would certainly be a bad
citizen; but it must be agreed also that, if men are not taught not to love
some things, it is impossible to teach them to love one object more than
another—to prefer that which is truly beautiful to that which is deformed.
If, for example, they were early accustomed to regard their individuality
only in its relation to the body of the State, and to be aware, so to speak, of
their own existence merely as a part of that of the State, they might at
length come to identify themselves in some degree with this greater whole,
to feel themselves members of their country, and to love it with that
exquisite feeling which no isolated person has save for himself; to lift up
their spirits perpetually to this great object, and thus to transform into a
sublime virtue that dangerous disposition which gives rise to all our vices.
Not only does philosophy demonstrate the possibility of giving feeling
these new directions; history furnishes us with a thousand striking
examples. If they are so rare among us moderns, it is because nobody
troubles himself whether citizens exist or not, and still less does anybody
think of attending to the matter soon enough to make them. It is too late to
change our natural inclinations, when they have taken their course, and
egoism is confirmed by habit: it is too late to lead us out of ourselves when
once the human Ego, concentrated in our hearts, has acquired that
contemptible activity which absorbs all virtue and constitutes the life and
being of little minds. How can, patriotism germinate in the midst of so
many other passions which smother it? And what can remain, for fellow-
citizens, of a heart already divided between avarice, a mistress, and vanity?
From the first moment of life, men ought to begin learning to deserve to
live; and, as at the instant of birth we partake of the rights of citizenship,
that instant ought to be the beginning of the exercise of our duty. If there are
laws for the age of maturity, there ought to be laws for infancy, teaching
obedience to others: and as the reason of each man is not left to be the sole
arbiter of his duties, government ought the less indiscriminately to abandon
to the intelligence and prejudices of fathers the education of their children,
as that education is of still greater importance to the State than to the
fathers: for, according to the course of nature, the death of the father often
deprives him of the final fruits of education; but his country sooner or later
perceives its effects. Families dissolve, but the State remains.
Should the public authority, by taking the place of the father, and
charging itself with that important function, acquire his rights by
discharging his duties, he would have the less cause to complain, as he
would only be changing his title, and would have in common, under the
name of citizen, the same authority over his children, as he was exercising
separately under the name of father, and would not be less obeyed when
speaking in the name of the law, than when he spoke in that of nature.
Public education, therefore, under regulations prescribed by the
government, and under magistrates established by the Sovereign, is one of
the fundamental rules of popular or legitimate government. If children are
brought up in common in the bosom of equality; if they are imbued with the
laws of the State and the precepts of the general will; if they are taught to
respect these above all things; if they are surrounded by examples and
objects which constantly remind them of the tender mother who nourishes
them, of the love she bears them, of the inestimable benefits they receive
from her, and of the return they owe her, we cannot doubt that they will
learn to cherish one another mutually as brothers, to will nothing contrary to
the will of society, to substitute the actions of men and citizens for the futile
and vain babbling of sophists, and to become in time defenders and fathers
of the country of which they will have been so long the children.
I shall say nothing of the Magistrates destined to preside over such an
education, which is certainly the most important business of the State. It is
easy to see that if such marks of public confidence were conferred on slight
grounds, if this sublime function were not, for those who have worthily
discharged all other offices, the reward of labour, the pleasant and
honourable repose of old age, and the crown of all honours, the whole
enterprise would be useless and the education void of success. For where-
ever the lesson is not supported by authority, and the precept by example,
all instruction is fruitless; and virtue itself loses its credit in the mouth of
one who does not practise it. But let illustrious warriors, bent under the
weight of their laurels, preach courage: let upright Magistrates, grown white
in the purple and on the bench teach justice. Such teachers as these would
thus get themselves virtuous successors, and transmit from age to age, to
generations to come, the experience and talents of rulers, the courage and
virtue of citizens, and common emulation in all to live and die for their
country.
I know of but three peoples which once practised public education, the
Cretans, the Lacedæmonians, and the ancient Persians: among all these it
was attended with the greatest success, and indeed it did wonders among
the two last. Since the world has been divided into nations too great to
admit of being well governed, this method has been no longer practicable,
and the reader will readily perceive other reasons why such a thing has
never been attempted by any modern people. It is very remarkable that the
Romans were able to dispense with it; but Rome was for five hundred years
one continued miracle which the world cannot hope to see again. The virtue
of the Romans, engendered by their horror of tyranny and the crimes of
tyrants, and by an innate patriotism, made all their houses so many schools
of citizenship; while the unlimited power of fathers over their children
made the individual authority so rigid that the father was more feared than
the Magistrate, and was in his family tribunal both censor of morals and
avenger of the laws.
Thus a careful and well-intentioned government, vigilant incessantly to
maintain or restore patriotism and morality among the people, provides
beforehand against the evils which sooner or later result from the
indifference of the citizens to the fate of the Republic, keeping within
narrow bounds that personal interest which so isolates the individual that
the State is enfeebled by his power, and has nothing to hope from his good-
will. Wherever men love their country, respect the laws, and live simply,
little remains to be done in order to make them happy; and in public
administration, where chance has less influence than in the lot of
individuals, wisdom is so nearly allied to happiness, that the two objects are
confounded.
III. It is not enough to have citizens and to protect them, it is also
necessary to consider their subsistence. Provision for the public wants is an
obvious inference from the general will, and the third essential duty of
government. This duty is not, we should feel, to fill the granaries of
individuals and thereby to grant them a dispensation from labour, but to
keep plenty so within their reach that labour is always necessary and never
useless for its acquisition. It extends also to everything regarding the
management of the exchequer, and the expenses of public administration.
Having thus treated of general economy with reference to the government
of persons, we must now consider it with reference to the administration of
property.
This part presents no fewer difficulties to solve, and contradictions to
remove, than the preceding. It is certain that the right of property is the
most sacred of all the rights of citizenship, and even more important in
some respects than liberty itself; either because it more nearly affects the
preservation of life, or because, property being more easily usurped and
more difficult to defend than life, the law ought to pay a greater attention to
what is most easily taken away; or finally, because property is the true
foundation of civil society, and the real guarantee of the undertakings of
citizens: for if property were not answerable for personal actions, nothing
would be easier than to evade duties and laugh at the laws. On the other
hand, it is no less certain that the maintenance of the State and the
government involves costs and out-goings; and as every one who agrees to
the end must acquiesce in the means, it follows that the members of a
society ought to contribute from their property to its support. Besides, it is
difficult to secure the property of individuals on one side, without attacking
it on another; and it is impossible that all the regulations which govern the
order of succession, will, contracts, &c. should not lay individuals under
some constraint as to the disposition of their goods, and should not
consequently restrict the right of property.
But besides what I have said above of the agreement between the
authority of law and the liberty of the citizen, there remains to be made,
with respect to the disposition of goods, an important observation which
removes many difficulties. As Puffendorf has shown, the right of property,
by its very nature, does not extend beyond the life of the proprietor, and the
moment a man is dead his goods cease to belong to him. Thus, to prescribe
the conditions according to which he can dispose of them, is in reality less
to alter his right as it appears, than to extend it in fact.
In general, although the institution of the laws which regulate the power
of individuals in the disposition of their own goods belongs only to the
Sovereign, the spirit of these laws, which the government ought to follow in
their application, is that, from father to son, and from relation to relation,
the goods of a family should go as little out of it and be as little alienated as
possible. There is a sensible reason for this in favour of children, to whom
the right of property would be quite useless, if the father left them nothing,
and who besides, having often contributed by their labour to the acquisition
of their father's wealth, are in their own right associates with him in his
right of property. But another reason, more distant, though not less
important, is that nothing is more fatal to morality and to the Republic than
the continual shifting of rank and fortune among the citizens: such changes
are both the proof and the source of a thousand disorders, and overturn and
confound everything; for those who were brought up to one thing find
themselves destined for another; and neither those who rise nor those who
fall are able to assume the rules of conduct, or to possess themselves of the
qualifications requisite for their new condition, still less to discharge the
duties it entails. I proceed to the object of public finance.
If the people governed itself and there were no intermediary between
the administration of the State and the citizens, they would have no more to
do than to assess themselves occasionally, in proportion to the public needs
and the abilities of individuals: and as they would all keep in sight the
recovery and employment of such assessments, no fraud or abuse could slip
into the management of them; the State would never be involved in debt, or
the people over-burdened with taxes; or at least the knowledge of how the
money would be used would be a consolation For the severity of the tax.
But things cannot be carried an in this manner: on the contrary, however
small any State may be, civil societies are always too populous to be under
the immediate government of all their members. It is necessary that the
public money should go through the hands of the rulers, all of whom have,
besides the interests of the State, their own individual interests, which are
not the last to be listened to. The people, on its side, perceiving rather the
cupidity and ridiculous expenditure of its rulers than the public needs,
murmurs at seeing itself stripped of necessaries to furnish others with
superfluities; and when once these complaints have reached a certain degree
of bitterness, the most upright administration will find it impossible to
restore confidence. In such a case, voluntary contributions bring in nothing,
and forced contributions are illegitimate. This cruel alternative of letting the
State perish, or of violating the sacred right of property, which is its
support, constitutes the great difficulty of just and prudent economy.
The first step which the founder of a republic ought to take after the
establishment of laws, is to settle a sufficient fund for the maintenance of
the Magistrates and other Officials, and for other public expenses. This
fund, if it consist of money, is called œrarium or fisc, and public demesne if
it consist of lands. This, for obvious reasons, is much to be preferred.
Whoever has reflected on this matter must be of the opinion of Bodin, who
looks upon the public demesne as the most reputable and certain means of
providing for the needs of the State. It is remarkable also that Romulus, in
his division of lands, made it his first care to set apart a third for the use of
the State. I confess it is not impossible for the produce of the demesne, if it
be badly managed, to be reduced to nothing; but it is not of the essence of
public demesnes to be badly administered.
Before any use is made of this fund, it should be assigned or accepted
by an assembly of the people, or of the estates of the country, which should
determine its future use. After this solemnity, which makes such funds
inalienable, their very nature is, in a manner, changed, and the revenues
become so sacred, that it is not only the most infamous theft, but actual
treason, to misapply them or pervert them from the purpose for which they
were destined. It reflects great dishonour on Rome that the integrity of Cato
the censor was something so very remarkable, and that an Emperor, on
rewarding the talents of a singer with a few crowns, thought it necessary to
observe that the money came from his own private purse, and not from that
of the State. But if we find few Galbas, where are we to look for a Cato?
For when vice is no longer dishonourable, what chiefs will be so scrupulous
as to abstain from touching the public revenues that are left to their
discretion, and even not in time to impose on themselves, by pretending to
confound their own expensive and scandalous dissipations with the glory of
the State, and the means of extending their own authority with the means of
augmenting its power? It is particularly in this delicate part of the
administration that virtue is the only effective instrument, and that the
integrity of the Magistrate is the only real check upon his avarice. Books
and auditing of accounts, instead of exposing frauds, only conceal them; for
prudence is never so ready to conceive new precautions as knavery is to
elude them. Never mind, then, about account books and papers; place the
management of finance in honest hands: that is the only way to get it
faithfully conducted.
When public funds are once established, the rulers of the State become
of right the administrators of them: for this administration constitutes a part
of government which is always essential, though not always equally so. Its
influence increases in proportion as that of other resources is diminished;
and it may justly be said that a government has reached the last stage of
corruption, when it has ceased to have sinews other than money. Now as
every government constantly tends to become lax, this is enough to show
why no State can subsist unless its revenues constantly increase.
The first sense of the necessity of this increase is also the first sign of
the internal disorder of the State; and the prudent administrator, in his
endeavours to find means to provide for the present necessity, will neglect
nothing to find out the distant cause of the new need; just as a mariner when
he finds the water gaining on his vessel, does not neglect, while he is
working the pumps, to discover and stop the leak.
From this rule is deduced the most important rule in the administration
of finance, which is, to take more pains to guard against needs than to
increase revenues. For, whatever diligence be employed, the relief which
only comes after, and more slowly than, the evil, always leaves some injury
behind. While a remedy is being found for one evil, another is beginning to
make itself felt, and even the remedies themselves produce new difficulties:
so that at length the nation is involved in debt and the people oppressed,
while the government loses its influence and can do very little with a great
deal of money. I imagine it was owing to the recognition of this rule that
such wonders were done by ancient governments, which did more with
their parsimony than ours do with all their treasures; and perhaps from this
comes the common use of the word economy, which means rather the
prudent management of what one has than ways of getting what one has
not.
But apart from the public demesne, which is of service to the State in
proportion to the uprightness of those who govern, any one sufficiently
acquainted with the whole force of the general administration, especially
when it confines itself to legitimate methods, would be astonished at the
resources the rulers can make use of for guarding against public needs,
without trespassing on the goods of individuals. As they are masters of the
whole commerce of the State, nothing is easier for them than to direct it into
such channels as to provide for every need, without appearing to interfere.
The distribution of provisions, money, and merchandise in just proportions,
according to times and places, is the true secret of finance and the source of
wealth, provided those who administer it have foresight enough to suffer a
present apparent loss, in order really to obtain immense profits in the future.
When we see a government paying bounties, instead of receiving duties, on
the exportation of corn in time of plenty, and on its importation in time of
scarcity, we must have such facts before our eyes if we are to be persuaded
of their reality. We should hold such facts to be idle tales, if they had
happened in ancient times. Let us suppose that, in order to prevent a
scarcity in bad years, a proposal were made to establish public granaries;
would not the maintenance of so useful an institution serve in most
countries as an excuse for new taxes? At Geneva, such granaries,
established and kept up by a prudent administration, are a public resource in
bad years, and the principal revenue of the State at all times. Alit et ditat is
the inscription which stands, rightly and properly, on the front of the
building. To set forth in this place the economic system of a good
government, I have often turned my eyes to that of this Republic, rejoicing
to find in my own country an example of that wisdom and happiness which
I should be glad to see prevail in every other.
If we ask how the needs of a State grow, we shall find they generally
arise, like the wants of individuals, less from any real necessity than from
the increase of useless desires, and that expenses are often augmented only
to give a pretext for raising receipts: so that the State would sometimes gain
by not being rich, and apparent wealth is in reality more burdensome than
poverty itself would be. Rulers may indeed hope to keep the peoples in
stricter dependence, by thus giving them with one hand what they take from
them with the other; and this was in fact the policy of Joseph towards the
Egyptians: but this political sophistry is the more fatal to the State, as the
money never returns into the hands it went out of. Such principles only
enrich the idle at the expense of the industrious.
A desire for conquest is one of the most evident and dangerous causes
of this increase. This desire, occasioned often by a different species of
ambition from that which, it seems to proclaim, is not always what it
appears to be, and has not so much, for its real motive, the apparent desire
to aggrandise the Nation as a secret desire to increase the authority of the
rulers at home, by increasing the number of troops, and by the diversion
which the objects of war occasion in the minds of the citizens.
It is at least certain, that no peoples are so oppressed and wretched as
conquering nations, and that their successes only increase their misery. Did
not history inform us of the fact, reason would suffice to tell us that, the
greater a State grows, the heavier and more burdensome in proportion its
expenses become: for every province has to furnish its share to the general
expense of government, and besides has to be at the expense of its own
administration, which is as great as if it were really independent. Add to this
that great fortunes are always acquired in one place and spent in another.
Production therefore soon ceases to balance consumption, and a whole
country is impoverished merely to enrich a single town.
Another source of the increase of public wants, which depends on the
foregoing, is this. There may come a time when the citizens, no longer
looking upon themselves as interested in the common cause, will cease to
be the defenders of their country, and the Magistrates will prefer the
command of mercenaries to that of free-men; if for no other reason than
that, when the time comes, they may use them to reduce free-men to
submission. Such was the state of Rome towards the end of the Republic
and under the Emperors: for all the victories of the early Romans, like those
of Alexander, had been won by brave citizens, who were ready, at need, to
give their blood in the service of their country, but would never sell it. Only
at the siege of Veii did the practice of paying the Roman infantry begin.
Marius, in the Jugurthine war, dishonoured the legions by introducing
freedmen, vagabonds and other mercenaries. Tyrants, the enemies of the
very people it was their duty to make happy, maintained regular troops,
apparently to withstand the foreigner, but really to enslave their
countrymen. To form such troops, it was necessary to take men from the
land; the lack of their labour then diminished the amount of provisions, and
their maintenance introduced those taxes which increased prices. This first
disorder gave rise to murmurs among the people; in order to suppress them,
the number of troops had to be increased, and consequently the misery of
the people also got worse; and the growing despair led to still further
increases in the cause in order to guard against its effects. On the other
hand, the mercenaries, whose merit we may judge of by the price at which
they sold themselves, proud of their own meanness, and despising the laws
that protected them, as well as their fellows whose bread they ate, imagined
themselves more honoured in being Cæsar's satellites than in being
defenders of Rome. As they were given over to blind obedience, their
swords were always at the throats of their fellow-citizens, and they were
prepared for general butchery at the first sign. It would not be difficult to
show that this was one of the principal causes of the ruin of the Roman
Empire.
The invention of artillery and fortifications has forced the princes of
Europe, in modern times, to return to the use of regular troops, in order to
garrison their towns; but> however lawful their motives, it is to be feared
the effect may be no less fatal. There is no better reason now than formerly
for depopulating the country to form armies and garrisons, nor should the
people be oppressed to support, them; in a word, these dangerous
establishments have increased of late years with such rapidity in this part of
the world, that they evidently threaten to depopulate Europe, and sooner or
later to ruin its inhabitants.
Be this as it may, it ought to be seen that such institutions necessarily
subvert the true economic system, which draws the principal revenue of the
State from the public demesne, and leave only the troublesome resource of
subsidies and imposts; with which it remains to deal.
It should be remembered that the foundation of the social compact is
property; and its first condition, that every one should be maintained in the
peaceful possession of what belongs to him. It is true that, by the same
treaty, every one binds himself, at least tacitly, to be assessed toward the
public wants: but as this undertaking cannot prejudice the fundamental law,
and presupposes that the need is clearly recognised by all who contribute to
it, it is plain that such assessment, in order to be lawful, must be voluntary;
it must depend, not indeed on a particular will, as if it were necessary to
have the consent of each individual, and that he should give no more than
just what he pleased, but on a general will, decided by vote of a majority,
and on the basis of a proportional rating which leaves nothing arbitrary in
the imposition of the tax.
That taxes cannot be legitimately established except by the consent of
the people or its representatives, is a truth generally admitted by all
philosophers and jurists of any repute on questions of public right, not even
excepting Bodin. If any of them have laid down rules which seem to
contradict this, their particular motives for doing so may easily be seen; and
they introduce so many conditions and restrictions that the argument comes
at bottom to the same thing: for whether the people has it in its power to
refuse, or the Sovereign ought not to exact, is a matter of indifference with
regard to right; and if the point in question concerns only power, it is
useless to inquire whether it is legitimate or not. Contributions levied on the
people are two kinds; real, levied on commodities, and personal, paid by the
head. Both are called taxes or subsidies: when the people fixes the sum to
be paid, it is called subsidy; but when it grants the product of an imposition,
it is called a tax. We are told in the Spirit of the Laws that a capitation tax is
most suited to slavery, and a real tax most in accordance with liberty. This
would be incontestable, if the circumstances of every person were equal; for
otherwise nothing can be more disproportionate than such a tax; and it is in
the observations of exact proportions that the spirit of liberty consists. But if
a tax by heads were exactly proportioned to the circumstances of
individuals, as what is called the capitation tax in France might be, is would
be the most equitable and consequently the most proper for free-men.
These proportions appear at first very easy to note, because, being
relative to each man's position in the world, their incidence is always
public: but proper regard is seldom paid to all the elements that should enter
into such a calculation, even apart from deception arising from avarice,
fraud and self-interest. In the first place, we have to consider the relation of
quantities, according to which, ceteris paribus, the person who has ten
times the property of another man ought to pay ten times as much to the
State. Secondly, the relation of the use made, that is to say, the distinction
between necessaries and superfluities. He who possesses only the common
necessaries of life should pay nothing at all, while the tax on him who is in
possession of superfluities may justly be extended to everything he has over
and above mere necessaries. To this he will possibly object that, when his
rank is taken into account, what may be superfluous to a man of inferior
station is necessary for him. But this is false: for a grandee has two legs just
like a cow-herd, and, like him again, but one belly. Besides, these pretended
necessaries are really so little necessary to his rank, that if he should
renounce them on any worthy occasion, he would only be the more
honoured. The populace would be ready to adore a Minister who went to
Council on foot, because he had sold off his carriages to supply a pressing
need of the State. Lastly, to no man does the law prescribe magnificence;
and propriety is no argument against right.
A third relation, which is never taken into account, though it ought to be
the chief consideration, is the advantage that every person derives from the
social confederacy; for this provides a powerful protection for the immense
possessions of the rich, and hardly leaves the poor man in quiet possession
of the cottage he builds with his own hands. Are not all the advantages of
society for the rich and powerful? Are not all lucrative posts in their hands?
Are not all privileges and exemptions reserved for them alone? Is not the
public authority always on their side? If a man of eminence robs his
creditors, or is guilty of other knaveries, is he not always assured of
impunity? Are not the assaults, acts of violence, assassinations, and even
murders committed by the great, matters that are hushed up in a few
months, and of which nothing more is thought? But if a great man himself
is robbed or insulted, the whole police force is immediately in motion, and
woe even to innocent persons who chance to be suspected. If he has to pass
through any dangerous road, the country is up in arms to escort him. If the
axle-tree of his chaise breaks, everybody flies to his assistance. If there is a
noise at his door, he speaks but a word, and all is silent. If he is
incommoded by the crowd, he waves his hand and every one makes way. If
his coach is met on the road by a wagon, his servants are ready to beat the
driver's brains out, and fifty honest pedestrians going quietly about their
business had better be knocked on the head than an idle jackanapes be
delayed in his coach. Yet all this respect costs him not a farthing: it is the
rich man's right, and not what he buys with his wealth. How different the
case of the poor man! the more humanity owes him, the more society denies
him. Every door is shut against him, even when he has a right to its being
opened: and if ever he obtains justice, it is with much greater difficulty than
others obtain favours. If the militia is to be raised or the highway to be
mended, he is always given the preference; he always bears the burden
which his richer neighbour has influence enough to get exempted from. On
the least accident that happens to him, everybody avoids him: if his cart be
overturned in the road, so far is he from receiving any assistance, that he is
lucky if he does not get horse-whipped by the impudent lackeys of some
young Duke; in a word, all gratuitous assistance is denied to the poor when
they need it, just because they cannot pay for it. I look upon any poor man
as totally undone, if he has the misfortune to have an honest heart, a fine
daughter, and a powerful neighbour.
Another no less important fact is that the losses of the poor are much
harder to repair than those of the rich, and that the difficulty of acquisition
is always greater in proportion as there is more need for it. "Nothing comes
out of nothing," is as true of life as in physics: money is the seed of money,
and the first guinea is sometimes more difficult to acquire than the second
million. Add to this that what the poor pay is lost to them for ever, and
remains in, or returns to, the hands of the rich: and as, to those who share in
the government or to their dependents, the whole produce of the taxes must
sooner or later pass, although they pay their share, these persons have
always a sensible interest in increasing them.
The terms of the social compact between these two estates of men may
be summed up in a few words. "You have need of me, because I am rich
and you are poor. We will therefore come to an agreement. I will permit you
to have the honour of serving me, on condition that you bestow on me the
little you have left, in return for the pains I shall take to command you."
Putting all these considerations carefully together, we shall find that, in
order to levy taxes in a truly equitable and proportionate manner, the
imposition ought not to be in simple ratio to the property of the
contributors, but in compound ratio to the difference of their conditions and
the superfluity of their possessions. This very important and difficult
operation is daily made by numbers of honest clerks, who know their
arithmetic; but a Plato or a Montesquieu would not venture to undertake it
without the greatest diffidence, or without praying to Heaven for
understanding and integrity.
Another disadvantage of personal taxes is that they may be too much
felt or raised with too great severity. This, however, does not prevent them
from being frequently evaded; for it is much easier for persons to escape a
tax than for their possessions.
Of all impositions, that on land, or real taxation, has always been
regarded as most advantageous in countries where more attention is paid to
what the tax will produce, and to the certainty of recovering the product,
than to securing the least discomfort for the people. It has been even
maintained that it is necessary to burden the peasant in order to rouse him
from indolence, and that he would never work if he had no taxes to pay. But
in all countries experience confutes this ridiculous notion. In England and
Holland the farmer pays very little, and in China nothing: yet these are the
countries in which the land is best cultivated. On the other hand, in those
countries where the husbandman is taxed in proportion to the produce of his
lands, he leaves them uncultivated, or reaps just as much from them as
suffices for bare subsistence. For to him who loses the fruit of his labour, it
is some gain to do nothing. To lay a tax on industry is a very singular
expedient for banishing idleness.
Taxes on land or corn, especially when they are excessive, lead to two
results so fatal in their effect that they cannot but depopulate and ruin, in the
long run, all countries in which they are established.
The first of these arises from the defective circulation of specie; for
industry and commerce draw all the money from the country into the
capitals: and as the tax destroys the proportion there might otherwise be
between the needs of the husbandman and the price of his corn, money is
always leaving and never returning. Thus the richer the city the poorer the
country. The product of the taxes passes from the hands of the Prince or his
financial officers into those of artists and traders; and the husbandman, who
receives, only the smallest part of it, is at length exhausted by paying
always the same, and receiving constantly less. How could a human body
subsist if it had veins and no arteries, or if its arteries conveyed the blood
only within four inches of the heart? Chardin tells us that in Persia the royal
dues on commodities are paid in kind: this custom, which, Herodotus
informs us, prevailed long ago in the same country down to the time of
Darius, might prevent the evil of which I have been speaking. But unless
Intendants, Directors, Commissioners and Warehousemen in Persia are a
different kind of people from what they are elsewhere, I can hardly believe
that the smallest part of this produce ever reaches the king, or that the corn
is not spoilt in every granary, and the greater part of the warehouses not
consumed by fire.
The second evil effect arises from an apparent advantage, which
aggravates the evil before it can be perceived. That is that corn is a
commodity whose price is not enhanced by taxes in the country producing
it, and which, in spite of its absolute necessity, may be diminished in
quantity without the price being increased. Hence, many people die of
hunger, although corn remains cheap, and the husbandman bears the whole
charge of a tax, for which he cannot indemnify himself by the price of his
corn. It must be observed that we ought not to reason about a land-tax in the
same manner as about duties laid on various kinds of merchandise; for the
effect of such duties is to raise the price, and they are paid by the buyers
rather than the sellers. For these duties, however heavy, are still voluntary,
and are paid by the merchant only in proportion to the quantity he buys; and
as he buys only in proportion to his sale, he himself gives the law its
particular application; but the farmer who is obliged to pay his rent at stated
times, whether he sells or not, cannot wait till he can get his own price for
his commodity: even if he is not forced to sell for mere subsistence, he must
sell to pay the taxes; so that it is frequently the heaviness of the tax that
keeps the price of corn low.
It is further to be noticed that the resources of commerce and industry
are so far from rendering the tax more supportable through abundance of
money, that they only render it more burdensome. I shall not insist on what
is very evident; i.e. that, although a greater or less quantity of money in a
State may give it the greater or less credit in the eye of the foreigner, it
makes not the least difference to the real fortune of the citizens, and does
not make their condition any more or less comfortable. But I must make
these two important remarks: first, unless a State possesses superfluous
commodities, and abundance of money results from foreign trade, only
trading cities are sensible of the abundance; while the peasant only becomes
relatively poorer. Secondly, as the price of everything is enhanced by the
increase of money, taxes also must be proportionately increased; so that the
farmer will find himself still more burdened without having more resources.
It ought to be observed that the tax on land is a real duty on the produce.
It is universally agreed, however, that nothing is so dangerous as a tax on
corn paid by the purchaser: but how comes it we do not see that it is a
hundred times worse when the duty is paid by the cultivator himself? Is not
this an attack on the substance of the State at its very source? Is it not the
directest possible method of depopulating a country, and therefore in the
end ruining it? For the worst kind of scarcity a nation can suffer from is
lack of inhabitants.
Only the real statesman can rise, in imposing taxes, above the mere
financial object: he alone can transform heavy burdens into useful
regulations, and make the people even doubtful whether such
establishments were not calculated rather for the good of the nation in
general, than merely for the raising of money.
Duties on the importation of foreign commodities, of which the natives
are fond, without the country standing in need of them; on the exportation
of those of the growth of the country which are not too plentiful, and which
foreigners cannot do without; on the productions of frivolous and all too
lucrative arts; on the importation of all pure luxuries; and in general on all
objects of luxury; will answer the two-fold end in view. It is by such taxes,
indeed, by which the poor are eased, and the burdens thrown on the rich,
that it is possible to prevent the continual increase of inequality of fortune;
the subjection of such a multitude of artisans and useless servants to the
rich, the multiplication of idle persons in our cities, and the depopulation of
the country-side.
It is important that the value of any commodity and the duties laid on it
should be so proportioned that the avarice of individuals may not be too
strongly tempted to fraud by the greatness of the possible profit. To make
smuggling difficult, those commodities should be singled out which are
hardest to conceal. All duties should be rather paid by the consumer of the
commodity taxed than by him who sells it: as the quantity of duty he would
be obliged to pay would lay him open to greater temptations, and afford him
more opportunities for fraud.
This is the constant custom in China, a country where the taxes are
greater and yet better paid than in any other part of the world. The merchant
himself there pays no duty; the buyer alone, without murmuring or sedition,
meets the whole charge; for as the necessaries of life, such as rice and corn,
are absolutely exempt from taxation, the common people is not oppressed,
and the duty falls only on those who are well-to-do. Precautions against
smuggling ought not to be dictated so much by the fear of it occurring, as
by the attention which the government should pay to securing individuals
from being seduced by illegitimate profits, which first make them bad
citizens, and afterwards soon turn them into dishonest men.
Heavy taxes should be laid on servants in livery, on equipages, rich
furniture, fine clothes, on spacious courts and gardens, on public
entertainments of all kinds, on useless professions, such as dancers, singers,
players, and in a word, on all that multiplicity of objects of luxury,
amusement and idleness, which strike the eyes of all, and can the less be
hidden, as their whole purpose is to be seen, without which they would be
useless. We need be under no apprehension of the produce of these taxes
being arbitrary, because they are laid on things not absolutely necessary.
They must know but little of mankind who imagine that, after they have
been once seduced by luxury, they can ever renounce it: they would a
hundred times sooner renounce common necessaries, and had much rather
die of hunger than of shame. The increase in their expense is only an
additional reason for supporting them, when the vanity of appearing
wealthy reaps its profit from the price of the thing and the charge of the tax.
As long as there are rich people in the world, they will be desirous of
distinguishing themselves from the poor, nor can the State devise a revenue
less burdensome or more certain than what arises from this distinction.
For the same reason, industry would have nothing to suffer from an
economic system which increased the revenue, encouraged agriculture by
relieving the husbandman, and insensibly tended to bring all fortunes nearer
to that middle condition which constitutes the genuine strength of the State.
These taxes might, I admit, bring certain fashionable articles of dress and
amusement to an untimely end; but it would be only to substitute others, by
which the artificer would gain, and the exchequer suffer no loss. In a word,
suppose the spirit of government was constantly to tax only the superfluities
of the rich, one of two things must happen: either the rich would convert
their superfluous expenses into useful ones, which would redound to the
profit of the State, and thus the imposition of taxes would have the effect of
the best sumptuary laws, the expenses of the State would necessarily
diminish with those of individuals, and the treasury would not receive so
much less as it would gain by having less to pay; or, if the rich did not
become less extravagant, the exchequer would have such resources in the
product of taxes on their expenditure as would provide for the needs of the
State. In the first case the treasury would be the richer by what it would
save, from having the less to do with its money; and in the second, it would
be enriched by the useless expenses of individuals.
We may add to all this a very important distinction in matters of
political right, to which governments, constantly tenacious of doing
everything for themselves, ought to pay great attention. It has been
observed that personal taxes and duties on the necessaries of life, as they
directly trespass on the right of property, and consequently on the true
foundation of political society, are always liable to have dangerous results,
if they are not established with the express consent of the people or its
representatives. It is not the same with articles the use of which we can
deny ourselves; for as the individual is under no absolute necessity to pay,
his contribution may count as voluntary. The particular consent of each
contributor then takes the place of the general consent of the whole people:
for why should a people oppose the imposition of a tax which falls only on
those who desire to pay it? It appears to me certain that everything, which is
not proscribed by law, or contrary to morality, and yet may be prohibited by
the government, may also be permitted on payment of a certain duty. Thus,
for example, if the government may prohibit the use of coaches, it may
certainly impose a tax on them; and this is a prudent and useful method of
censuring their use without absolutely forbidding it. In this case, the tax
may be regarded as a sort of fine, the product of which compensates for the
abuse it punishes.
It may perhaps be objected that those, whom Bodin calls impostors, i.e.
those who impose or contrive the taxes, being in the class of the rich, will
be far from sparing themselves to relieve the poor. But this is quite beside
the point. If, in every nation, those to whom the Sovereign commits the
government of the people, were, from their position, its enemies, it would
not be worth while to inquire what they ought to do to make the people
happy.
The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind
(Gustave Le Bon)
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Preface
Introduction. The Era of Crowds
Book I. The Mind of Crowds
Chapter I. General Characteristics of Crowds.—Psychological Law of
Their Mental Unity.
Chapter II. The Sentiments and Morality of Crowds
Chapter III. The Ideas, Reasoning Power, and Imagination of Crowds
Chapter IV. A Religious Shape Assumed by All the Convictions of
Crowds
Book II. The Opinions and Beliefs of Crowds
Chapter I. Remote Factors of the Opinions and Beliefs of Crowds
Chapter II. The Immediate Factors of the Opinions of Crowds
Chapter III. The Leaders of Crowds and Their Means of Persuasion
Chapter IV. Limitations of the Variability of the Beliefs and Opinions
of Crowds
Book III. The Classification and Description of the Different Kinds
of Crowds
Chapter I. The Classification of Crowds
Chapter II. Crowds Termed Criminal Crowds
Chapter III. Criminal Juries
Chapter IV. Electoral Crowds
Chapter V. Parliamentary Assemblies
Preface
Table of Contents
The following work is devoted to an account of the characteristics of
crowds.
The whole of the common characteristics with which heredity endows
the individuals of a race constitute the genius of the race. When, however, a
certain number of these individuals are gathered together in a crowd for
purposes of action, observation proves that, from the mere fact of their
being assembled, there result certain new psychological characteristics,
which are added to the racial characteristics and differ from them at times to
a very considerable degree.
Organised crowds have always played an important part in the life of
peoples, but this part has never been of such moment as at present. The
substitution of the unconscious action of crowds for the conscious activity
of individuals is one of the principal characteristics of the present age.
I have endeavoured to examine the difficult problem presented by
crowds in a purely scientific manner—that is, by making an effort to
proceed with method, and without being influenced by opinions, theories,
and doctrines. This, I believe, is the only mode of arriving at the discovery
of some few particles of truth, especially when dealing, as is the case here,
with a question that is the subject of impassioned controversy. A man of
science bent on verifying a phenomenon is not called upon to concern
himself with the interests his verifications may hurt. In a recent publication
an eminent thinker, M. Goblet d'Alviela, made the remark that, belonging to
none of the contemporary schools, I am occasionally found in opposition of
sundry of the conclusions of all of them. I hope this new work will merit a
similar observation. To belong to a school is necessarily to espouse its
prejudices and preconceived opinions.
Still I should explain to the reader why he will find me draw
conclusions from my investigations which it might be thought at first sight
they do not bear; why, for instance, after noting the extreme mental
inferiority of crowds, picked assemblies included, I yet affirm it would be
dangerous to meddle with their organisation, notwithstanding this
inferiority.
The reason is, that the most attentive observation of the facts of history
has invariably demonstrated to me that social organisms being every whit as
complicated as those of all beings, it is in no wise in our power to force
them to undergo on a sudden far-reaching transformations. Nature has
recourse at times to radical measures, but never after our fashion, which
explains how it is that nothing is more fatal to a people than the mania for
great reforms, however excellent these reforms may appear theoretically.
They would only be useful were it possible to change instantaneously the
genius of nations. This power, however, is only possessed by time. Men are
ruled by ideas, sentiments, and customs—matters which are of the essence
of ourselves. Institutions and laws are the outward manifestation of our
character, the expression of its needs. Being its outcome, institutions and
laws cannot change this character.
The study of social phenomena cannot be separated from that of the
peoples among whom they have come into existence. From the philosophic
point of view these phenomena may have an absolute value; in practice they
have only a relative value.
It is necessary, in consequence, when studying a social phenomenon, to
consider it successively under two very different aspects. It will then be
seen that the teachings of pure reason are very often contrary to those of
practical reason. There are scarcely any data, even physical, to which this
distinction is not applicable. From the point of view of absolute truth a cube
or a circle are invariable geometrical figures, rigorously defined by certain
formulas. From the point of view of the impression they make on our eye
these geometrical figures may assume very varied shapes. By perspective
the cube may be transformed into a pyramid or a square, the circle into an
ellipse or a straight line. Moreover, the consideration of these fictitious
shapes is far more important than that of the real shapes, for it is they and
they alone that we see and that can be reproduced by photography or in
pictures. In certain cases there is more truth in the unreal than in the real. To
present objects with their exact geometrical forms would be to distort nature
and render it unrecognisable. If we imagine a world whose inhabitants
could only copy or photograph objects, but were unable to touch them, it
would be very difficult for such persons to attain to an exact idea of their
form. Moreover, the knowledge of this form, accessible only to a small
number of learned men, would present but a very minor interest.
The philosopher who studies social phenomena should bear in mind that
side by side with their theoretical value they possess a practical value, and
that this latter, so far as the evolution of civilisation is concerned, is alone of
importance. The recognition of this fact should render him very circumspect
with regard to the conclusions that logic would seem at first to enforce upon
him.
There are other motives that dictate to him a like reserve. The
complexity of social facts is such, that it is impossible to grasp them as a
whole and to foresee the effects of their reciprocal influence. It seems, too,
that behind the visible facts are hidden at times thousands of invisible
causes. Visible social phenomena appear to be the result of an immense,
unconscious working, that as a rule is beyond the reach of our analysis.
Perceptible phenomena may be compared to the waves, which are the
expression on the surface of the ocean of deep-lying disturbances of which
we know nothing. So far as the majority of their acts are considered, crowds
display a singularly inferior mentality; yet there are other acts in which they
appear to be guided by those mysterious forces which the ancients
denominated destiny, nature, or providence, which we call the voices of the
dead, and whose power it is impossible to overlook, although we ignore
their essence. It would seem, at times, as if there were latent forces in the
inner being of nations which serve to guide them. What, for instance, can be
more complicated, more logical, more marvellous than a language? Yet
whence can this admirably organised production have arisen, except it be
the outcome of the unconscious genius of crowds? The most learned
academics, the most esteemed grammarians can do no more than note down
the laws that govern languages; they would be utterly incapable of creating
them. Even with respect to the ideas of great men are we certain that they
are exclusively the offspring of their brains? No doubt such ideas are
always created by solitary minds, but is it not the genius of crowds that has
furnished the thousands of grains of dust forming the soil in which they
have sprung up?
Crowds, 
doubtless, 
are 
always 
unconscious, 
but 
this 
very
unconsciousness is perhaps one of the secrets of their strength. In the
natural world beings exclusively governed by instinct accomplish acts
whose marvellous complexity astounds us. Reason is an attribute of
humanity of too recent date and still too imperfect to reveal to us the laws
of the unconscious, and still more to take its place. The part played by the
unconscious in all our acts is immense, and that played by reason very
small. The unconscious acts like a force still unknown.
If we wish, then, to remain within the narrow but safe limits within
which science can attain to knowledge, and not to wander in the domain of
vague conjecture and vain hypothesis, all we must do is simply to take note
of such phenomena as are accessible to us, and confine ourselves to their
consideration. Every conclusion drawn from our observation is, as a rule,
premature, for behind the phenomena which we see clearly are other
phenomena that we see indistinctly, and perhaps behind these latter, yet
others which we do not see at all.
Introduction.
The Era of Crowds
Table of Contents
The evolution of the present age—The great changes in
civilisation are the consequence of changes in National
thought—Modern belief in the power of crowds—It
transforms the traditional policy of the European states—
How the rise of the popular classes comes about, and the
manner in which they exercise their power—The necessary
consequences of the power of the crowd—Crowds unable to
play a part other than destructive—The dissolution of worn-
out civilisations is the work of the crowd—General
ignorance of the psychology of crowds— Importance of the
study of crowds for legislators and statesmen.
The great upheavals which precede changes of civilisations such as the fall
of the Roman Empire and the foundation of the Arabian Empire, seem at
first sight determined more especially by political transformations, foreign
invasion, or the overthrow of dynasties. But a more attentive study of these
events shows that behind their apparent causes the real cause is generally
seen to be a profound modification in the ideas of the peoples. The true
historical upheavals are not those which astonish us by their grandeur and
violence. The only important changes whence the renewal of civilisations
results, affect ideas, conceptions, and beliefs. The memorable events of
history are the visible effects of the invisible changes of human thought.
The reason these great events are so rare is that there is nothing so stable in
a race as the inherited groundwork of its thoughts.
The present epoch is one of these critical moments in which the thought
of mankind is undergoing a process of transformation.
Two fundamental factors are at the base of this transformation. The first
is the destruction of those religious, political, and social beliefs in which all
the elements of our civilisation are rooted. The second is the creation of
entirely new conditions of existence and thought as the result of modern
scientific and industrial discoveries.
The ideas of the past, although half destroyed, being still very powerful,
and the ideas which are to replace them being still in process of formation,
the modern age represents a period of transition and anarchy.
It is not easy to say as yet what will one day be evolved from this
necessarily somewhat chaotic period. What will be the fundamental ideas
on which the societies that are to succeed our own will be built up? We do
not at present know. Still it is already clear that on whatever lines the
societies of the future are organised, they will have to count with a new
power, with the last surviving sovereign force of modern times, the power
of crowds. On the ruins of so many ideas formerly considered beyond
discussion, and to-day decayed or decaying, of so many sources of authority
that successive revolutions have destroyed, this power, which alone has
arisen in their stead, seems soon destined to absorb the others. While all our
ancient beliefs are tottering and disappearing, while the old pillars of
society are giving way one by one, the power of the crowd is the only force
that nothing menaces, and of which the prestige is continually on the
increase. The age we are about to enter will in truth be the Era of crowds.
Scarcely a century ago the traditional policy of European states and the
rivalries of sovereigns were the principal factors that shaped events. The
opinion of the masses scarcely counted, and most frequently indeed did not
count at all. To-day it is the traditions which used to obtain in politics, and
the individual tendencies and rivalries of rulers which do not count; while,
on the contrary, the voice of the masses has become preponderant. It is this
voice that dictates their conduct to kings, whose endeavour is to take note
of its utterances. The destinies of nations are elaborated at present in the
heart of the masses, and no longer in the councils of princes.
The entry of the popular classes into political life—that is to say, in
reality, their progressive transformation into governing classes—is one of
the most striking characteristics of our epoch of transition. The introduction
of universal suffrage, which exercised for a long time but little influence, is
not, as might be thought, the distinguishing feature of this transference of
political power. The progressive growth of the power of the masses took
place at first by the propagation of certain ideas, which have slowly
implanted themselves in men's minds, and afterwards by the gradual
association of individuals bent on bringing about the realisation of
theoretical conceptions. It is by association that crowds have come to
procure ideas with respect to their interests which are very clearly defined if
not particularly just, and have arrived at a consciousness of their strength.
The masses are founding syndicates before which the authorities capitulate
one after the other; they are also founding labour unions, which in spite of
all economic laws tend to regulate the conditions of labour and wages. They
return to assemblies in which the Government is vested, representatives
utterly lacking initiative and independence, and reduced most often to
nothing else than the spokesmen of the committees that have chosen them.
To-day the claims of the masses are becoming more and more sharply
defined, and amount to nothing less than a determination to utterly destroy
society as it now exists, with a view to making it hark back to that primitive
communism which was the normal condition of all human groups before
the dawn of civilisation. Limitations of the hours of labour, the
nationalisation of mines, railways, factories, and the soil, the equal
distribution of all products, the elimination of all the upper classes for the
benefit of the popular classes, &c., such are these claims.
Little adapted to reasoning, crowds, on the contrary, are quick to act. As
the result of their present organisation their strength has become immense.
The dogmas whose birth we are witnessing will soon have the force of the
old dogmas; that is to say, the tyrannical and sovereign force of being above
discussion. The divine right of the masses is about to replace the divine
right of kings.
The writers who enjoy the favour of our middle classes, those who best
represent their rather narrow ideas, their somewhat prescribed views, their
rather superficial scepticism, and their at times somewhat excessive egoism,
display profound alarm at this new power which they see growing; and to
combat the disorder in men's minds they are addressing despairing appeals
to those moral forces of the Church for which they formerly professed so
much disdain. They talk to us of the bankruptcy of science, go back in
penitence to Rome, and remind us of the teachings of revealed truth. These
new converts forget that it is too late. Had they been really touched by
grace, a like operation could not have the same influence on minds less
concerned with the preoccupations which beset these recent adherents to
religion. The masses repudiate to-day the gods which their admonishers
repudiated yesterday and helped to destroy. There is no power, Divine or
human, that can oblige a stream to flow back to its source.
There has been no bankruptcy of science, and science has had no share
in the present intellectual anarchy, nor in the making of the new power
which is springing up in the midst of this anarchy. Science promised us
truth, or at least a knowledge of such relations as our intelligence can seize:
it never promised us peace or happiness. Sovereignly indifferent to our
feelings, it is deaf to our lamentations. It is for us to endeavour to live with
science, since nothing can bring back the illusions it has destroyed.
Universal symptoms, visible in all nations, show us the rapid growth of
the power of crowds, and do not admit of our supposing that it is destined to
cease growing at an early date. Whatever fate it may reserve for us, we shall
have to submit to it. All reasoning against it is a mere vain war of words.
Certainly it is possible that the advent to power of the masses marks one of
the last stages of Western civilisation, a complete return to those periods of
confused anarchy which seem always destined to precede the birth of every
new society. But may this result be prevented?
Up to now these thoroughgoing destructions of a worn-out civilisation
have constituted the most obvious task of the masses. It is not indeed to-day
merely that this can be traced. History tells us, that from the moment when
the moral forces on which a civilisation rested have lost their strength, its
final dissolution is brought about by those unconscious and brutal crowds
known, justifiably enough, as barbarians. Civilisations as yet have only
been created and directed by a small intellectual aristocracy, never by
crowds. Crowds are only powerful for destruction. Their rule is always
tantamount to a barbarian phase. A civilisation involves fixed rules,
discipline, a passing from the instinctive to the rational state, forethought
for the future, an elevated degree of culture—all of them conditions that
crowds, left to themselves, have invariably shown themselves incapable of
realising. In consequence of the purely destructive nature of their power
crowds act like those microbes which hasten the dissolution of enfeebled or
dead bodies. When the structure of a civilisation is rotten, it is always the
masses that bring about its downfall. It is at such a juncture that their chief
mission is plainly visible, and that for a while the philosophy of number
seems the only philosophy of history.
Is the same fate in store for our civilisation? There is ground to fear that
this is the case, but we are not as yet in a position to be certain of it.
However this may be, we are bound to resign ourselves to the reign of
the masses, since want of foresight has in succession overthrown all the
barriers that might have kept the crowd in check.
We have a very slight knowledge of these crowds which are beginning
to be the object of so much discussion. Professional students of psychology,
having lived far from them, have always ignored them, and when, as of late,
they have turned their attention in this direction it has only been to consider
the crimes crowds are capable of committing. Without a doubt criminal
crowds exist, but virtuous and heroic crowds, and crowds of many other
kinds, are also to be met with. The crimes of crowds only constitute a
particular phase of their psychology. The mental constitution of crowds is
not to be learnt merely by a study of their crimes, any more than that of an
individual by a mere description of his vices.
However, in point of fact, all the world's masters, all the founders of
religions or empires, the apostles of all beliefs, eminent statesmen, and, in a
more modest sphere, the mere chiefs of small groups of men have always
been unconscious psychologists, possessed of an instinctive and often very
sure knowledge of the character of crowds, and it is their accurate
knowledge of this character that has enabled them to so easily establish
their mastery. Napoleon had a marvellous insight into the psychology of the
masses of the country over which he reigned, but he, at times, completely
misunderstood the psychology of crowds belonging to other races;1 and it is
because he thus misunderstood it that he engaged in Spain, and notably in
Russia, in conflicts in which his power received blows which were destined
within a brief space of time to ruin it. A knowledge of the psychology of
crowds is to-day the last resource of the statesman who wishes not to
govern them—that is becoming a very difficult matter—but at any rate not
to be too much governed by them.
It is only by obtaining some sort of insight into the psychology of
crowds that it can be understood how slight is the action upon them of laws
and institutions, how powerless they are to hold any opinions other than
those which are imposed upon them, and that it is not with rules based on
theories of pure equity that they are to be led, but by seeking what produces
an impression on them and what seduces them. For instance, should a
legislator, wishing to impose a new tax, choose that which would be
theoretically the most just? By no means. In practice the most unjust may
be the best for the masses. Should it at the same time be the least obvious,
and apparently the least burdensome, it will be the most easily tolerated. It
is for this reason that an indirect tax, however exorbitant it be, will always
be accepted by the crowd, because, being paid daily in fractions of a
farthing on objects of consumption, it will not interfere with the habits of
the crowd, and will pass unperceived. Replace it by a proportional tax on
wages or income of any other kind, to be paid in a lump sum, and were this
new imposition theoretically ten times less burdensome than the other, it
would give rise to unanimous protest. This arises from the fact that a sum
relatively high, which will appear immense, and will in consequence strike
the imagination, has been substituted for the unperceived fractions of a
farthing. The new tax would only appear light had it been saved farthing by
farthing, but this economic proceeding involves an amount of foresight of
which the masses are incapable.
The example which precedes is of the simplest. Its appositeness will be
easily perceived. It did not escape the attention of such a psychologist as
Napoleon, but our modern legislators, ignorant as they are of the
characteristics of a crowd, are unable to appreciate it. Experience has not
taught them as yet to a sufficient degree that men never shape their conduct
upon the teaching of pure reason.
Many other practical applications might be made of the psychology of
crowds. A knowledge of this science throws the most vivid light on a great
number of historical and economic phenomena totally incomprehensible
without it. I shall have occasion to show that the reason why the most
remarkable of modern historians, Taine, has at times so imperfectly
understood the events of the great French Revolution is, that it never
occurred to him to study the genius of crowds. He took as his guide in the
study of this complicated period the descriptive method resorted to by
naturalists; but the moral forces are almost absent in the case of the
phenomena which naturalists have to study. Yet it is precisely these forces
that constitute the true mainsprings of history.
In consequence, merely looked at from its practical side, the study of
the psychology of crowds deserved to be attempted. Were its interest that
resulting from pure curiosity only, it would still merit attention. It is as
interesting to decipher the motives of the actions of men as to determine the
characteristics of a mineral or a plant. Our study of the genius of crowds
can merely be a brief synthesis, a simple summary of our investigations.
Nothing more must be demanded of it than a few suggestive views. Others
will work the ground more thoroughly. To-day we only touch the surface of
a still almost virgin soil.
1. His most subtle advisers, moreover, did not understand this psychology any better. Talleyrand
wrote him that "Spain would receive his soldiers as liberators." It received them as beasts of
prey. A psychologist acquainted with the hereditary instincts of the Spanish race would have
easily foreseen this reception.
Book I.
The Mind of Crowds
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
General Characteristics of Crowds.—
Psychological Law of Their Mental Unity.
Table of Contents
What constitutes a crowd from the psychological point of
view—A numerically strong agglomeration of individuals
does not suffice to form a crowd—Special characteristics of
psychological crowds—The turning in a fixed direction of
the ideas and sentiments of individuals composing such a
crowd, and the disappearance of their personality—The
crowd is always dominated by considerations of which it is
unconscious—The disappearance of brain activity and the
predominance of medullar activity—The lowering of the
intelligence and the complete transformation of the
sentiments—The transformed sentiments may be better or
worse than those of the individuals of which the crowd is
composed—A crowd is as easily heroic as criminal.
In its ordinary sense the word "crowd" means a gathering of individuals of
whatever nationality, profession, or sex, and whatever be the chances that
have brought them together. From the psychological point of view the
expression "crowd" assumes quite a different signification. Under certain
given circumstances, and only under those circumstances, an agglomeration
of men presents new characteristics very different from those of the
individuals composing it. The sentiments and ideas of all the persons in the
gathering take one and the same direction, and their conscious personality
vanishes. A collective mind is formed, doubtless transitory, but presenting
very clearly defined characteristics. The gathering has thus become what, in
the absence of a better expression, I will call an organised crowd, or, if the
term is considered preferable, a psychological crowd. It forms a single
being, and is subjected to the Law of the mental unity of crowds.
It is evident that it is not by the mere fact of a number of individuals
finding themselves accidentally side by side that they acquire the character
of an organised crowd. A thousand individuals accidentally gathered in a
public place without any determined object in no way constitute a crowd
from the psychological point of view. To acquire the special characteristics
of such a crowd, the influence is necessary of certain predisposing causes of
which we shall have to determine the nature.
The disappearance of conscious personality and the turning of feelings
and thoughts in a definite direction, which are the primary characteristics of
a crowd about to become organised, do not always involve the simultaneous
presence of a number of individuals on one spot. Thousands of isolated
individuals may acquire at certain moments, and under the influence of
certain violent emotions—such, for example, as a great national event—the
characteristics of a psychological crowd. It will be sufficient in that case
that a mere chance should bring them together for their acts to at once
assume the characteristics peculiar to the acts of a crowd. At certain
moments half a dozen men might constitute a psychological crowd, which
may not happen in the case of hundreds of men gathered together by
accident. On the other hand, an entire nation, though there may be no
visible agglomeration, may become a crowd under the action of certain
influences.
A psychological crowd once constituted, it acquires certain provisional
but determinable general characteristics. To these general characteristics
there are adjoined particular characteristics which vary according to the
elements of which the crowd is composed, and may modify its mental
constitution. Psychological crowds, then, are susceptible of classification;
and when we come to occupy ourselves with this matter, we shall see that a
heterogeneous crowd—that is, a crowd composed of dissimilar elements—
presents certain characteristics in common with homogeneous crowds—that
is, with crowds composed of elements more or less akin (sects, castes, and
classes)—and side by side with these common characteristics particularities
which permit of the two kinds of crowds being differentiated.
But before occupying ourselves with the different categories of crowds,
we must first of all examine the characteristics common to them all. We
shall set to work like the naturalist, who begins by describing the general
characteristics common to all the members of a family before concerning
himself with the particular characteristics which allow the differentiation of
the genera and species that the family includes.
It is not easy to describe the mind of crowds with exactness, because its
organisation varies not only according to race and composition, but also
according to the nature and intensity of the exciting causes to which crowds
are subjected. The same difficulty, however, presents itself in the
psychological study of an individual. It is only in novels that individuals are
found to traverse their whole life with an unvarying character. It is only the
uniformity of the environment that creates the apparent uniformity of
characters. I have shown elsewhere that all mental constitutions contain
possibilities of character which may be manifested in consequence of a
sudden change of environment. This explains how it was that among the
most savage members of the French Convention were to be found
inoffensive citizens who, under ordinary circumstances, would have been
peaceable notaries or virtuous magistrates. The storm past, they resumed
their normal character of quiet, law-abiding citizens. Napoleon found
amongst them his most docile servants.
It being impossible to study here all the successive degrees of
organisation of crowds, we shall concern ourselves more especially with
such crowds as have attained to the phase of complete organisation. In this
way we shall see what crowds may become, but not what they invariably
are. It is only in this advanced phase of organisation that certain new and
special characteristics are superposed on the unvarying and dominant
character of the race; then takes place that turning already alluded to of all
the feelings and thoughts of the collectivity in an identical direction. It is
only under such circumstances, too, that what I have called above the
Psychological law of the mental unity of crowds comes into play.
Among the psychological characteristics of crowds there are some that
they may present in common with isolated individuals, and others, on the
contrary, which are absolutely peculiar to them and are only to be met with
in collectivities. It is these special characteristics that we shall study, first of
all, in order to show their importance.
The most striking peculiarity presented by a psychological crowd is the
following: Whoever be the individuals that compose it, however like or
unlike be their mode of life, their occupations, their character, or their
intelligence, the fact that they have been transformed into a crowd puts
them in possession of a sort of collective mind which makes them feel,
think, and act in a manner quite different from that in which each individual
of them would feel, think, and act were he in a state of isolation. There are
certain ideas and feelings which do not come into being, or do not
transform themselves into acts except in the case of individuals forming a
crowd. The psychological crowd is a provisional being formed of
heterogeneous elements, which for a moment are combined, exactly as the
cells which constitute a living body form by their reunion a new being
which displays characteristics very different from those possessed by each
of the cells singly.
Contrary to an opinion which one is astonished to find coming from the
pen of so acute a philosopher as Herbert Spencer, in the aggregate which
constitutes a crowd there is in no sort a summing-up of or an average struck
between its elements. What really takes place is a combination followed by
the creation of new characteristics, just as in chemistry certain elements,
when brought into contact—bases and acids, for example—combine to
form a new body possessing properties quite different from those of the
bodies that have served to form it.
It is easy to prove how much the individual forming part of a crowd
differs from the isolated individual, but it is less easy to discover the causes
of this difference.
To obtain at any rate a glimpse of them it is necessary in the first place
to call to mind the truth established by modern psychology, that
unconscious phenomena play an altogether preponderating part not only in
organic life, but also in the operations of the intelligence. The conscious life
of the mind is of small importance in comparison with its unconscious life.
The most subtle analyst, the most acute observer, is scarcely successful in
discovering more than a very small number of the unconscious motives that
determine his conduct. Our conscious acts are the outcome of an
unconscious substratum created in the mind in the main by hereditary
influences. This substratum consists of the innumerable common
characteristics handed down from generation to generation, which
constitute the genius of a race. Behind the avowed causes of our acts there
undoubtedly lie secret causes that we do not avow, but behind these secret
causes there are many others more secret still which we ourselves ignore.
The greater part of our daily actions are the result of hidden motives which
escape our observation.
It is more especially with respect to those unconscious elements which
constitute the genius of a race that all the individuals belonging to it
resemble each other, while it is principally in respect to the conscious
elements of their character—the fruit of education, and yet more of
exceptional hereditary conditions—that they differ from each other. Men
the most unlike in the matter of their intelligence possess instincts, passions,
and feelings that are very similar. In the case of every thing that belongs to
the realm of sentiment—religion, politics, morality, the affections and
antipathies, &c.—the most eminent men seldom surpass the standard of the
most ordinary individuals. From the intellectual point of view an abyss may
exist between a great mathematician and his boot maker, but from the point
of view of character the difference is most often slight or non-existent.
It is precisely these general qualities of character, governed by forces of
which we are unconscious, and possessed by the majority of the normal
individuals of a race in much the same degree—it is precisely these
qualities, I say, that in crowds become common property. In the collective
mind the intellectual aptitudes of the individuals, and in consequence their
individuality, are weakened. The heterogeneous is swamped by the
homogeneous, and the unconscious qualities obtain the upper hand.
This very fact that crowds possess in common ordinary qualities
explains why they can never accomplish acts demanding a high degree of
intelligence. The decisions affecting matters of general interest come to by
an assembly of men of distinction, but specialists in different walks of life,
are not sensibly superior to the decisions that would be adopted by a
gathering of imbeciles. The truth is, they can only bring to bear in common
on the work in hand those mediocre qualities which are the birthright of
every average individual. In crowds it is stupidity and not mother-wit that is
accumulated. It is not all the world, as is so often repeated, that has more
wit than Voltaire, but assuredly Voltaire that has more wit than all the world,
if by "all the world" crowds are to be understood.
If the individuals of a crowd confined themselves to putting in common
the ordinary qualities of which each of them has his share, there would
merely result the striking of an average, and not, as we have said is actually
the case, the creation of new characteristics. How is it that these new
characteristics are created? This is what we are now to investigate.
Different causes determine the appearance of these characteristics
peculiar to crowds, and not possessed by isolated individuals. The first is
that the individual forming part of a crowd acquires, solely from numerical
considerations, a sentiment of invincible power which allows him to yield
to instincts which, had he been alone, he would perforce have kept under
restraint. He will be the less disposed to check himself from the
consideration that, a crowd being anonymous, and in consequence
irresponsible, the sentiment of responsibility which always controls
individuals disappears entirely.
The second cause, which is contagion, also intervenes to determine the
manifestation in crowds of their special characteristics, and at the same time
the trend they are to take. Contagion is a phenomenon of which it is easy to
establish the presence, but that it is not easy to explain. It must be classed
among those phenomena of a hypnotic order, which we shall shortly study.
In a crowd every sentiment and act is contagious, and contagious to such a
degree that an individual readily sacrifices his personal interest to the
collective interest. This is an aptitude very contrary to his nature, and of
which a man is scarcely capable, except when he makes part of a crowd.
A third cause, and by far the most important, determines in the
individuals of a crowd special characteristics which are quite contrary at
times to those presented by the isolated individual. I allude to that
suggestibility of which, moreover, the contagion mentioned above is neither
more nor less than an effect.
To understand this phenomenon it is necessary to bear in mind certain
recent physiological discoveries. We know to-day that by various processes
an individual may be brought into such a condition that, having entirely lost
his conscious personality, he obeys all the suggestions of the operator who
has deprived him of it, and commits acts in utter contradiction with his
character and habits. The most careful observations seem to prove that an
individual immerged for some length of time in a crowd in action soon
finds himself—either in consequence of the magnetic influence given out
by the crowd, or from some other cause of which we are ignorant—in a
special state, which much resembles the state of fascination in which the
hypnotised individual finds himself in the hands of the hypnotiser. The
activity of the brain being paralysed in the case of the hypnotised subject,
the latter becomes the slave of all the unconscious activities of his spinal
cord, which the hypnotiser directs at will. The conscious personality has
entirely vanished; will and discernment are lost. All feelings and thoughts
are bent in the direction determined by the hypnotiser.
Such also is approximately the state of the individual forming part of a
psychological crowd. He is no longer conscious of his acts. In his case, as in
the case of the hypnotised subject, at the same time that certain faculties are
destroyed, others may be brought to a high degree of exaltation. Under the
influence of a suggestion, he will undertake the accomplishment of certain
acts with irresistible impetuosity. This impetuosity is the more irresistible in
the case of crowds than in that of the hypnotised subject, from the fact that,
the suggestion being the same for all the individuals of the crowd, it gains
in strength by reciprocity. The individualities in the crowd who might
possess a personality sufficiently strong to resist the suggestion are too few
in number to struggle against the current. At the utmost, they may be able to
attempt a diversion by means of different suggestions. It is in this way, for
instance, that a happy expression, an image opportunely evoked, have
occasionally deterred crowds from the most bloodthirsty acts.
We see, then, that the disappearance of the conscious personality, the
predominance of the unconscious personality, the turning by means of
suggestion and contagion of feelings and ideas in an identical direction, the
tendency to immediately transform the suggested ideas into acts; these, we
see, are the principal characteristics of the individual forming part of a
crowd. He is no longer himself, but has become an automaton who has
ceased to be guided by his will.
Moreover, by the mere fact that he forms part of an organised crowd, a
man descends several rungs in the ladder of civilisation. Isolated, he may be
a cultivated individual; in a crowd, he is a barbarian—that is, a creature
acting by instinct. He possesses the spontaneity, the violence, the ferocity,
and also the enthusiasm and heroism of primitive beings, whom he further
tends to resemble by the facility with which he allows himself to be
impressed by words and images—which would be entirely without action
on each of the isolated individuals composing the crowd—and to be
induced to commit acts contrary to his most obvious interests and his best-
known habits. An individual in a crowd is a grain of sand amid other grains
of sand, which the wind stirs up at will.
It is for these reasons that juries are seen to deliver verdicts of which
each individual juror would disapprove, that parliamentary assemblies
adopt laws and measures of which each of their members would disapprove
in his own person. Taken separately, the men of the Convention were
enlightened citizens of peaceful habits. United in a crowd, they did not
hesitate to give their adhesion to the most savage proposals, to guillotine
individuals most clearly innocent, and, contrary to their interests, to
renounce their inviolability and to decimate themselves.
It is not only by his acts that the individual in a crowd differs essentially
from himself. Even before he has entirely lost his independence, his ideas
and feelings have undergone a transformation, and the transformation is so
profound as to change the miser into a spendthrift, the sceptic into a
believer, the honest man into a criminal, and the coward into a hero. The
renunciation of all its privileges which the nobility voted in a moment of
enthusiasm during the celebrated night of August 4, 1789, would certainly
never have been consented to by any of its members taken singly.
The conclusion to be drawn from what precedes is, that the crowd is
always intellectually inferior to the isolated individual, but that, from the
point of view of feelings and of the acts these feelings provoke, the crowd
may, according to circumstances, he better or worse than the individual. All
depends on the nature of the suggestion to which the crowd is exposed. This
is the point that has been completely misunderstood by writers who have
only studied crowds from the criminal point of view. Doubtless a crowd is
often criminal, but also it is often heroic. It is crowds rather than isolated
individuals that may be induced to run the risk of death to secure the
triumph of a creed or an idea, that may be fired with enthusiasm for glory
and honour, that are led on—almost without bread and without arms, as in
the age of the Crusades—to deliver the tomb of Christ from the infidel, or,
as in '93, to defend the fatherland. Such heroism is without doubt somewhat
unconscious, but it is of such heroism that history is made. Were peoples
only to be credited with the great actions performed in cold blood, the
annals of the world would register but few of them.
Chapter II.
The Sentiments and Morality of Crowds
Table of Contents
1. Impulsiveness, mobility, and irritability of crowds. The
crowd is at the mercy of all exterior exciting causes, and
reflects their incessant variations—The impulses which the
crowd obeys are so imperious as to annihilate the feeling of
personal interest— Premeditation is absent from crowds—
Racial influence. 2. Crowds are credulous and readily
influenced by suggestion. The obedience of crowds to
suggestions—The images evoked in the mind of crowds are
accepted by them as realities—Why these images are
identical for all the individuals composing a crowd—The
equality of the educated and the ignorant man in a crowd—
Various examples of the illusions to which the individuals in
a crowd are subject—The impossibility of according belief
to the testimony of crowds—The unanimity of numerous
witnesses is one of the worst proofs that can be invoked to
establish a fact—The slight value of works of history. 3. The
exaggeration and ingenuousness of the sentiments of crowds.
Crowds do not admit doubt or uncertainty, and always go to
extremes—Their sentiments always excessive. 4. The
intolerance, dictatorialness, and conservatism of crowds.
The reasons of these sentiments—The servility of crowds in
the face of a strong authority—The momentary revolutionary
instincts of crowds do not prevent them from being
extremely conservative—Crowds instinctively hostile to
changes and progress. 5. The morality of crowds. The
morality of crowds, according to the suggestions under
which they act, may be much lower or much higher than that
of the individuals composing them—Explanation and
examples— Crowds rarely guided by those considerations of
interest which are most often the exclusive motives of the
isolated individual—The moralising role of crowds.
Having indicated in a general way the principal characteristics of crowds, it
remains to study these characteristics in detail.
It will be remarked that among the special characteristics of crowds
there are several—such as impulsiveness, irritability, incapacity to reason,
the absence of judgment and of the critical spirit, the exaggeration of the
sentiments, and others besides—which are almost always observed in
beings belonging to inferior forms of evolution—in women, savages, and
children, for instance. However, I merely indicate this analogy in passing;
its demonstration is outside the scope of this work. It would, moreover, be
useless for persons acquainted with the psychology of primitive beings, and
would scarcely carry conviction to those in ignorance of this matter.
I now proceed to the successive consideration of the different
characteristics that may be observed in the majority of crowds.
1. Impulsiveness, Mobility, and Irritability of Crowds.
When studying the fundamental characteristics of a crowd we stated that it
is guided almost exclusively by unconscious motives. Its acts are far more
under the influence of the spinal cord than of the brain. In this respect a
crowd is closely akin to quite primitive beings. The acts performed may be
perfect so far as their execution is concerned, but as they are not directed by
the brain, the individual conducts himself according as the exciting causes
to which he is submitted may happen to decide. A crowd is at the mercy of
all external exciting causes, and reflects their incessant variations. It is the
slave of the impulses which it receives. The isolated individual may be
submitted to the same exciting causes as the man in a crowd, but as his
brain shows him the inadvisability of yielding to them, he refrains from
yielding. This truth may be physiologically expressed by saying that the
isolated individual possesses the capacity of dominating his reflex actions,
while a crowd is devoid of this capacity.
The varying impulses to which crowds obey may be, according to their
exciting causes, generous or cruel, heroic or cowardly, but they will always
be so imperious that the interest of the individual, even the interest of self-
preservation, will not dominate them. The exciting causes that may act on
crowds being so varied, and crowds always obeying them, crowds are in
consequence extremely mobile. This explains how it is that we see them
pass in a moment from the most bloodthirsty ferocity to the most extreme
generosity and heroism. A crowd may easily enact the part of an
executioner, but not less easily that of a martyr. It is crowds that have
furnished the torrents of blood requisite for the triumph of every belief. It is
not necessary to go back to the heroic ages to see what crowds are capable
of in this latter direction. They are never sparing of their life in an
insurrection, and not long since a general,2 becoming suddenly popular,
might easily have found a hundred thousand men ready to sacrifice their
lives for his cause had he demanded it.
Any display of premeditation by crowds is in consequence out of the
question. They may be animated in succession by the most contrary
sentiments, but they will always be under the influence of the exciting
causes of the moment. They are like the leaves which a tempest whirls up
and scatters in every direction and then allows to fall. When studying later
on certain revolutionary crowds we shall give some examples of the
variability of their sentiments.
This mobility of crowds renders them very difficult to govern,
especially when a measure of public authority has fallen into their hands.
Did not the necessities of everyday life constitute a sort of invisible
regulator of existence, it would scarcely be possible for democracies to last.
Still, though the wishes of crowds are frenzied they are not durable. Crowds
are as incapable of willing as of thinking for any length of time.
A crowd is not merely impulsive and mobile. Like a savage, it is not
prepared to admit that anything can come between its desire and the
realisation of its desire. It is the less capable of understanding such an
intervention, in consequence of the feeling of irresistible power given it by
its numerical strength. The notion of impossibility disappears for the
individual in a crowd. An isolated individual knows well enough that alone
he cannot set fire to a palace or loot a shop, and should he be tempted to do
so, he will easily resist the temptation. Making part of a crowd, he is
conscious of the power given him by number, and it is sufficient to suggest
to him ideas of murder or pillage for him to yield immediately to
temptation. An unexpected obstacle will be destroyed with frenzied rage.
Did the human organism allow of the perpetuity of furious passion, it might
be said that the normal condition of a crowd baulked in its wishes is just
such a state of furious passion.
The fundamental characteristics of the race, which constitute the
unvarying source from which all our sentiments spring, always exert an
influence on the irritability of crowds, their impulsiveness and their
mobility, as on all the popular sentiments we shall have to study. All crowds
are doubtless always irritable and impulsive, but with great variations of
degree. For instance, the difference between a Latin and an Anglo-Saxon
crowd is striking. The most recent facts in French history throw a vivid light
on this point. The mere publication, twenty-five years ago, of a telegram,
relating an insult supposed to have been offered an ambassador, was
sufficient to determine an explosion of fury, whence followed immediately
a terrible war. Some years later the telegraphic announcement of an
insignificant reverse at Langson provoked a fresh explosion which brought
about the instantaneous overthrow of the government. At the same moment
a much more serious reverse undergone by the English expedition to
Khartoum produced only a slight emotion in England, and no ministry was
overturned. 
Crowds 
are 
everywhere 
distinguished 
by 
feminine
characteristics, but Latin crowds are the most feminine of all. Whoever
trusts in them may rapidly attain a lofty destiny, but to do so is to be
perpetually skirting the brink of a Tarpeian rock, with the certainty of one
day being precipitated from it.
2. The Suggestibility and Credulity of Crowds.
When defining crowds, we said that one of their general characteristics was
an excessive suggestibility, and we have shown to what an extent
suggestions are contagious in every human agglomeration; a fact which
explains the rapid turning of the sentiments of a crowd in a definite
direction. However indifferent it may be supposed, a crowd, as a rule, is in a
state of expectant attention, which renders suggestion easy. The first
suggestion formulated which arises implants itself immediately by a process
of contagion in the brains of all assembled, and the identical bent of the
sentiments of the crowd is immediately an accomplished fact.
As is the case with all persons under the influence of suggestion, the
idea which has entered the brain tends to transform itself into an act.
Whether the act is that of setting fire to a palace, or involves self-sacrifice, a
crowd lends itself to it with equal facility. All will depend on the nature of
the exciting cause, and no longer, as in the case of the isolated individual,
on the relations existing between the act suggested and the sum total of the
reasons which may be urged against its realisation.
In consequence, a crowd perpetually hovering on the borderland of
unconsciousness, readily yielding to all suggestions, having all the violence
of feeling peculiar to beings who cannot appeal to the influence of reason,
deprived of all critical faculty, cannot be otherwise than excessively
credulous. The improbable does not exist for a crowd, and it is necessary to
bear this circumstance well in mind to understand the facility with which
are created and propagated the most improbable legends and stories.3
The creation of the legends which so easily obtain circulation in crowds
is not solely the consequence of their extreme credulity. It is also the result
of the prodigious perversions that events undergo in the imagination of a
throng. The simplest event that comes under the observation of a crowd is
soon totally transformed. A crowd thinks in images, and the image itself
immediately calls up a series of other images, having no logical connection
with the first. We can easily conceive this state by thinking of the fantastic
succession of ideas to which we are sometimes led by calling up in our
minds any fact. Our reason shows us the incoherence there is in these
images, but a crowd is almost blind to this truth, and confuses with the real
event what the deforming action of its imagination has superimposed
thereon. A crowd scarcely distinguishes between the subjective and the
objective. It accepts as real the images evoked in its mind, though they most
often have only a very distant relation with the observed fact.
The ways in which a crowd perverts any event of which it is a witness
ought, it would seem, to be innumerable and unlike each other, since the
individuals composing the gathering are of very different temperaments.
But this is not the case. As the result of contagion the perversions are of the
same kind, and take the same shape in the case of all the assembled
individuals.
The first perversion of the truth effected by one of the individuals of the
gathering is the starting-point of the contagious suggestion. Before St.
George appeared on the walls of Jerusalem to all the Crusaders he was
certainly perceived in the first instance by one of those present. By dint of
suggestion and contagion the miracle signalised by a single person was
immediately accepted by all.
Such is always the mechanism of the collective hallucinations so
frequent in history—hallucinations which seem to have all the recognised
characteristics of authenticity, since they are phenomena observed by
thousands of persons.
To combat what precedes, the mental quality of the individuals
composing a crowd must not be brought into consideration. This quality is
without importance. From the moment that they form part of a crowd the
learned man and the ignoramus are equally incapable of observation.
This thesis may seem paradoxical. To demonstrate it beyond doubt it
would be necessary to investigate a great number of historical facts, and
several volumes would be insufficient for the purpose.
Still, as I do not wish to leave the reader under the impression of
unproved assertions, I shall give him some examples taken at hazard from
the immense number of those that might be quoted.
The following fact is one of the most typical, because chosen from
among collective hallucinations of which a crowd is the victim, in which
are to be found individuals of every kind, from the most ignorant to the
most highly educated. It is related incidentally by Julian Felix, a naval
lieutenant, in his book on "Sea Currents," and has been previously cited by
the Revue Scientifique.
The frigate, the Belle Poule, was cruising in the open sea for the
purpose of finding the cruiser Le Berceau, from which she had been
separated by a violent storm. It was broad daylight and in full sunshine.
Suddenly the watch signalled a disabled vessel; the crew looked in the
direction signalled, and every one, officers and sailors, clearly perceived a
raft covered with men towed by boats which were displaying signals of
distress. Yet this was nothing more than a collective hallucination. Admiral
Desfosses lowered a boat to go to the rescue of the wrecked sailors. On
nearing the object sighted, the sailors and officers on board the boat saw
"masses of men in motion, stretching out their hands, and heard the dull and
confused noise of a great number of voices." When the object was reached
those in the boat found themselves simply and solely in the presence of a
few branches of trees covered with leaves that had been swept out from the
neighbouring coast. Before evidence so palpable the hallucination vanished.
The mechanism of a collective hallucination of the kind we have
explained is clearly seen at work in this example. On the one hand we have
a crowd in a state of expectant attention, on the other a suggestion made by
the watch signalling a disabled vessel at sea, a suggestion which, by a
process of contagion, was accepted by all those present, both officers and
sailors.
It is not necessary that a crowd should be numerous for the faculty of
seeing what is taking place before its eyes to be destroyed and for the real
facts to be replaced by hallucinations unrelated to them. As soon as a few
individuals are gathered together they constitute a crowd, and, though they
should be distinguished men of learning, they assume all the characteristics
of crowds with regard to matters outside their speciality. The faculty of
observation and the critical spirit possessed by each of them individually at
once disappears. An ingenious psychologist, Mr. Davey, supplies us with a
very curious example in point, recently cited in the Annales des Sciences
Psychiques, and deserving of relation here. Mr. Davey, having convoked a
gathering of distinguished observers, among them one of the most
prominent of English scientific men, Mr. Wallace, executed in their
presence, and after having allowed them to examine the objects and to place
seals where they wished, all the regulation spiritualistic phenomena, the
materialisation of spirits, writing on slates, &c. Having subsequently
obtained from these distinguished observers written reports admitting that
the phenomena observed could only have been obtained by supernatural
means, he revealed to them that they were the result of very simple tricks.
"The most astonishing feature of Monsieur Davey's investigation," writes
the author of this account, "is not the marvellousness of the tricks
themselves, but the extreme weakness of the reports made with respect to
them by the noninitiated witnesses. It is clear, then," he says, "that
witnesses even in number may give circumstantial relations which are
completely erroneous, but whose result is that, if their descriptions are
accepted as exact, the phenomena they describe are inexplicable by
trickery. The methods invented by Mr. Davey were so simple that one is
astonished that he should have had the boldness to employ them; but he had
such a power over the mind of the crowd that he could persuade it that it
saw what it did not see." Here, as always, we have the power of the
hypnotiser over the hypnotised. Moreover, when this power is seen in
action on minds of a superior order and previously invited to be suspicious,
it is understandable how easy it is to deceive ordinary crowds.
Analogous examples are innumerable. As I write these lines the papers
are full of the story of two little girls found drowned in the Seine. These
children, to begin with, were recognised in the most unmistakable manner
by half a dozen witnesses. All the affirmations were in such entire
concordance that no doubt remained in the mind of the juge d'instruction.
He had the certificate of death drawn up, but just as the burial of the
children was to have been proceeded with, a mere chance brought about the
discovery that the supposed victims were alive, and had, moreover, but a
remote resemblance to the drowned girls. As in several of the examples
previously cited, the affirmation of the first witness, himself a victim of
illusion, had sufficed to influence the other witnesses.
In parallel cases the starting-point of the suggestion is always the
illusion produced in an individual by more or less vague reminiscences,
contagion following as the result of the affirmation of this initial illusion. If
the first observer be very impressionable, it will often be sufficient that the
corpse he believes he recognises should present— apart from all real
resemblance—some peculiarity, a scar, or some detail of toilet which may
evoke the idea of another person. The idea evoked may then become the
nucleus of a sort of crystallisation which invades the understanding and
paralyses all critical faculty. What the observer then sees is no longer the
object itself, but the image evoked in his mind. In this way are to be
explained erroneous recognitions of the dead bodies of children by their
own mother, as occurred in the following case, already old, but which has
been recently recalled by the newspapers. In it are to be traced precisely the
two kinds of suggestion of which I have just pointed out the mechanism.
"The child was recognised by another child, who was mistaken The
series of unwarranted recognitions then began.
"An extraordinary thing occurred. The day after a schoolboy had
recognised the corpse a woman exclaimed, `Good Heavens, it is my child!'
"She was taken up to the corpse; she examined the clothing, and noted a
scar on the forehead. `It is certainly,' she said, `my son who disappeared last
July. He has been stolen from me and murdered.'
"The woman was concierge in the Rue du Four; her name was
Chavandret. Her brother-in-law was summoned, and when questioned he
said, `That is the little Filibert.' Several persons living in the street
recognised the child found at La Villette as Filibert Chavandret, among
them being the boy's schoolmaster, who based his opinion on a medal worn
by the lad.
"Nevertheless, the neighbours, the brother-in-law, the schoolmaster, and
the mother were mistaken. Six weeks later the identity of the child was
established. The boy, belonging to Bordeaux, had been murdered there and
brought by a carrying company to Paris."4
It will be remarked that these recognitions are most often made by
women and children—that is to say, by precisely the most impressionable
persons. They show us at the same time what is the worth in law courts of
such witnesses. As far as children, more especially, are concerned, their
statements ought never to be invoked. Magistrates are in the habit of
repeating that children do not lie. Did they possess a psychological culture a
little less rudimentary than is the case they would know that, on the
contrary, children invariably lie; the lie is doubtless innocent, but it is none
the less a lie. It would be better to decide the fate of an accused person by
the toss of a coin than, as has been so often done, by the evidence of a child.
To return to the faculty of observation possessed by crowds, our
conclusion is that their collective observations are as erroneous as possible,
and that most often they merely represent the illusion of an individual who,
by a process of contagion, has suggestioned his fellows. Facts proving that
the most utter mistrust of the evidence of crowds is advisable might be
multiplied to any extent. Thousands of men were present twenty-five years
ago at the celebrated cavalry charge during the battle of Sedan, and yet it is
impossible, in the face of the most contradictory ocular testimony, to decide
by whom it was commanded. The English general, Lord Wolseley, has
proved in a recent book that up to now the gravest errors of fact have been
committed with regard to the most important incidents of the battle of
Waterloo—facts that hundreds of witnesses had nevertheless attested.5
Such facts show us what is the value of the testimony of crowds.
Treatises on logic include the unanimity of numerous witnesses in the
category of the strongest proofs that can be invoked in support of the
exactness of a fact. Yet what we know of the psychology of crowds shows
that treatises on logic need on this point to be rewritten. The events with
regard to which there exists the most doubt are certainly those which have
been observed by the greatest number of persons. To say that a fact has
been simultaneously verified by thousands of witnesses is to say, as a rule,
that the real fact is very different from the accepted account of it.
It clearly results from what precedes that works of history must be
considered as works of pure imagination. They are fanciful accounts of ill-
observed facts, accompanied by explanations the result of reflection. To
write such books is the most absolute waste of time. Had not the past left us
its literary, artistic, and monumental works, we should know absolutely
nothing in reality with regard to bygone times. Are we in possession of a
single word of truth concerning the lives of the great men who have played
preponderating parts in the history of humanity—men such as Hercules,
Buddha, or Mahomet? In all probability we are not. In point of fact,
moreover, their real lives are of slight importance to us. Our interest is to
know what our great men were as they are presented by popular legend. It is
legendary heroes, and not for a moment real heroes, who have impressed
the minds of crowds.
Unfortunately, legends—even although they have been definitely put on
record by books—have in themselves no stability. The imagination of the
crowd continually transforms them as the result of the lapse of time and
especially in consequence of racial causes. There is a great gulf fixed
between the sanguinary Jehovah of the Old Testament and the God of Love
of Sainte Therese, and the Buddha worshipped in China has no traits in
common with that venerated in India.
It is not even necessary that heroes should be separated from us by
centuries for their legend to be transformed by the imagination of the
crowd. The transformation occasionally takes place within a few years. In
our own day we have seen the legend of one of the greatest heroes of
history modified several times in less than fifty years. Under the Bourbons
Napoleon became a sort of idyllic and liberal philanthropist, a friend of the
humble who, according to the poets, was destined to be long remembered in
the cottage. Thirty years afterwards this easy-going hero had become a
sanguinary despot, who, after having usurped power and destroyed liberty,
caused the slaughter of three million men solely to satisfy his ambition. At
present we are witnessing a fresh transformation of the legend. When it has
undergone the influence of some dozens of centuries the learned men of the
future, face to face with these contradictory accounts, will perhaps doubt
the very existence of the hero, as some of them now doubt that of Buddha,
and will see in him nothing more than a solar myth or a development of the
legend of Hercules. They will doubtless console themselves easily for this
uncertainty, for, better initiated than we are to-day in the characteristics and
psychology of crowds, they will know that history is scarcely capable of
preserving the memory of anything except myths.
3. The Exaggeration and Ingenuousness of the Sentiments of Crowds.
Whether the feelings exhibited by a crowd be good or bad, they present the
double character of being very simple and very exaggerated. On this point,
as on so many others, an individual in a crowd resembles primitive beings.
Inaccessible to fine distinctions, he sees things as a whole, and is blind to
their intermediate phases. The exaggeration of the sentiments of a crowd is
heightened by the fact that any feeling when once it is exhibited
communicating itself very quickly by a process of suggestion and
contagion, the evident approbation of which it is the object considerably
increases its force.
The simplicity and exaggeration of the sentiments of crowds have for
result that a throng knows neither doubt nor uncertainty. Like women, it
goes at once to extremes. A suspicion transforms itself as soon as
announced into incontrovertible evidence. A commencement of antipathy or
disapprobation, which in the case of an isolated individual would not gain
strength, becomes at once furious hatred in the case of an individual in a
crowd.
The violence of the feelings of crowds is also increased, especially in
heterogeneous crowds, by the absence of all sense of responsibility. The
certainty of impunity, a certainty the stronger as the crowd is more
numerous, and the notion of a considerable momentary force due to
number, make possible in the case of crowds sentiments and acts impossible
for the isolated individual. In crowds the foolish, ignorant, and envious
persons are freed from the sense of their insignificance and powerlessness,
and are possessed instead by the notion of brutal and temporary but
immense strength.
Unfortunately, this tendency of crowds towards exaggeration is often
brought to bear upon bad sentiments. These sentiments are atavistic
residuum of the instincts of the primitive man, which the fear of punishment
obliges the isolated and responsible individual to curb. Thus it is that
crowds are so easily led into the worst excesses.
Still this does not mean that crowds, skilfully influenced, are not
capable of heroism and devotion and of evincing the loftiest virtues; they
are even more capable of showing these qualities than the isolated
individual. We shall soon have occasion to revert to this point when we
come to study the morality of crowds.
Given to exaggeration in its feelings, a crowd is only impressed by
excessive sentiments. An orator wishing to move a crowd must make an
abusive use of violent affirmations. To exaggerate, to affirm, to resort to
repetitions, and never to attempt to prove anything by reasoning are
methods of argument well known to speakers at public meetings.
Moreover, a crowd exacts a like exaggeration in the sentiments of its
heroes. Their apparent qualities and virtues must always be amplified. It has
been justly remarked that on the stage a crowd demands from the hero of
the piece a degree of courage, morality, and virtue that is never to be found
in real life.
Quite rightly importance has been laid on the special standpoint from
which matters are viewed in the theatre. Such a standpoint exists no doubt,
but its rules for the most part have nothing to do with common sense and
logic. The art of appealing to crowds is no doubt of an inferior order, but it
demands quite special aptitudes. It is often impossible on reading plays to
explain their success. Managers of theatres when accepting pieces are
themselves, as a rule, very uncertain of their success, because to judge the
matter it would be necessary that they should be able to transform
themselves into a crowd.6
Here, once more, were we able to embark on more extensive
explanations, we should show the preponderating influence of racial
considerations. A play which provokes the enthusiasm of the crowd in one
country has sometimes no success in another, or has only a partial and
conventional success, because it does not put in operation influences
capable of working on an altered public.
I need not add that the tendency to exaggeration in crowds is only
present in the case of sentiments and not at all in the matter of intelligence.
I have already shown that, by the mere fact that an individual forms part of
a crowd, his intellectual standard is immediately and considerably lowered.
A learned magistrate, M. Tarde, has also verified this fact in his researches
on the crimes of crowds. It is only, then, with respect to sentiment that
crowds can rise to a very high or, on the contrary, descend to a very low
level.
4. The Intolerance, Dictatorialness and Conservatism of Crowds.
Crowds are only cognisant of simple and extreme sentiments; the opinions,
ideas, and beliefs suggested to them are accepted or rejected as a whole, and
considered as absolute truths or as not less absolute errors. This is always
the case with beliefs induced by a process of suggestion instead of
engendered by reasoning. Every one is aware of the intolerance that
accompanies religious beliefs, and of the despotic empire they exercise on
men's minds.
Being in doubt as to what constitutes truth or error, and having, on the
other hand, a clear notion of its strength, a crowd is as disposed to give
authoritative effect to its inspirations as it is intolerant. An individual may
accept contradiction and discussion; a crowd will never do so. At public
meetings the slightest contradiction on the part of an orator is immediately
received with howls of fury and violent invective, soon followed by blows,
and expulsion should the orator stick to his point. Without the restraining
presence of the representatives of authority the contradictor, indeed, would
often be done to death.
Dictatorialness and intolerance are common to all categories of crowds,
but they are met with in a varying degree of intensity. Here, once more,
reappears that fundamental notion of race which dominates all the feelings
and all the thoughts of men. It is more especially in Latin crowds that
authoritativeness and intolerance are found developed in the highest
measure. In fact, their development is such in crowds of Latin origin that
they have entirely destroyed that sentiment of the independence of the
individual so powerful in the Anglo-Saxon. Latin crowds are only
concerned with the collective independence of the sect to which they
belong, and the characteristic feature of their conception of independence is
the need they experience of bringing those who are in disagreement with
themselves into immediate and violent subjection to their beliefs. Among
the Latin races the Jacobins of every epoch, from those of the Inquisition
downwards, have never been able to attain to a different conception of
liberty.
Authoritativeness and intolerance are sentiments of which crowds have
a very clear notion, which they easily conceive and which they entertain as
readily as they put them in practice when once they are imposed upon them.
Crowds exhibit a docile respect for force, and are but slightly impressed by
kindness, which for them is scarcely other than a form of weakness. Their
sympathies have never been bestowed on easy-going masters, but on tyrants
who vigorously oppressed them. It is to these latter that they always erect
the loftiest statues. It is true that they willingly trample on the despot whom
they have stripped of his power, but it is because, having lost his strength,
he has resumed his place among the feeble, who are to be despised because
they are not to be feared. The type of hero dear to crowds will always have
the semblance of a Caesar. His insignia attracts them, his authority
overawes them, and his sword instils them with fear.
A crowd is always ready to revolt against a feeble, and to bow down
servilely before a strong authority. Should the strength of an authority be
intermittent, the crowd, always obedient to its extreme sentiments, passes
alternately from anarchy to servitude, and from servitude to anarchy.
However, to believe in the predominance among crowds of
revolutionary instincts would be to entirely misconstrue their psychology. It
is merely their tendency to violence that deceives us on this point. Their
rebellious and destructive outbursts are always very transitory. Crowds are
too much governed by unconscious considerations, and too much subject in
consequence to secular hereditary influences not to be extremely
conservative. Abandoned to themselves, they soon weary of disorder, and
instinctively turn to servitude. It was the proudest and most untractable of
the Jacobins who acclaimed Bonaparte with greatest energy when he
suppressed all liberty and made his hand of iron severely felt.
It is difficult to understand history, and popular revolutions in particular,
if one does not take sufficiently into account the profoundly conservative
instincts of crowds. They may be desirous, it is true, of changing the names
of their institutions, and to obtain these changes they accomplish at times
even violent revolutions, but the essence of these institutions is too much
the expression of the hereditary needs of the race for them not invariably to
abide by it. Their incessant mobility only exerts its influence on quite
superficial matters. In fact they possess conservative instincts as
indestructible as those of all primitive beings. Their fetish- like respect for
all traditions is absolute; their unconscious horror of all novelty capable of
changing the essential conditions of their existence is very deeply rooted.
Had democracies possessed the power they wield to-day at the time of the
invention of mechanical looms or of the introduction of steam-power and of
railways, the realisation of these inventions would have been impossible, or
would have been achieved at the cost of revolutions and repeated
massacres. It is fortunate for the progress of civilisation that the power of
crowds only began to exist when the great discoveries of science and
industry had already been effected.
5. The Morality of Crowds.
Taking the word "morality" to mean constant respect for certain social
conventions, and the permanent repression of selfish impulses, it is quite
evident that crowds are too impulsive and too mobile to be moral. If,
however, we include in the term morality the transitory display of certain
qualities such as abnegation, self-sacrifice, disinterestedness, devotion, and
the need of equity, we may say, on the contrary, that crowds may exhibit at
times a very lofty morality.
The few psychologists who have studied crowds have only considered
them from the point of view of their criminal acts, and noticing how
frequent these acts are, they have come to the conclusion that the moral
standard of crowds is very low.
Doubtless this is often the case; but why? Simply because our savage,
destructive instincts are the inheritance left dormant in all of us from the
primitive ages. In the life of the isolated individual it would be dangerous
for him to gratify these instincts, while his absorption in an irresponsible
crowd, in which in consequence he is assured of impunity, gives him entire
liberty to follow them. Being unable, in the ordinary course of events, to
exercise these destructive instincts on our fellow- men, we confine
ourselves to exercising them on animals. The passion, so widespread, for
the chase and the acts of ferocity of crowds proceed from one and the same
source. A crowd which slowly slaughters a defenceless victim displays a
very cowardly ferocity; but for the philosopher this ferocity is very closely
related to that of the huntsmen who gather in dozens for the pleasure of
taking part in the pursuit and killing of a luckless stag by their hounds.
A crowd may be guilty of murder, incendiarism, and every kind of
crime, but it is also capable of very lofty acts of devotion, sacrifice, and
disinterestedness, of acts much loftier indeed than those of which the
isolated individual is capable. Appeals to sentiments of glory, honour, and
patriotism are particularly likely to influence the individual forming part of
a crowd, and often to the extent of obtaining from him the sacrifice of his
life. History is rich in examples analogous to those furnished by the
Crusaders and the volunteers of 1793. Collectivities alone are capable of
great disinterestedness and great devotion. How numerous are the crowds
that have heroically faced death for beliefs, ideas, and phrases that they
scarcely understood! The crowds that go on strike do so far more in
obedience to an order than to obtain an increase of the slender salary with
which they make shift. Personal interest is very rarely a powerful motive
force with crowds, while it is almost the exclusive motive of the conduct of
the isolated individual. It is assuredly not self-interest that has guided
crowds in so many wars, incomprehensible as a rule to their intelligence—
wars in which they have allowed themselves to be massacred as easily as
the larks hypnotised by the mirror of the hunter.
Even in the case of absolute scoundrels it often happens that the mere
fact of their being in a crowd endows them for the moment with very strict
principles of morality. Taine calls attention to the fact that the perpetrators
of the September massacres deposited on the table of the committees the
pocket-books and jewels they had found on their victims, and with which
they could easily have been able to make away. The howling, swarming,
ragged crowd which invaded the Tuileries during the revolution of 1848 did
not lay hands on any of the objects that excited its astonishment, and one of
which would have meant bread for many days.
This moralisation of the individual by the crowd is not certainly a
constant rule, but it is a rule frequently observed. It is even observed in
circumstances much less grave than those I have just cited. I have remarked
that in the theatre a crowd exacts from the hero of the piece exaggerated
virtues, and it is a commonplace observation that an assembly, even though
composed of inferior elements, shows itself as a rule very prudish. The
debauchee, the souteneur, the rough often break out into murmurs at a
slightly risky scene or expression, though they be very harmless in
comparison with their customary conversation.
If, then, crowds often abandon themselves to low instincts, they also set
the example at times of acts of lofty morality. If disinterestedness,
resignation, and absolute devotion to a real or chimerical ideal are moral
virtues, it may be said that crowds often possess these virtues to a degree
rarely attained by the wisest philosophers. Doubtless they practice them
unconsciously, but that is of small import. We should not complain too
much that crowds are more especially guided by unconscious
considerations and are not given to reasoning. Had they, in certain cases,
reasoned and consulted their immediate interests, it is possible that no
civilisation would have grown up on our planet and humanity would have
had no history.
2. General Boulanger.
3. Persons who went through the siege of Paris saw numerous examples of this credulity of crowds.
A candle alight in an upper story was immediately looked upon as a signal given the besiegers,
although it was evident, after a moment of reflection, that it was utterly impossible to catch sight
of the light of the candle at a distance of several miles.
4. L'Eclair, April 21, 1895.
5. Do we know in the case of one single battle exactly how it took place? I am very doubtful on the
point. We know who were the conquerors and the conquered, but this is probably all. What M.
D'Harcourt has said with respect to the battle of Solferino, which he witnessed and in which he
was personally engaged, may be applied to all battles—"The generals (informed, of course, by
the evidence of hundreds of witnesses) forward their official reports; the orderly officers modify
these documents and draw up a definite narrative; the chief of the staff raises objections and re-
writes the whole on a fresh basis. It is carried to the Marshal, who exclaims, `You are entirely in
error,' and he substitutes a fresh edition. Scarcely anything remains of the original report." M.
D'Harcourt relates this fact as proof of the impossibility of establishing the truth in connection
with the most striking, the best observed events.
6. It is understandable for this reason why it sometimes happens that pieces refused by all theatrical
managers obtain a prodigious success when by a stroke of chance they are put on the stage. The
recent success of Francois Coppee's play "Pour la Couronne" is well known, and yet, in spite of
the name of its author, it was refused during ten years by the managers of the principal Parisian
theatres.
"Charley's Aunt," refused at every theatre, and finally staged at the expense of a stockbroker, has
had two hundred representations in France, and more than a thousand in London. Without the
explanation given above of the impossibility for theatrical managers to mentally substitute
themselves for a crowd, such mistakes in judgment on the part of competent individuals, who
are most interested not to commit such grave blunders, would be inexplicable. This is a subject
that I cannot deal with here, but it might worthily tempt the pen of a writer acquainted with
theatrical matters, and at the same time a subtle psychologist—of such a writer, for instance, as
M. Francisque Sarcey.
Chapter III.
The Ideas, Reasoning Power, and Imagination of
Crowds
Table of Contents
1. The ideas of crowds. Fundamental and accessory ideas—
How contradictory ideas may exist simultaneously—The
transformation that must be undergone by lofty ideas before
they are accessible to crowds— The social influence of ideas
is independent of the degree of truth they may contain. 2.
The reasoning power of crowds. Crowds are not to be
influenced by reasoning—The reasoning of crowds is always
of a very inferior order—There is only the appearance of
analogy or succession in the ideas they associate. 3. The
imagination of crowds. Strength of the imagination of
crowds—Crowds think in images, and these images succeed
each other without any connecting link—Crowds are
especially impressed by the marvellous—Legends and the
marvellous are the real pillars of civilisation—The popular
imagination has always been the basis of the power of
statesmen—The manner in which facts capable of striking
the 
imagination 
of 
crowds 
present 
themselves 
for
observation.
1. The Ideas of Crowds
When studying in a preceding work the part played by ideas in the
evolution of nations, we showed that every civilisation is the outcome of a
small number of fundamental ideas that are very rarely renewed. We
showed how these ideas are implanted in the minds of crowds, with what
difficulty the process is effected, and the power possessed by the ideas in
question when once it has been accomplished. Finally we saw that great
historical perturbations are the result, as a rule, of changes in these
fundamental ideas.
Having treated this subject at sufficient length, I shall not return to it
now, but shall confine myself to saying a few words on the subject of such
ideas as are accessible to crowds, and of the forms under which they
conceive them.
They may be divided into two classes. In one we shall place accidental
and passing ideas created by the influences of the moment: infatuation for
an individual or a doctrine, for instance. In the other will be classed the
fundamental ideas, to which the environment, the laws of heredity and
public opinion give a very great stability; such ideas are the religious beliefs
of the past and the social and democratic ideas of to-day.
These fundamental ideas resemble the volume of the water of a stream
slowly pursuing its course; the transitory ideas are like the small waves, for
ever changing, which agitate its surface, and are more visible than the
progress of the stream itself although without real importance.
At the present day the great fundamental ideas which were the mainstay
of our fathers are tottering more and more. They have lost all solidity, and at
the same time the institutions resting upon them are severely shaken. Every
day there are formed a great many of those transitory minor ideas of which
I have just been speaking; but very few of them to all appearance seem
endowed with vitality and destined to acquire a preponderating influence.
Whatever be the ideas suggested to crowds they can only exercise
effective influence on condition that they assume a very absolute,
uncompromising, and simple shape. They present themselves then in the
guise of images, and are only accessible to the masses under this form.
These imagelike ideas are not connected by any logical bond of analogy or
succession, and may take each other's place like the slides of a magic-
lantern which the operator withdraws from the groove in which they were
placed one above the other. This explains how it is that the most
contradictory ideas may be seen to be simultaneously current in crowds.
According to the chances of the moment, a crowd will come under the
influence of one of the various ideas stored up in its understanding, and is
capable, in consequence, of committing the most dissimilar acts. Its
complete lack of the critical spirit does not allow of its perceiving these
contradictions.
This phenomenon is not peculiar to crowds. It is to be observed in many
isolated individuals, not only among primitive beings, but in the case of all
those—the fervent sectaries of a religious faith, for instance—who by one
side or another of their intelligence are akin to primitive beings. I have
observed its presence to a curious extent in the case of educated Hindoos
brought up at our European universities and having taken their degree. A
number of Western ideas had been superposed on their unchangeable and
fundamental hereditary or social ideas. According to the chances of the
moment, the one or the other set of ideas showed themselves each with their
special accompaniment of acts or utterances, the same individual presenting
in this way the most flagrant contradictions. These contradictions are more
apparent than real, for it is only hereditary ideas that have sufficient
influence over the isolated individual to become motives of conduct. It is
only when, as the result of the intermingling of different races, a man is
placed between different hereditary tendencies that his acts from one
moment to another may be really entirely contradictory. It would be useless
to insist here on these phenomena, although their psychological importance
is capital. I am of opinion that at least ten years of travel and observation
would be necessary to arrive at a comprehension of them.
Ideas being only accessible to crowds after having assumed a very
simple shape must often undergo the most thoroughgoing transformations
to become popular. It is especially when we are dealing with somewhat
lofty philosophic or scientific ideas that we see how far-reaching are the
modifications they require in order to lower them to the level of the
intelligence of crowds. These modifications are dependent on the nature of
the crowds, or of the race to which the crowds belong, but their tendency is
always belittling and in the direction of simplification. This explains the
fact that, from the social point of view, there is in reality scarcely any such
thing as a hierarchy of ideas—that is to say, as ideas of greater or less
elevation. However great or true an idea may have been to begin with, it is
deprived of almost all that which constituted its elevation and its greatness
by the mere fact that it has come within the intellectual range of crowds and
exerts an influence upon them.
Moreover, from the social point of view the hierarchical value of an
idea, its intrinsic worth, is without importance. The necessary point to
consider is the effects it produces. The Christian ideas of the Middle Ages,
the democratic ideas of the last century, or the social ideas of to-day are
assuredly not very elevated. Philosophically considered, they can only be
regarded as somewhat sorry errors, and yet their power has been and will be
immense, and they will count for a long time to come among the most
essential factors that determine the conduct of States.
Even when an idea has undergone the transformations which render it
accessible to crowds, it only exerts influence when, by various processes
which we shall examine elsewhere, it has entered the domain of the
unconscious, when indeed it has become a sentiment, for which much time
is required.
For it must not be supposed that merely because the justness of an idea
has been proved it can be productive of effective action even on cultivated
minds. This fact may be quickly appreciated by noting how slight is the
influence of the clearest demonstration on the majority of men. Evidence, if
it be very plain, may be accepted by an educated person, but the convert
will be quickly brought back by his unconscious self to his original
conceptions. See him again after the lapse of a few days and he will put
forward afresh his old arguments in exactly the same terms. He is in reality
under the influence of anterior ideas, that have become sentiments, and it is
such ideas alone that influence the more recondite motives of our acts and
utterances. It cannot be otherwise in the case of crowds.
When by various processes an idea has ended by penetrating into the
minds of crowds, it possesses an irresistible power, and brings about a
series of effects, opposition to which is bootless. The philosophical ideas
which resulted in the French Revolution took nearly a century to implant
themselves in the mind of the crowd. Their irresistible force, when once
they had taken root, is known. The striving of an entire nation towards the
conquest of social equality, and the realisation of abstract rights and ideal
liberties, caused the tottering of all thrones and profoundly disturbed the
Western world. During twenty years the nations were engaged in
internecine conflict, and Europe witnessed hecatombs that would have
terrified Ghengis Khan and Tamerlane. The world had never seen on such a
scale what may result from the promulgation of an idea.
A long time is necessary for ideas to establish themselves in the minds
of crowds, but just as long a time is needed for them to be eradicated. For
this reason crowds, as far as ideas are concerned, are always several
generations behind learned men and philosophers. All statesmen are well
aware to-day of the admixture of error contained in the fundamental ideas I
referred to a short while back, but as the influence of these ideas is still very
powerful they are obliged to govern in accordance with principles in the
truth of which they have ceased to believe.
2. The Reasoning Power of Crowds
It cannot absolutely be said that crowds do not reason and are not to be
influenced by reasoning.
However, the arguments they employ and those which are capable of
influencing them are, from a logical point of view, of such an inferior kind
that it is only by way of analogy that they can be described as reasoning.
The inferior reasoning of crowds is based, just as is reasoning of a high
order, on the association of ideas, but between the ideas associated by
crowds there are only apparent bonds of analogy or succession. The mode
of reasoning of crowds resembles that of the Esquimaux who, knowing
from experience that ice, a transparent body, melts in the mouth, concludes
that glass, also a transparent body, should also melt in the mouth; or that of
the savage who imagines that by eating the heart of a courageous foe he
acquires his bravery; or of the workman who, having been exploited by one
employer of labour, immediately concludes that all employers exploit their
men.
The characteristics of the reasoning of crowds are the association of
dissimilar things possessing a merely apparent connection between each
other, and the immediate generalisation of particular cases. It is arguments
of this kind that are always presented to crowds by those who know how to
manage them. They are the only arguments by which crowds are to be
influenced. A chain of logical argumentation is totally incomprehensible to
crowds, and for this reason it is permissible to say that they do not reason or
that they reason falsely and are not to be influenced by reasoning.
Astonishment is felt at times on reading certain speeches at their weakness,
and yet they had an enormous influence on the crowds which listened to
them, but it is forgotten that they were intended to persuade collectivities
and not to be read by philosophers. An orator in intimate communication
with a crowd can evoke images by which it will be seduced. If he is
successful his object has been attained, and twenty volumes of harangues—
always the outcome of reflection—are not worth the few phrases which
appealed to the brains it was required to convince.
It would be superfluous to add that the powerlessness of crowds to
reason aright prevents them displaying any trace of the critical spirit,
prevents them, that is, from being capable of discerning truth from error, or
of forming a precise judgment on any matter. Judgments accepted by
crowds are merely judgments forced upon them and never judgments
adopted after discussion. In regard to this matter the individuals who do not
rise above the level of a crowd are numerous. The ease with which certain
opinions obtain general acceptance results more especially from the
impossibility experienced by the majority of men of forming an opinion
peculiar to themselves and based on reasoning of their own.
3. The Imagination of Crowds
Just as is the case with respect to persons in whom the reasoning power is
absent, the figurative imagination of crowds is very powerful, very active
and very susceptible of being keenly impressed. The images evoked in their
mind by a personage, an event, an accident, are almost as lifelike as the
reality. Crowds are to some extent in the position of the sleeper whose
reason, suspended for the time being, allows the arousing in his mind of
images of extreme intensity which would quickly be dissipated could they
be submitted to the action of reflection. Crowds, being incapable both of
reflection and of reasoning, are devoid of the notion of improbability; and it
is to be noted that in a general way it is the most improbable things that are
the most striking.
This is why it happens that it is always the marvellous and legendary
side of events that more specially strike crowds. When a civilisation is
analysed it is seen that, in reality, it is the marvellous and the legendary that
are its true supports. Appearances have always played a much more
important part than reality in history, where the unreal is always of greater
moment than the real.
Crowds being only capable of thinking in images are only to be
impressed by images. It is only images that terrify or attract them and
become motives of action.
For this reason theatrical representations, in which the image is shown
in its most clearly visible shape, always have an enormous influence on
crowds. Bread and spectacular shows constituted for the plebeians of
ancient Rome the ideal of happiness, and they asked for nothing more.
Throughout the successive ages this ideal has scarcely varied. Nothing has a
greater effect on the imagination of crowds of every category than theatrical
representations. The entire audience experiences at the same time the same
emotions, and if these emotions are not at once transformed into acts, it is
because the most unconscious spectator cannot ignore that he is the victim
of illusions, and that he has laughed or wept over imaginary adventures.
Sometimes, however, the sentiments suggested by the images are so strong
that they tend, like habitual suggestions, to transform themselves into acts.
The story has often been told of the manager of a popular theatre who, in
consequence of his only playing sombre dramas, was obliged to have the
actor who took the part of the traitor protected on his leaving the theatre, to
defend him against the violence of the spectators, indignant at the crimes,
imaginary though they were, which the traitor had committed. We have
here, in my opinion, one of the most remarkable indications of the mental
state of crowds, and especially of the facility with which they are
suggestioned. The unreal has almost as much influence on them as the real.
They have an evident tendency not to distinguish between the two.
The power of conquerors and the strength of States is based on the
popular imagination. It is more particularly by working upon this
imagination that crowds are led. All great historical facts, the rise of
Buddhism, of Christianity, of Islamism, the Reformation, the French
Revolution, and, in our own time, the threatening invasion of Socialism are
the direct or indirect consequences of strong impressions produced on the
imagination of the crowd.
Moreover, all the great statesmen of every age and every country,
including the most absolute despots, have regarded the popular imagination
as the basis of their power, and they have never attempted to govern in
opposition to it "It was by becoming a Catholic," said Napoleon to the
Council of State, "that I terminated the Vendeen war. By becoming a
Mussulman that I obtained a footing in Egypt. By becoming an
Ultramontane that I won over the Italian priests, and had I to govern a
nation of Jews I would rebuild Solomon's temple." Never perhaps since
Alexander and Caesar has any great man better understood how the
imagination of the crowd should be impressed. His constant preoccupation
was to strike it. He bore it in mind in his victories, in his harangues, in his
speeches, in all his acts. On his deathbed it was still in his thoughts.
How is the imagination of crowds to be impressed? We shall soon see.
Let us confine ourselves for the moment to saying that the feat is never to
be achieved by attempting to work upon the intelligence or reasoning
faculty, that is to say, by way of demonstration. It was not by means of
cunning rhetoric that Antony succeeded in making the populace rise against
the murderers of Caesar; it was by reading his will to the multitude and
pointing to his corpse.
Whatever strikes the imagination of crowds presents itself under the
shape of a startling and very clear image, freed from all accessory
explanation, or merely having as accompaniment a few marvellous or
mysterious facts: examples in point are a great victory, a great miracle, a
great crime, or a great hope. Things must be laid before the crowd as a
whole, and their genesis must never be indicated. A hundred petty crimes or
petty accidents will not strike the imagination of crowds in the least,
whereas a single great crime or a single great accident will profoundly
impress them, even though the results be infinitely less disastrous than
those of the hundred small accidents put together. The epidemic of
influenza, which caused the death but a few years ago of five thousand
persons in Paris alone, made very little impression on the popular
imagination. The reason was that this veritable hecatomb was not embodied
in any visible image, but was only learnt from statistical information
furnished weekly. An accident which should have caused the death of only
five hundred instead of five thousand persons, but on the same day and in
public, as the outcome of an accident appealing strongly to the eye, by the
fall, for instance, of the Eiffel Tower, would have produced, on the contrary,
an immense impression on the imagination of the crowd. The probable loss
of a transatlantic steamer that was supposed, in the absence of news, to have
gone down in mid-ocean profoundly impressed the imagination of the
crowd for a whole week. Yet official statistics show that 850 sailing vessels
and 203 steamers were lost in the year 1894 alone. The crowd, however,
was never for a moment concerned by these successive losses, much more
important though they were as far as regards the destruction of life and
property, than the loss of the Atlantic liner in question could possibly have
been.
It is not, then, the facts in themselves that strike the popular
imagination, but the way in which they take place and are brought under
notice. It is necessary that by their condensation, if I may thus express
myself, they should produce a startling image which fills and besets the
mind. To know the art of impressing the imagination of crowds is to know
at the same time the art of governing them.
Chapter IV.
A Religious Shape Assumed by All the Convictions
of Crowds
Table of Contents
What is meant by the religious sentiment—It is independent
of the worship of a divinity—Its characteristics—The
strength of convictions assuming a religious shape—Various
examples—Popular gods have never disappeared—New
forms under which they are revived—Religious forms of
atheism—Importance of these notions from the historical
point of view— The Reformation, Saint Bartholomew, the
Terror, and all analogous events are the result of the religious
sentiments of crowds and not of the will of isolated
individuals.
We have shown that crowds do not reason, that they accept or reject ideas
as a whole, that they tolerate neither discussion nor contradiction, and that
the suggestions brought to bear on them invade the entire field of their
understanding and tend at once to transform themselves into acts. We have
shown that crowds suitably influenced are ready to sacrifice themselves for
the ideal with which they have been inspired. We have also seen that they
only entertain violent and extreme sentiments, that in their case sympathy
quickly becomes adoration, and antipathy almost as soon as it is aroused is
transformed into hatred. These general indications furnish us already with a
presentiment of the nature of the convictions of crowds.
When these convictions are closely examined, whether at epochs
marked by fervent religious faith, or by great political upheavals such as
those of the last century, it is apparent that they always assume a peculiar
form which I cannot better define than by giving it the name of a religious
sentiment.
This sentiment has very simple characteristics, such as worship of a
being supposed superior, fear of the power with which the being is credited,
blind submission to its commands, inability to discuss its dogmas, the desire
to spread them, and a tendency to consider as enemies all by whom they are
not accepted. Whether such a sentiment apply to an invisible God, to a
wooden or stone idol, to a hero or to a political conception, provided that it
presents the preceding characteristics, its essence always remains religious.
The supernatural and the miraculous are found to be present to the same
extent. Crowds unconsciously accord a mysterious power to the political
formula or the victorious leader that for the moment arouses their
enthusiasm.
A person is not religious solely when he worships a divinity, but when
he puts all the resources of his mind, the complete submission of his will,
and the whole-souled ardour of fanaticism at the service of a cause or an
individual who becomes the goal and guide of his thoughts and actions.
Intolerance and fanaticism are the necessary accompaniments of the
religious sentiment. They are inevitably displayed by those who believe
themselves in the possession of the secret of earthly or eternal happiness.
These two characteristics are to be found in all men grouped together when
they are inspired by a conviction of any kind. The Jacobins of the Reign of
Terror were at bottom as religious as the Catholics of the Inquisition, and
their cruel ardour proceeded from the same source.
The convictions of crowds assume those characteristics of blind
submission, fierce intolerance, and the need of violent propaganda which
are inherent in the religious sentiment, and it is for this reason that it may be
said that all their beliefs have a religious form. The hero acclaimed by a
crowd is a veritable god for that crowd. Napoleon was such a god for fifteen
years, and a divinity never had more fervent worshippers or sent men to
their death with greater ease. The Christian and Pagan Gods never exercised
a more absolute empire over the minds that had fallen under their sway.
All founders of religious or political creeds have established them solely
because they were successful in inspiring crowds with those fanatical
sentiments which have as result that men find their happiness in worship
and obedience and are ready to lay down their lives for their idol. This has
been the case at all epochs. Fustel de Coulanges, in his excellent work on
Roman Gaul, justly remarks that the Roman Empire was in no wise
maintained by force, but by the religious admiration it inspired. "It would
be without a parallel in the history of the world," he observes rightly, "that a
form of government held in popular detestation should have lasted for five
centuries. . . . It would be inexplicable that the thirty legions of the Empire
should have constrained a hundred million men to obedience." The reason
of their obedience was that the Emperor, who personified the greatness of
Rome, was worshipped like a divinity by unanimous consent. There were
altars in honour of the Emperor in the smallest townships of his realm.
"From one end of the Empire to the other a new religion was seen to arise in
those days which had for its divinities the emperors themselves. Some years
before the Christian era the whole of Gaul, represented by sixty cities, built
in common a temple near the town of Lyons in honour of Augustus. . . . Its
priests, elected by the united Gallic cities, were the principal personages in
their country. . . . It is impossible to attribute all this to fear and servility.
Whole nations are not servile, and especially for three centuries. It was not
the courtiers who worshipped the prince, it was Rome, and it was not Rome
merely, but it was Gaul, it was Spain, it was Greece and Asia."
To-day the majority of the great men who have swayed men's minds no
longer have altars, but they have statues, or their portraits are in the hands
of their admirers, and the cult of which they are the object is not notably
different from that accorded to their predecessors. An understanding of the
philosophy of history is only to be got by a thorough appreciation of this
fundamental point of the psychology of crowds. The crowd demands a god
before everything else.
It must not be supposed that these are the superstitions of a bygone age
which reason has definitely banished. Sentiment has never been vanquished
in its eternal conflict with reason. Crowds will hear no more of the words
divinity and religion, in whose name they were so long enslaved; but they
have never possessed so many fetishes as in the last hundred years, and the
old divinities have never had so many statues and altars raised in their
honour. Those who in recent years have studied the popular movement
known under the name of Boulangism have been able to see with what ease
the religious instincts of crowds are ready to revive. There was not a
country inn that did not possess the hero's portrait. He was credited with the
power of remedying all injustices and all evils, and thousands of men would
have given their lives for him. Great might have been his place in history
had his character been at all on a level with his legendary reputation.
It is thus a very useless commonplace to assert that a religion is
necessary for the masses, because all political, divine, and social creeds
only take root among them on the condition of always assuming the
religious shape—a shape which obviates the danger of discussion. Were it
possible to induce the masses to adopt atheism, this belief would exhibit all
the intolerant ardour of a religious sentiment, and in its exterior forms
would soon become a cult. The evolution of the small Positivist sect
furnishes us a curious proof in point. What happened to the Nihilist whose
story is related by that profound thinker Dostoiewsky has quickly happened
to the Positivists. Illumined one day by the light of reason he broke the
images of divinities and saints that adorned the altar of a chapel,
extinguished the candles, and, without losing a moment, replaced the
destroyed objects by the works of atheistic philosophers such as Buchner
and Moleschott, after which he piously relighted the candles. The object of
his religious beliefs had been transformed, but can it be truthfully said that
his religious sentiments had changed?
Certain historical events—and they are precisely the most important—I
again repeat, are not to be understood unless one has attained to an
appreciation of the religious form which the convictions of crowds always
assume in the long run. There are social phenomena that need to be studied
far more from the point of view of the psychologist than from that of the
naturalist. The great historian Taine has only studied the Revolution as a
naturalist, and on this account the real genesis of events has often escaped
him. He has perfectly observed the facts, but from want of having studied
the psychology of crowds he has not always been able to trace their causes.
The facts having appalled him by their bloodthirsty, anarchic, and ferocious
side, he has scarcely seen in the heroes of the great drama anything more
than a horde of epileptic savages abandoning themselves without restraint
to their instincts. The violence of the Revolution, its massacres, its need of
propaganda, its declarations of war upon all things, are only to be properly
explained by reflecting that the Revolution was merely the establishment of
a new religious belief in the mind of the masses. The Reformation, the
massacre of Saint Bartholomew, the French religious wars, the Inquisition,
the Reign of Terror are phenomena of an identical kind, brought about by
crowds animated by those religious sentiments which necessarily lead those
imbued with them to pitilessly extirpate by fire and sword whoever is
opposed to the establishment of the new faith. The methods of the
Inquisition are those of all whose convictions are genuine and sturdy. Their
convictions would not deserve these epithets did they resort to other
methods.
Upheavals analogous to those I have just cited are only possible when it
is the soul of the masses that brings them about. The most absolute despots
could not cause them. When historians tell us that the massacre of Saint
Bartholomew was the work of a king, they show themselves as ignorant of
the psychology of crowds as of that of sovereigns. Manifestations of this
order can only proceed from the soul of crowds. The most absolute power
of the most despotic monarch can scarcely do more than hasten or retard the
moment of their apparition. The massacre of Saint Bartholomew or the
religious wars were no more the work of kings than the Reign of Terror was
the work of Robespierre, Danton, or Saint Just. At the bottom of such
events is always to be found the working of the soul of the masses, and
never the power of potentates.
Book II.
The Opinions and Beliefs of Crowds
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Remote Factors of the Opinions and Beliefs of
Crowds
Table of Contents
Preparatory factors of the beliefs of crowds—The origin of
the beliefs of crowds is the consequence of a preliminary
process of elaboration— Study of the different factors of
these beliefs. 1. Race. The predominating influence it
exercises—It represents the suggestions of ancestors. 2.
Traditions. They are the synthesis of the soul of the race—
Social importance of traditions—How, after having been
necessary they become harmful—Crowds are the most
obstinate maintainers of traditional ideas. 3. Time. It prepares
in succession the establishment of beliefs and then their
destruction. It is by the aid of this factor that order may
proceed from chaos. 4. Political and social institutions.
Erroneous idea of their part—Their influence extremely
weak—They are effects, not causes—Nations are incapable
of choosing what appear to them the best institutions—
Institutions are labels which shelter the most dissimilar
things under the same title— How institutions may come to
be created—Certain institutions theoretically bad, such as
centralisation obligatory for certain nations. 5. Institutions
and education. Falsity of prevalent ideas as to the influence
of instruction on crowds— Statistical indications—
Demoralising effect of Latin system of education—Part
instruction might play—Examples furnished by various
peoples.
Having studied the mental constitution of crowds and become acquainted
with their modes of feeling, thinking, and reasoning, we shall now proceed
to examine how their opinions and beliefs arise and become established.
The factors which determine these opinions and beliefs are of two
kinds: remote factors and immediate factors.
The remote factors are those which render crowds capable of adopting
certain convictions and absolutely refractory to the acceptance of others.
These factors prepare the ground in which are suddenly seen to germinate
certain new ideas whose force and consequences are a cause of
astonishment, though they are only spontaneous in appearance. The
outburst and putting in practice of certain ideas among crowds present at
times a startling suddenness. This is only a superficial effect, behind which
must be sought a preliminary and preparatory action of long duration.
The immediate factors are those which, coming on the top of this long,
preparatory working, in whose absence they would remain without effect,
serve as the source of active persuasion on crowds; that is, they are the
factors which cause the idea to take shape and set it loose with all its
consequences. The resolutions by which collectivities are suddenly carried
away arise out of these immediate factors; it is due to them that a riot breaks
out or a strike is decided upon, and to them that enormous majorities invest
one man with power to overthrow a government.
The successive action of these two kinds of factors is to be traced in all
great historical events. The French Revolution—to cite but one of the most
striking of such events—had among its remote factors the writings of the
philosophers, the exactions of the nobility, and the progress of scientific
thought. The mind of the masses, thus prepared, was then easily roused by
such immediate factors as the speeches of orators, and the resistance of the
court party to insignificant reforms.
Among the remote factors there are some of a general nature, which are
found to underlie all the beliefs and opinions of crowds. They are race,
traditions, time, institutions, and education.
We now proceed to study the influence of these different factors.
1. Race
This factor, race, must be placed in the first rank, for in itself it far surpasses
in importance all the others. We have sufficiently studied it in another work;
it is therefore needless to deal with it again. We showed, in a previous
volume, what an historical race is, and how, its character once formed, it
possesses, as the result of the laws of heredity such power that its beliefs,
institutions, and arts—in a word, all the elements of its civilisation—are
merely the outward expression of its genius. We showed that the power of
the race is such that no element can pass from one people to another
without undergoing the most profound transformations.7
Environment, circumstances, and events represent the social suggestions
of the moment. They may have a considerable influence, but this influence
is always momentary if it be contrary to the suggestions of the race; that is,
to those which are inherited by a nation from the entire series of its
ancestors.
We shall have occasion in several of the chapters of this work to touch
again upon racial influence, and to show that this influence is so great that it
dominates the characteristics peculiar to the genius of crowds. It follows
from this fact that the crowds of different countries offer very considerable
differences of beliefs and conduct and are not to be influenced in the same
manner.
2. Traditions
Traditions represent the ideas, the needs, and the sentiments of the past.
They are the synthesis of the race, and weigh upon us with immense force.
The biological sciences have been transformed since embryology has
shown the immense influence of the past on the evolution of living beings;
and the historical sciences will not undergo a less change when this
conception has become more widespread. As yet it is not sufficiently
general, and many statesmen are still no further advanced than the theorists
of the last century, who believed that a society could break off with its past
and be entirely recast on lines suggested solely by the light of reason.
A people is an organism created by the past, and, like every other
organism, it can only be modified by slow hereditary accumulations.
It is tradition that guides men, and more especially so when they are in a
crowd. The changes they can effect in their traditions with any ease, merely
bear, as I have often repeated, upon names and outward forms.
This circumstance is not to be regretted. Neither a national genius nor
civilisation would be possible without traditions. In consequence man's two
great concerns since he has existed have been to create a network of
traditions which he afterwards endeavours to destroy when their beneficial
effects have worn themselves out. Civilisation is impossible without
traditions, and progress impossible without the destruction of those
traditions. The difficulty, and it is an immense difficulty, is to find a proper
equilibrium between stability and variability. Should a people allow its
customs to become too firmly rooted, it can no longer change, and becomes,
like China, incapable of improvement. Violent revolutions are in this case
of no avail; for what happens is that either the broken fragments of the
chain are pieced together again and the past resumes its empire without
change, or the fragments remain apart and decadence soon succeeds
anarchy.
The ideal for a people is in consequence to preserve the institutions of
the past, merely changing them insensibly and little by little. This ideal is
difficult to realise. The Romans in ancient and the English in modern times
are almost alone in having realised it.
It is precisely crowds that cling the most tenaciously to traditional ideas
and oppose their being changed with the most obstinacy. This is notably the
case with the category of crowds constituting castes. I have already insisted
upon the conservative spirit of crowds, and shown that the most violent
rebellions merely end in a changing of words and terms. At the end of the
last century, in the presence of destroyed churches, of priests expelled the
country or guillotined, it might have been thought that the old religious
ideas had lost all their strength, and yet a few years had barely lapsed before
the abolished system of public worship had to be re-established in deference
to universal demands.8
Blotted out for a moment, the old traditions had resumed their sway.
No example could better display the power of tradition on the mind of
crowds. The most redoubtable idols do not dwell in temples, nor the most
despotic tyrants in palaces; both the one and the other can be broken in an
instant. But the invisible masters that reign in our innermost selves are safe
from every effort at revolt, and only yield to the slow wearing away of
centuries.
3. Time
In social as in biological problems time is one of the most energetic factors.
It is the sole real creator and the sole great destroyer. It is time that has
made mountains with grains of sand and raised the obscure cell of
geological eras to human dignity. The action of centuries is sufficient to
transform any given phenomenon. It has been justly observed that an ant
with enough time at its disposal could level Mount Blanc. A being
possessed of the magical force of varying time at his will would have the
power attributed by believers to God.
In this place, however, we have only to concern ourselves with the
influence of time on the genesis of the opinions of crowds. Its action from
this point of view is still immense. Dependent upon it are the great forces
such as race, which cannot form themselves without it. It causes the birth,
the growth, and the death of all beliefs. It is by the aid of time that they
acquire their strength and also by its aid that they lose it.
It is time in particular that prepares the opinions and beliefs of crowds,
or at least the soil on which they will germinate. This is why certain ideas
are realisable at one epoch and not at another. It is time that accumulates
that immense detritus of beliefs and thoughts on which the ideas of a given
period spring up. They do not grow at hazard and by chance; the roots of
each of them strike down into a long past. When they blossom it is time that
has prepared their blooming; and to arrive at a notion of their genesis it is
always back in the past that it is necessary to search. They are the daughters
of the past and the mothers of the future, but throughout the slaves of time.
Time, in consequence, is our veritable master, and it suffices to leave it
free to act to see all things transformed. At the present day we are very
uneasy with regard to the threatening aspirations of the masses and the
destructions and upheavals foreboded thereby. Time, without other aid, will
see to the restoration of equilibrium. "No form of government," M. Lavisse
very properly writes, "was founded in a day. Political and social
organisations are works that demand centuries. The feudal system existed
for centuries in a shapeless, chaotic state before it found its laws; absolute
monarchy also existed for centuries before arriving at regular methods of
government, and these periods of expectancy were extremely troubled."
4. Political and Social Institutions
The idea that institutions can remedy the defects of societies, that national
progress is the consequence of the improvement of institutions and
governments, and that social changes can be effected by decrees— this
idea, I say, is still generally accepted. It was the starting-point of the French
Revolution, and the social theories of the present day are based upon it.
The most continuous experience has been unsuccessful in shaking this
grave delusion. Philosophers and historians have endeavoured in vain to
prove its absurdity, but yet they have had no difficulty in demonstrating that
institutions are the outcome of ideas, sentiments, and customs, and that
ideas, sentiments, and customs are not to be recast by recasting legislative
codes. A nation does not choose its institutions at will any more than it
chooses the colour of its hair or its eyes. Institutions and governments are
the product of the race. They are not the creators of an epoch, but are
created by it. Peoples are not governed in accordance with their caprices of
the moment, but as their character determines that they shall be governed.
Centuries are required to form a political system and centuries needed to
change it. Institutions have no intrinsic virtue: in themselves they are
neither good nor bad. Those which are good at a given moment for a given
people may be harmful in the extreme for another nation.
Moreover, it is in no way in the power of a people to really change its
institutions. Undoubtedly, at the cost of violent revolutions, it can change
their name, but in their essence they remain unmodified. The names are
mere futile labels with which an historian who goes to the bottom of things
need scarcely concern himself. It is in this way, for instance, that England,9
the most democratic country in the world, lives, nevertheless, under a
monarchical regime, whereas the countries in which the most oppressive
despotism is rampant are the Spanish-American Republics, in spite of their
republican constitutions. The destinies of peoples are determined by their
character and not by their government. I have endeavoured to establish this
view in my previous volume by setting forth categorical examples.
To lose time in the manufacture of cut-and-dried constitutions is, in
consequence, a puerile task, the useless labour of an ignorant rhetorician.
Necessity and time undertake the charge of elaborating constitutions when
we are wise enough to allow these two factors to act. This is the plan the
Anglo-Saxons have adopted, as their great historian, Macaulay, teaches us
in a passage that the politicians of all Latin countries ought to learn by
heart. After having shown all the good that can be accomplished by laws
which appear from the point of view of pure reason a chaos of absurdities
and contradictions, he compares the scores of constitutions that have been
engulfed in the convulsions of the Latin peoples with that of England, and
points out that the latter has only been very slowly changed part by part,
under the influence of immediate necessities and never of speculative
reasoning.
"To think nothing of symmetry and much of convenience; never to
remove an anomaly merely because it is an anomaly; never to innovate
except when some grievance is felt; never to innovate except so far as to get
rid of the grievance; never to lay down any proposition of wider extent than
the particular case for which it is necessary to provide; these are the rules
which have, from the age of John to the age of Victoria, generally guided
the deliberations of our two hundred and fifty Parliaments."
It would be necessary to take one by one the laws and institutions of
each people to show to what extent they are the expression of the needs of
each race and are incapable, for that reason, of being violently transformed.
It is possible, for, instance, to indulge in philosophical dissertations on the
advantages and disadvantages of centralisation; but when we see a people
composed of very different races devote a thousand years of efforts to
attaining to this centralisation; when we observe that a great revolution,
having for object the destruction of all the institutions of the past, has been
forced to respect this centralisation, and has even strengthened it; under
these circumstances we should admit that it is the outcome of imperious
needs, that it is a condition of the existence of the nation in question, and
we should pity the poor mental range of politicians who talk of destroying
it. Could they by chance succeed in this attempt, their success would at
once be the signal for a frightful civil war,10 which, moreover, would
immediately bring back a new system of centralisation much more
oppressive than the old.
The conclusion to be drawn from what precedes is, that it is not in
institutions that the means is to be sought of profoundly influencing the
genius of the masses. When we see certain countries, such as the United
States, reach a high degree of prosperity under democratic institutions,
while others, such as the Spanish-American Republics, are found existing in
a pitiable state of anarchy under absolutely similar institutions, we should
admit that these institutions are as foreign to the greatness of the one as to
the decadence of the others. Peoples are governed by their character, and all
institutions which are not intimately modelled on that character merely
represent a borrowed garment, a transitory disguise. No doubt sanguinary
wars and violent revolutions have been undertaken, and will continue to be
undertaken, to impose institutions to which is attributed, as to the relics of
saints, the supernatural power of creating welfare. It may be said, then, in
one sense, that institutions react on the mind of the crowd inasmuch as they
engender such upheavals. But in reality it is not the institutions that react in
this manner, since we know that, whether triumphant or vanquished, they
possess in themselves no virtue. It is illusions and words that have
influenced the mind of the crowd, and especially words— words which are
as powerful as they are chimerical, and whose astonishing sway we shall
shortly demonstrate.
5. Instruction and Education
Foremost among the dominant ideas of the present epoch is to be found the
notion that instruction is capable of considerably changing men, and has for
its unfailing consequence to improve them and even to make them equal.
By the mere fact of its being constantly repeated, this assertion has ended
by becoming one of the most steadfast democratic dogmas. It would be as
difficult now to attack it as it would have been formerly to have attacked the
dogmas of the Church.
On this point, however, as on many others, democratic ideas are in
profound disagreement with the results of psychology and experience.
Many eminent philosophers, among them Herbert Spencer, have had no
difficulty in showing that instruction neither renders a man more moral nor
happier, that it changes neither his instincts nor his hereditary passions, and
that at times—for this to happen it need only be badly directed—it is much
more pernicious than useful. Statisticians have brought confirmation of
these views by telling us that criminality increases with the generalisation
of instruction, or at any rate of a certain kind of instruction, and that the
worst enemies of society, the anarchists, are recruited among the prize-
winners of schools; while in a recent work a distinguished magistrate, M.
Adolphe Guillot, made the observation that at present 3,000 educated
criminals are met with for every 1,000 illiterate delinquents, and that in fifty
years the criminal percentage of the population has passed from 227 to 552
for every 100,000 inhabitants, an increase of 133 per cent. He has also
noted in common with his colleagues that criminality is particularly on the
increase among young persons, for whom, as is known, gratuitous and
obligatory schooling has—in France—replaced apprenticeship.
It is not assuredly—and nobody has ever maintained this proposition—
that well-directed instruction may not give very useful practical results, if
not in the sense of raising the standard of morality, at least in that of
developing professional capacity. Unfortunately the Latin peoples,
especially in the last twenty-five years, have based their systems of
instruction on very erroneous principles, and in spite of the observations of
the most eminent minds, such as Breal, Fustel de Coulanges, Taine, and
many others, they persist in their lamentable mistakes. I have myself
shown, in a work published some time ago, that the French system of
education transforms the majority of those who have undergone it into
enemies of society, and recruits numerous disciples for the worst forms of
socialism.
The primary danger of this system of education—very properly
qualified as Latin—consists in the fact that it is based on the fundamental
psychological error that the intelligence is developed by the learning by
heart of text-books. Adopting this view, the endeavour has been made to
enforce a knowledge of as many hand-books as possible. From the primary
school till he leaves the university a young man does nothing but acquire
books by heart without his judgment or personal initiative being ever called
into play. Education consists for him in reciting by heart and obeying.
"Learning lessons, knowing by heart a grammar or a compendium,
repeating well and imitating well—that," writes a former Minister of Public
Instruction, M. Jules Simon, "is a ludicrous form of education whose every
effort is an act of faith tacitly admitting the infallibility of the master, and
whose only results are a belittling of ourselves and a rendering of us
impotent."
Were this education merely useless, one might confine one's self to
expressing compassion for the unhappy children who, instead of making
needful studies at the primary school, are instructed in the genealogy of the
sons of Clotaire, the conflicts between Neustria and Austrasia, or zoological
classifications. But the system presents a far more serious danger. It gives
those who have been submitted to it a violent dislike to the state of life in
which they were born, and an intense desire to escape from it. The working
man no longer wishes to remain a working man, or the peasant to continue a
peasant, while the most humble members of the middle classes admit of no
possible career for their sons except that of State-paid functionaries. Instead
of preparing men for life French schools solely prepare them to occupy
public functions, in which success can be attained without any necessity for
self-direction or the exhibition of the least glimmer of personal initiative. At
the bottom of the social ladder the system creates an army of proletarians
discontented with their lot and always ready to revolt, while at the summit it
brings into being a frivolous bourgeoisie, at once sceptical and credulous,
having a superstitious confidence in the State, whom it regards as a sort of
Providence, but without forgetting to display towards it a ceaseless hostility,
always laying its own faults to the door of the Government, and incapable
of the least enterprise without the intervention of the authorities.
The State, which manufactures by dint of textbooks all these persons
possessing diplomas, can only utilise a small number of them, and is forced
to leave the others without employment. It is obliged in consequence to
resign itself to feeding the first mentioned and to having the others as its
enemies. From the top to the bottom of the social pyramid, from the
humblest clerk to the professor and the prefect, the immense mass of
persons boasting diplomas besiege the professions. While a business man
has the greatest difficulty in finding an agent to represent him in the
colonies, thousands of candidates solicit the most modest official posts.
There are 20,000 schoolmasters and mistresses without employment in the
department of the Seine alone, all of them persons who, disdaining the
fields or the workshops, look to the State for their livelihood. The number
of the chosen being restricted, that of the discontented is perforce immense.
The latter are ready for any revolution, whoever be its chiefs and whatever
the goal they aim at. The acquisition of knowledge for which no use can be
found is a sure method of driving a man to revolt.11
It is evidently too late to retrace our steps. Experience alone, that
supreme educator of peoples, will be at pains to show us our mistake. It
alone will be powerful enough to prove the necessity of replacing our
odious text-books and our pitiable examinations by industrial instruction
capable of inducing our young men to return to the fields, to the workshop,
and to the colonial enterprise which they avoid to-day at all costs.
The professional instruction which all enlightened minds are now
demanding was the instruction received in the past by our forefathers. It is
still in vigour at the present day among the nations who rule the world by
their force of will, their initiative, and their spirit of enterprise. In a series of
remarkable pages, whose principal passages I reproduce further on, a great
thinker, M. Taine, has clearly shown that our former system of education
was approximately that in vogue to-day in England and America, and in a
remarkable parallel between the Latin and Anglo-Saxon systems he has
plainly pointed out the consequences of the two methods.
One might consent, perhaps, at a pinch, to continue to accept all the
disadvantages of our classical education, although it produced nothing but
discontented men, and men unfitted for their station in life, did the
superficial acquisition of so much knowledge, the faultless repeating by
heart of so many text-books, raise the level of intelligence. But does it
really raise this level? Alas, no! The conditions of success in life are the
possession of judgment, experience, initiative, and character—qualities
which are not bestowed by books. Books are dictionaries, which it is useful
to consult, but of which it is perfectly useless to have lengthy portions in
one's head.
How is it possible for professional instruction to develop the
intelligence in a measure quite beyond the reach of classical instruction?
This has been well shown by M. Taine.
"Ideas, he says, are only formed in their natural and normal
surroundings; the promotion of the growth is effected by the innumerable
impressions appealing to the senses which a young man receives daily in
the workshop, the mine, the law court, the study, the builder's yard, the
hospital; at the sight of tools, materials, and operations; in the presence of
customers, workers, and labour, of work well or ill done, costly or lucrative.
In such a way are obtained those trifling perceptions of detail of the eyes,
the ear, the hands, and even the sense of smell, which, picked up
involuntarily, and silently elaborated, take shape within the learner, and
suggest to him sooner or, later this or that new combination, simplification,
economy, improvement, or invention. The young Frenchman is deprived,
and precisely at the age when they are most fruitful, of all these precious
contacts, of all these indispensable elements of assimilation. For seven or
eight years on end he is shut up in a school, and is cut off from that direct
personal experience which would give him a keen and exact notion of men
and things and of the various ways of handling them."
" . . . At least nine out of ten have wasted their time and pains during
several years of their life—telling, important, even decisive years. Among
such are to be counted, first of all, the half or two-thirds of those who
present themselves for examination—I refer to those who are rejected; and
then among those who are successful, who obtain a degree, a certificate, a
diploma, there is still a half or two-thirds—I refer to the overworked. Too
much has been demanded of them by exacting that on a given day, on a
chair or before a board, they should, for two hours in succession, and with
respect to a group of sciences, be living repertories of all human
knowledge. In point of fact they were that, or nearly so, for two hours on
that particular day, but a month later they are so no longer. They could not
go through the examination again. Their too numerous and too burdensome
acquisitions slip incessantly from their mind, and are not replaced. Their
mental vigour has declined, their fertile capacity for growth has dried up,
the fully-developed man appears, and he is often a used-up man. Settled
down, married, resigned to turning in a circle, and indefinitely in the same
circle, he shuts himself up in his confined function, which he fulfils
adequately, but nothing more. Such is the average yield: assuredly the
receipts do not balance the expenditure. In England or America, where, as
in France previous to 1789, the contrary proceeding is adopted, the outcome
obtained is equal or superior."
The illustrious psychologist subsequently shows us the difference
between our system and that of the Anglo-Saxons. The latter do not possess
our innumerable special schools. With them instruction is not based on
book-learning, but on object lessons. The engineer, for example, is trained
in a workshop, and never at a school; a method which allows of each
individual reaching the level his intelligence permits of. He becomes a
workman or a foreman if he can get no further, an engineer if his aptitudes
take him as far. This manner of proceeding is much more democratic and of
much greater benefit to society than that of making the whole career of an
individual depend on an examination, lasting a few hours, and undergone at
the age of nineteen or twenty.
"In the hospital, the mine, the factory, in the architect's or the lawyer's
office, the student, who makes a start while very young, goes through his
apprenticeship, stage by stage, much as does with us a law clerk in his
office, or an artist in his studio. Previously, and before making a practical
beginning, he has had an opportunity of following some general and
summary course of instruction, so as to have a framework ready prepared in
which to store the observations he is shortly to make. Furthermore he is
able, as a rule, to avail himself of sundry technical courses which he can
follow in his leisure hours, so as to co-ordinate step by step the daily
experience he is gathering. Under such a system the practical capabilities
increase and develop of themselves in exact proportion to the faculties of
the student, and in the direction requisite for his future task and the special
work for which from now onwards he desires to fit himself. By this means
in England or the United States a young man is quickly in a position to
develop his capacity to the utmost. At twenty-five years of age, and much
sooner if the material and the parts are there, he is not merely a useful
performer, he is capable also of spontaneous enterprise; he is not only a part
of a machine, but also a motor. In France, where the contrary system
prevails—in France, which with each succeeding generation is falling more
and more into line with China—the sum total of the wasted forces is
enormous."
The great philosopher arrives at the following conclusion with respect
to the growing incongruity between our Latin system of education and the
requirements of practical life:—
"In the three stages of instruction, those of childhood, adolescence and
youth, the theoretical and pedagogic preparation by books on the school
benches has lengthened out and become overcharged in view of the
examination, the degree, the diploma, and the certificate, and solely in this
view, and by the worst methods, by the application of an unnatural and anti-
social regime, by the excessive postponement of the practical
apprenticeship, by our boarding-school system, by artificial training and
mechanical cramming, by overwork, without thought for the time that is to
follow, for the adult age and the functions of the man, without regard for the
real world on which the young man will shortly be thrown, for the society
in which we move and to which he must be adapted or be taught to resign
himself in advance, for the struggle in which humanity is engaged, and in
which to defend himself and to keep his footing he ought previously to have
been equipped, armed, trained, and hardened. This indispensable
equipment, this acquisition of more importance than any other, this sturdy
common sense and nerve and will-power our schools do not procure the
young Frenchman; on the contrary, far from qualifying him for his
approaching and definite state, they disqualify him. In consequence, his
entry into the world and his first steps in the field of action are most often
merely a succession of painful falls, whose effect is that he long remains
wounded and bruised, and sometimes disabled for life. The test is severe
and dangerous. In the course of it the mental and moral equilibrium is
affected, and runs the risk of not being re-established. Too sudden and
complete disillusion has supervened. The deceptions have been too great,
the disappointments too keen."12
Have we digressed in what precedes from the psychology of crowds?
Assuredly not. If we desire to understand the ideas and beliefs that are
germinating to-day in the masses, and will spring up to-morrow, it is
necessary to know how the ground has been prepared. The instruction given
the youth of a country allows of a knowledge of what that country will one
day be. The education accorded the present generation justifies the most
gloomy previsions. It is in part by instruction and education that the mind of
the masses is improved or deteriorated. It was necessary in consequence to
show how this mind has been fashioned by the system in vogue, and how
the mass of the indifferent and the neutral has become progressively an
army of the discontented ready to obey all the suggestions of utopians and
rhetoricians. It is in the schoolroom that socialists and anarchists are found
nowadays, and that the way is being paved for the approaching period of
decadence for the Latin peoples.
7. The novelty of this proposition being still considerable and history being quite unintelligible
without it, I devoted four chapters to its demonstration in my last book ("The Psychological
Laws of the Evolution of Peoples"). From it the reader will see that, in spite of fallacious
appearances, neither language, religion, arts, or, in a word, any element of civilisation, can pass,
intact, from one people to another.
8. The report of the ex-Conventionist, Fourcroy, quoted by Taine, is very clear on this point.
"What is everywhere seen with respect to the keeping of Sunday and attendance at the churches
proves that the majority of Frenchmen desire to return to their old usages and that it is no longer
opportune to resist this natural tendency. . . . The great majority of men stand in need of religion,
public worship, and priests. It is an error of some modern philosophers, by which i myself have
been led away, to believe in the possibility of instruction being so general as to destroy religious
prejudices, which for a great number of unfortunate persons are a source of consolation. . . . The
mass of the people, then, must be allowed its priests, its altars, and its public worship."
9. The most advanced republicans, even of the United States, recognise this fact. The American
magazine, The Forum, recently gave categorical expression to the opinion in terms which I
reproduce here from the Review of Reviews for December, 1894:—
"It should never be forgotten, even by the most ardent enemies of an aristocracy, that England is
to-day the most democratic country of the universe, the country in which the rights of the
individual are most respected, and in which the individual possesses the most liberty."
10. If a comparison be made between the profound religious and political dissensions which
separate the various parties in France, and are more especially the result of social questions, and
the separatist tendencies which were manifested at the time of the Revolution, and began to
again display themselves towards the close of the Franco-German war, it will be seen that the
different races represented in France are still far from being completely blended. The vigorous
centralisation of the Revolution and the creation of artificial departments destined to bring about
the fusion of the ancient provinces was certainly its most useful work. Were it possible to bring
about the decentralisation which is to-day preoccupying minds lacking in foresight, the
achievement would promptly have for consequence the most sanguinary disorders. To overlook
this fact is to leave out of account the entire history of France.
11. This phenomenon, moreover, is not peculiar to the Latin peoples. It is also to be observed in
China, which is also a country in the hands of a solid hierarchy of mandarins or functionaries,
and where a function is obtained, as in France, by competitive examination, in which the only
test is the imperturbable recitation of bulky manuals. The army of educated persons without
employment is considered in China at the present day as a veritable national calamity. It is the
same in India where, since the English have opened schools, not for educating purposes, as is
the case in England itself, but simply to furnish the indigenous inhabitants with instruction,
there has been formed a special class of educated persons, the Baboos, who, when they do not
obtain employment, become the irreconcilable enemies of the English rule. In the case of all the
Baboos, whether provided with employment or not, the first effect of their instruction has been
to lower their standard of morality. This is a fact on which I have insisted at length in my book,
"The Civilisations of India"—a fact, too, which has been observed by all authors who have
visited the great peninsula.
12. Taine, "Le Regime moderne," vol. ii., 1894. These pages are almost the last that Taine wrote.
They resume admirably the results of the great philosopher's long experience. Unfortunately
they are in my opinion totally incomprehensible for such of our university professors who have
not lived abroad. Education is the only means at our disposal of influencing to some extent the
mind of a nation, and it is profoundly saddening to have to think that there is scarcely any one in
France who can arrive at understanding that our present system of teaching is a grave cause of
rapid decadence, which instead of elevating our youth, lowers and perverts it.
A useful comparison may be made between Taine's pages and the observations on American
education recently made by M. Paul Bourget in his excellent book, "Outre-Mer." He, too, after
having noted that our education merely produces narrow-minded bourgeois, lacking in initiative
and will-power, or anarchists—"those two equally harmful types of the civilised man, who
degenerates into impotent platitude or insane destructiveness"—he too, I say, draws a
comparison that cannot be the object of too much reflection between our French lycees (public
schools), those factories of degeneration, and the American schools, which prepare a man
admirably for life. The gulf existing between truly democratic nations and those who have
democracy in their speeches, but in no wise in their thoughts, is clearly brought out in this
comparison.
Chapter II.
The Immediate Factors of the Opinions of Crowds
Table of Contents
1. Images, words and formulae. The magical power of words
and formulae—The power of words bound up with the
images they evoke, and independent of their real sense—
These images vary from age to age, and from race to race—
The wear and tear of words—Examples of the considerable
variations of sense of much-used words—The political
utility of baptizing old things with new names when the
words by which they were designated produced an
unfavourable impression on the masses— variations of the
sense of words in consequence of race differences—The
different meanings of the word "democracy" in Europe and
America. 2. Illusions. Their importance—They are to be
found at the root of all civilisations—The social necessity of
illusions—Crowds always prefer them to truths. 3.
Experience. Experience alone can fix in the mind of crowds
truths become necessary and destroy illusions grown
dangerous—Experience is only effective on the condition
that it be frequently repeated—The cost of the experiences
requisite to persuade crowds. 4. Reason. The nullity of its
influence on crowds—Crowds only to be influenced by their
unconscious sentiments— The role of logic in history—The
secret causes of improbable events.
We have just investigated the remote and preparatory factors which give the
mind of crowds a special receptivity, and make possible therein the growth
of certain sentiments and certain ideas. It now remains for us to study the
factors capable of acting in a direct manner. We shall see in a forthcoming
chapter how these factors should be put in force in order that they may
produce their full effect.
In the first part of this work we studied the sentiments, ideas, and
methods of reasoning of collective bodies, and from the knowledge thus
acquired it would evidently be possible to deduce in a general way the
means of making an impression on their mind. We already know what
strikes the imagination of crowds, and are acquainted with the power and
contagiousness of suggestions, of those especially that are presented under
the form of images. However, as suggestions may proceed from very
different sources, the factors capable of acting on the minds of crowds may
differ considerably. It is necessary, then, to study them separately. This is
not a useless study. Crowds are somewhat like the sphinx of ancient fable: it
is necessary to arrive at a solution of the problems offered by their
psychology or to resign ourselves to being devoured by them.
1. Images, Words, and Formulas
When studying the imagination of crowds we saw that it is particularly
open to the impressions produced by images. These images do not always
lie ready to hand, but it is possible to evoke them by the judicious
employment of words and formulas. Handled with art, they possess in sober
truth the mysterious power formerly attributed to them by the adepts of
magic. They cause the birth in the minds of crowds of the most formidable
tempests, which in turn they are capable of stilling. A pyramid far loftier
than that of old Cheops could be raised merely with the bones of men who
have been victims of the power of words and formulas.
The power of words is bound up with the images they evoke, and is
quite independent of their real significance. Words whose sense is the most
ill-defined are sometimes those that possess the most influence. Such, for
example, are the terms democracy, socialism, equality, liberty, &c., whose
meaning is so vague that bulky volumes do not suffice to precisely fix it.
Yet it is certain that a truly magical power is attached to those short
syllables, as if they contained the solution of all problems. They synthesise
the most diverse unconscious aspirations and the hope of their realisation.
Reason and arguments are incapable of combatting certain words and
formulas. They are uttered with solemnity in the presence of crowds, and as
soon as they have been pronounced an expression of respect is visible on
every countenance, and all heads are bowed. By many they are considered
as natural forces, as supernatural powers. They evoke grandiose and vague
images in men's minds, but this very vagueness that wraps them in
obscurity augments their mysterious power. They are the mysterious
divinities hidden behind the tabernacle, which the devout only approach in
fear and trembling.
The images evoked by words being independent of their sense, they
vary from age to age and from people to people, the formulas remaining
identical. Certain transitory images are attached to certain words: the word
is merely as it were the button of an electric bell that calls them up.
All words and all formulas do not possess the power of evoking images,
while there are some which have once had this power, but lose it in the
course of use, and cease to waken any response in the mind. They then
become vain sounds, whose principal utility is to relieve the person who
employs them of the obligation of thinking. Armed with a small stock of
formulas and commonplaces learnt while we are young, we possess all that
is needed to traverse life without the tiring necessity of having to reflect on
anything whatever.
If any particular language be studied, it is seen that the words of which
it is composed change rather slowly in the course of ages, while the images
these words evoke or the meaning attached to them changes ceaselessly.
This is the reason why, in another work, I have arrived at the conclusion
that the absolute translation of a language, especially of a dead language, is
totally impossible. What do we do in reality when we substitute a French
for a Latin, Greek, or Sanscrit expression, or even when we endeavour to
understand a book written in our own tongue two or three centuries back?
We merely put the images and ideas with which modern life has endowed
our intelligence in the place of absolutely distinct notions and images which
ancient life had brought into being in the mind of races submitted to
conditions of existence having no analogy with our own. When the men of
the Revolution imagined they were copying the Greeks and Romans, what
were they doing except giving to ancient words a sense the latter had never
had? What resemblance can possibly exist between the institutions of the
Greeks and those designated to-day by corresponding words? A republic at
that epoch was an essentially aristocratic institution, formed of a reunion of
petty despots ruling over a crowd of slaves kept in the most absolute
subjection. These communal aristocracies, based on slavery, could not have
existed for a moment without it.
The word "liberty," again, what signification could it have in any way
resembling that we attribute to it to-day at a period when the possibility of
the liberty of thought was not even suspected, and when there was no
greater and more exceptional crime than that of discussing the gods, the
laws and the customs of the city? What did such a word as "fatherland"
signify to an Athenian or Spartan unless it were the cult of Athens or Sparta,
and in no wise that of Greece, composed of rival cities always at war with
each other? What meaning had the same word "fatherland" among the
ancient Gauls, divided into rival tribes and races, and possessing different
languages and religions, and who were easily vanquished by Caesar
because he always found allies among them? It was Rome that made a
country of Gaul by endowing it with political and religious unity. Without
going back so far, scarcely two centuries ago, is it to be believed that this
same notion of a fatherland was conceived to have the same meaning as at
present by French princes like the great Conde, who allied themselves with
the foreigner against their sovereign? And yet again, the same word had it
not a sense very different from the modern for the French royalist
emigrants, who thought they obeyed the laws of honour in fighting against
France, and who from their point of view did indeed obey them, since the
feudal law bound the vassal to the lord and not to the soil, so that where the
sovereign was there was the true fatherland?
Numerous are the words whose meaning has thus profoundly changed
from age to age—words which we can only arrive at understanding in the
sense in which they were formerly understood after a long effort. It has
been said with truth that much study is necessary merely to arrive at
conceiving what was signified to our great grandfathers by such words as
the "king" and the "royal family." What, then, is likely to be the case with
terms still more complex?
Words, then, have only mobile and transitory significations which
change from age to age and people to people; and when we desire to exert
an influence by their means on the crowd what it is requisite to know is the
meaning given them by the crowd at a given moment, and not the meaning
which they formerly had or may yet have for individuals of a different
mental constitution.
Thus, when crowds have come, as the result of political upheavals or
changes of belief, to acquire a profound antipathy for the images evoked by
certain words, the first duty of the true statesman is to change the words
without, of course, laying hands on the things themselves, the latter being
too intimately bound up with the inherited constitution to be transformed.
The judicious Tocqueville long ago made the remark that the work of the
consulate and the empire consisted more particularly in the clothing with
new words of the greater part of the institutions of the past—that is to say,
in replacing words evoking disagreeable images in the imagination of the
crowd by other words of which the novelty prevented such evocations. The
"taille" or tallage has become the land tax; the "gabelle," the tax on salt; the
"aids," the indirect contributions and the consolidated duties; the tax on
trade companies and guilds, the license, &c.
One of the most essential functions of statesmen consists, then, in
baptizing with popular or, at any rate, indifferent words things the crowd
cannot endure under their old names. The power of words is so great that it
suffices to designate in well-chosen terms the most odious things to make
them acceptable to crowds. Taine justly observes that it was by invoking
liberty and fraternity—words very popular at the time— that the Jacobins
were able "to install a despotism worthy of Dahomey, a tribunal similar to
that of the Inquisition, and to accomplish human hecatombs akin to those of
ancient Mexico." The art of those who govern, as is the case with the art of
advocates, consists above all in the science of employing words. One of the
greatest difficulties of this art is, that in one and the same society the same
words most often have very different meanings for the different social
classes, who employ in appearance the same words, but never speak the
same language.
In the preceding examples it is especially time that has been made to
intervene as the principal factor in the changing of the meaning of words. If,
however, we also make race intervene, we shall then see that, at the same
period, among peoples equally civilised but of different race, the same
words very often correspond to extremely dissimilar ideas. It is impossible
to understand these differences without having travelled much, and for this
reason I shall not insist upon them. I shall confine myself to observing that
it is precisely the words most often employed by the masses which among
different peoples possess the most different meanings. Such is the case, for
instance, with the words "democracy" and "socialism" in such frequent use
nowadays.
In reality they correspond to quite contrary ideas and images in the
Latin and Anglo-Saxon mind. For the Latin peoples the word "democracy"
signifies more especially the subordination of the will and the initiative of
the individual to the will and the initiative of the community represented by
the State. It is the State that is charged, to a greater and greater degree, with
the direction of everything, the centralisation, the monopolisation, and the
manufacture of everything. To the State it is that all parties without
exception, radicals, socialists, or monarchists, constantly appeal. Among the
Anglo-Saxons and notably in America this same word "democracy"
signifies, on the contrary, the intense development of the will of the
individual, and as complete a subordination as possible of the State, which,
with the exception of the police, the army, and diplomatic relations, is not
allowed the direction of anything, not even of public instruction. It is seen,
then, that the same word which signifies for one people the subordination of
the will and the initiative of the individual and the preponderance of the
State, signifies for another the excessive development of the will and the
initiative of the individual and the complete subordination of the State.13
2. Illusions
From the dawn of civilisation onwards crowds have always undergone the
influence of illusions. It is to the creators of illusions that they have raised
more temples, statues, and altars than to any other class of men. Whether it
be the religious illusions of the past or the philosophic and social illusions
of the present, these formidable sovereign powers are always found at the
head of all the civilisations that have successively flourished on our planet.
It is in their name that were built the temples of Chaldea and Egypt and the
religious edifices of the Middle Ages, and that a vast upheaval shook the
whole of Europe a century ago, and there is not one of our political, artistic,
or social conceptions that is free from their powerful impress. Occasionally,
at the cost of terrible disturbances, man overthrows them, but he seems
condemned to always set them up again. Without them he would never have
emerged from his primitive barbarian state, and without them again he
would soon return to it. Doubtless they are futile shadows; but these
children of our dreams have forced the nations to create whatever the arts
may boast of splendour or civilisation of greatness.
"If one destroyed in museums and libraries, if one hurled down on the
flagstones before the churches all the works and all the monuments of art
that religions have inspired, what would remain of the great dreams of
humanity? To give to men that portion of hope and illusion without which
they cannot live, such is the reason for the existence of gods, heroes, and
poets. During fifty years science appeared to undertake this task. But
science has been compromised in hearts hungering after the ideal, because
it does not dare to be lavish enough of promises, because it cannot lie."14
The philosophers of the last century devoted themselves with fervour to
the destruction of the religious, political, and social illusions on which our
forefathers had lived for a long tale of centuries. By destroying them they
have dried up the springs of hope and resignation. Behind the immolated
chimeras they came face to face with the blind and silent forces of nature,
which are inexorable to weakness and ignore pity.
Notwithstanding all its progress, philosophy has been unable as yet to
offer the masses any ideal that can charm them; but, as they must have their
illusions at all cost, they turn instinctively, as the insect seeks the light, to
the rhetoricians who accord them what they want. Not truth, but error has
always been the chief factor in the evolution of nations, and the reason why
socialism is so powerful to-day is that it constitutes the last illusion that is
still vital. In spite of all scientific demonstrations it continues on the
increase. Its principal strength lies in the fact that it is championed by minds
sufficiently ignorant of things as they are in reality to venture boldly to
promise mankind happiness. The social illusion reigns to-day upon all the
heaped-up ruins of the past, and to it belongs the future. The masses have
never thirsted after truth. They turn aside from evidence that is not to their
taste, preferring to deify error, if error seduce them. Whoever can supply
them with illusions is easily their master; whoever attempts to destroy their
illusions is always their victim.
3. Experience
Experience constitutes almost the only effective process by which a truth
may be solidly established in the mind of the masses, and illusions grown
too dangerous be destroyed. To this end, however, it is necessary that the
experience should take place on a very large scale, and be very frequently
repeated. The experiences undergone by one generation are useless, as a
rule, for the generation that follows, which is the reason why historical
facts, cited with a view to demonstration, serve no purpose. Their only
utility is to prove to what an extent experiences need to be repeated from
age to age to exert any influence, or to be successful in merely shaking an
erroneous opinion when it is solidly implanted in the mind of the masses.
Our century and that which preceded it will doubtless be alluded to by
historians as an era of curious experiments, which in no other age have been
tried in such number.
The most gigantic of these experiments was the French Revolution. To
find out that a society is not to be refashioned from top to bottom in
accordance with the dictates of pure reason, it was necessary that several
millions of men should be massacred and that Europe should be profoundly
disturbed for a period of twenty years. To prove to us experimentally that
dictators cost the nations who acclaim them dear, two ruinous experiences
have been required in fifty years, and in spite of their clearness they do not
seem to have been sufficiently convincing. The first, nevertheless, cost
three millions of men and an invasion, the second involved a loss of
territory, and carried in its wake the necessity for permanent armies. A third
was almost attempted not long since, and will assuredly be attempted one
day. To bring an entire nation to admit that the huge German army was not,
as was currently alleged thirty years ago, a sort of harmless national
guard,15 the terrible war which cost us so dear had to take place. To bring
about the recognition that Protection ruins the nations who adopt it, at least
twenty years of disastrous experience will be needful. These examples
might be indefinitely multiplied.
4. Reason
In enumerating the factors capable of making an impression on the minds of
crowds all mention of reason might be dispensed with, were it not necessary
to point out the negative value of its influence.
We have already shown that crowds are not to be influenced by
reasoning, and can only comprehend rough-and-ready associations of ideas.
The orators who know how to make an impression upon them always
appeal in consequence to their sentiments and never to their reason. The
laws of logic have no action on crowds.16 To bring home conviction to
crowds it is necessary first of all to thoroughly comprehend the sentiments
by which they are animated, to pretend to share these sentiments, then to
endeavour to modify them by calling up, by means of rudimentary
associations, certain eminently suggestive notions, to be capable, if need be,
of going back to the point of view from which a start was made, and, above
all, to divine from instant to instant the sentiments to which one's discourse
is giving birth. This necessity of ceaselessly varying one's language in
accordance with the effect produced at the moment of speaking deprives
from the outset a prepared and studied harangue of all efficaciousness. In
such a speech the orator follows his own line of thought, not that of his
hearers, and from this fact alone his influence is annihilated.
Logical minds, accustomed to be convinced by a chain of somewhat
close reasoning, cannot avoid having recourse to this mode of persuasion
when addressing crowds, and the inability of their arguments always
surprises them. "The usual mathematical consequences based on the
syllogism—that is, on associations of identities—are imperative . . ." writes
a logician. "This imperativeness would enforce the assent even of an
inorganic mass were it capable of following associations of identities." This
is doubtless true, but a crowd is no more capable than an inorganic mass of
following such associations, nor even of understanding them. If the attempt
be made to convince by reasoning primitive minds—savages or children,
for instance—the slight value possessed by this method of arguing will be
understood.
It is not even necessary to descend so low as primitive beings to obtain
an insight into the utter powerlessness of reasoning when it has to fight
against sentiment. Let us merely call to mind how tenacious, for centuries
long, have been religious superstitions in contradiction with the simplest
logic. For nearly two thousand years the most luminous geniuses have
bowed before their laws, and modern times have to be reached for their
veracity to be merely contested. The Middle Ages and the Renaissance
possessed many enlightened men, but not a single man who attained by
reasoning to an appreciation of the childish side of his superstitions, or who
promulgated even a slight doubt as to the misdeeds of the devil or the
necessity of burning sorcerers.
Should it be regretted that crowds are never guided by reason? We
would not venture to affirm it. Without a doubt human reason would not
have availed to spur humanity along the path of civilisation with the ardour
and hardihood its illusions have done. These illusions, the offspring of those
unconscious forces by which we are led, were doubtless necessary. Every
race carries in its mental constitution the laws of its destiny, and it is,
perhaps, these laws that it obeys with a resistless impulse, even in the case
of those of its impulses which apparently are the most unreasoned. It seems
at times as if nations were submitted to secret forces analogous to those
which compel the acorn to transform itself into an oak or a comet to follow
its orbit.
What little insight we can get into these forces must be sought for in the
general course of the evolution of a people, and not in the isolated facts
from which this evolution appears at times to proceed. Were these facts
alone to be taken into consideration, history would seem to be the result of a
series of improbable chances. It was improbable that a Galilean carpenter
should become for two thousand years an all-powerful God in whose name
the most important civilisations were founded; improbable, too, that a few
bands of Arabs, emerging from their deserts, should conquer the greater part
of the old Graco-Roman world, and establish an empire greater than that of
Alexander; improbable, again, that in Europe, at an advanced period of its
development, and when authority throughout it had been systematically
hierarchised, an obscure lieutenant of artillery should have succeeded in
reigning over a multitude of peoples and kings.
Let us leave reason, then, to philosophers, and not insist too strongly on
its intervention in the governing of men. It is not by reason, but most often
in spite of it, that are created those sentiments that are the mainsprings of all
civilisation—sentiments such as honour, self- sacrifice, religious faith,
patriotism, and the love of glory.
13. In my book, "The Psychological Laws of the Evolution of Peoples," I have insisted at length on
the differences which distinguish the Latin democratic ideal from the Anglo-Saxon democratic
ideal. Independently, and as the result of his travels, M. Paul Bourget has arrived, in his quite
recent book, "Outre-Mer," at conclusions almost identical with mine.
14. Daniel Lesueur.
15. The opinion of the crowd was formed in this case by those rough-and-ready associations of
dissimilar things, the mechanism of which I have previously explained. The French national
guard of that period, being composed of peaceable shopkeepers, utterly lacking in discipline and
quite incapable of being taken seriously, whatever bore a similar name, evoked the same
conception and was considered in consequence as harmless. The error of the crowd was shared
at the time by its leaders, as happens so often in connection with opinions dealing with
generalisations. In a speech made in the Chamber on the 31st of December, 1867, and quoted in
a book by M. E. Ollivier that has appeared recently, a statesman who often followed the opinion
of the crowd but was never in advance of it—I allude to M. Thiers—declared that Prussia only
possessed a national guard analogous to that of France, and in consequence without importance,
in addition to a regular army about equal to the French regular army; assertions about as
accurate as the predictions of the same statesman as to the insignificant future reserved for
railways.
16. My first observations with regard to the art of impressing crowds and touching the slight
assistance to be derived in this connection from the rules of logic date back to the seige of Paris,
to the day when I saw conducted to the Louvre, where the Government was then sitting, Marshal
V——, whom a furious crowd asserted they had surprised in the act of taking the plans of the
fortifications to sell them to the Prussians. A member of the Government (G. P——), a very
celebrated orator, came out to harangue the crowd, which was demanding the immediate
execution of the prisoner. I had expected that the speaker would point out the absurdity of the
accusation by remarking that the accused Marshal was positively one of those who had
constructed the fortifications, the plan of which, moreover, was on sale at every booksellers. To
my immense stupefaction—I was very young then—the speech was on quite different lines.
"Justice shall be done," exclaimed the orator, advancing towards the prisoner, "and pitiless
justice. Let the Government of the National Defence conclude your inquiry. In the meantime we
will keep the prisoner in custody." At once calmed by this apparent concession, the crowd broke
up, and a quarter of an hour later the Marshal was able to return home. He would infallibly have
been torn in pieces had the speaker treated the infuriated crowd to the logical arguments that my
extreme youth induced me to consider as very convincing.
Chapter III.
The Leaders of Crowds and Their Means of
Persuasion
Table of Contents
1. The leaders of crowds. The instinctive need of all beings
forming a crowd to obey a leader—The psychology of the
leaders of crowds—They alone can endow crowds with faith
and organise them—The leaders forcibly despotic—
Classification of the leaders—The part played by the will. 2.
The means of action of the leaders. Affirmation, repetition,
contagion—The respective part of these different factors—
The way in which contagion may spread from the lower to
the upper classes in a society—A popular opinion soon
becomes a general opinion. 3. Prestige. Definition of
prestige and classification of its different kinds—Acquired
prestige and personal prestige—Various examples—The way
in which prestige is destroyed.
We are now acquainted with the mental constitution of crowds, and we also
know what are the motives capable of making an impression on their mind.
It remains to investigate how these motives may be set in action, and by
whom they may usefully be turned to practical account.
1. The Leaders of Crowds.
As soon as a certain number of living beings are gathered together, whether
they be animals or men, they place themselves instinctively under the
authority of a chief.
In the case of human crowds the chief is often nothing more than a
ringleader or agitator, but as such he plays a considerable part. His will is
the nucleus around which the opinions of the crowd are grouped and attain
to identity. He constitutes the first element towards the organisation of
heterogeneous crowds, and paves the way for their organisation in sects; in
the meantime he directs them. A crowd is a servile flock that is incapable of
ever doing without a master.
The leader has most often started as one of the led. He has himself been
hypnotised by the idea, whose apostle he has since become. It has taken
possession of him to such a degree that everything outside it vanishes, and
that every contrary opinion appears to him an error or a superstition. An
example in point is Robespierre, hypnotised by the philosophical ideas of
Rousseau, and employing the methods of the Inquisition to propagate them.
The leaders we speak of are more frequently men of action than
thinkers. They are not gifted with keen foresight, nor could they be, as this
quality generally conduces to doubt and inactivity. They are especially
recruited from the ranks of those morbidly nervous, excitable, half-
deranged persons who are bordering on madness. However absurd may be
the idea they uphold or the goal they pursue, their convictions are so strong
that all reasoning is lost upon them. Contempt and persecution do not affect
them, or only serve to excite them the more. They sacrifice their personal
interest, their family—everything. The very instinct of self-preservation is
entirely obliterated in them, and so much so that often the only recompense
they solicit is that of martyrdom. The intensity of their faith gives great
power of suggestion to their words. The multitude is always ready to listen
to the strong-willed man, who knows how to impose himself upon it. Men
gathered in a crowd lose all force of will, and turn instinctively to the
person who possesses the quality they lack.
Nations have never lacked leaders, but all of the latter have by no means
been animated by those strong convictions proper to apostles. These leaders
are often subtle rhetoricians, seeking only their own personal interest, and
endeavouring to persuade by flattering base instincts. The influence they
can assert in this manner may be very great, but it is always ephemeral. The
men of ardent convictions who have stirred the soul of crowds, the Peter the
Hermits, the Luthers, the Savonarolas, the men of the French Revolution,
have only exercised their fascination after having been themselves
fascinated first of all by a creed. They are then able to call up in the souls of
their fellows that formidable force known as faith, which renders a man the
absolute slave of his dream.
The arousing of faith—whether religious, political, or social, whether
faith in a work, in a person, or an idea—has always been the function of the
great leaders of crowds, and it is on this account that their influence is
always very great. Of all the forces at the disposal of humanity, faith has
always been one of the most tremendous, and the gospel rightly attributes to
it the power of moving mountains. To endow a man with faith is to multiply
his strength tenfold. The great events of history have been brought about by
obscure believers, who have had little beyond their faith in their favour. It is
not by the aid of the learned or of philosophers, and still less of sceptics,
that have been built up the great religions which have swayed the world, or
the vast empires which have spread from one hemisphere to the other.
In the cases just cited, however, we are dealing with great leaders, and
they are so few in number that history can easily reckon them up. They
form the summit of a continuous series, which extends from these powerful
masters of men down to the workman who, in the smoky atmosphere of an
inn, slowly fascinates his comrades by ceaselessly drumming into their ears
a few set phrases, whose purport he scarcely comprehends, but the
application of which, according to him, must surely bring about the
realisation of all dreams and of every hope.
In every social sphere, from the highest to the lowest, as soon as a man
ceases to be isolated he speedily falls under the influence of a leader. The
majority of men, especially among the masses, do not possess clear and
reasoned ideas on any subject whatever outside their own speciality. The
leader serves them as guide. It is just possible that he may be replaced,
though very inefficiently, by the periodical publications which manufacture
opinions for their readers and supply them with ready- made phrases which
dispense them of the trouble of reasoning.
The leaders of crowds wield a very despotic authority, and this
despotism indeed is a condition of their obtaining a following. It has often
been remarked how easily they extort obedience, although without any
means of backing up their authority, from the most turbulent section of the
working classes. They fix the hours of labour and the rate of wages, and
they decree strikes, which are begun and ended at the hour they ordain.
At the present day these leaders and agitators tend more and more to
usurp the place of the public authorities in proportion as the latter allow
themselves to be called in question and shorn of their strength. The tyranny
of these new masters has for result that the crowds obey them much more
docilely than they have obeyed any government. If in consequence of some
accident or other the leaders should be removed from the scene the crowd
returns to its original state of a collectivity without cohesion or force of
resistance. During the last strike of the Parisian omnibus employes the
arrest of the two leaders who were directing it was at once sufficient to
bring it to an end. It is the need not of liberty but of servitude that is always
predominant in the soul of crowds. They are so bent on obedience that they
instinctively submit to whoever declares himself their master.
These ringleaders and agitators may be divided into two clearly defined
classes. The one includes the men who are energetic and possess, but only
intermittently, much strength of will, the other the men, far rarer than the
preceding, whose strength of will is enduring. The first mentioned are
violent, brave, and audacious. They are more especially useful to direct a
violent enterprise suddenly decided on, to carry the masses with them in
spite of danger, and to transform into heroes the men who but yesterday
were recruits. Men of this kind were Ney and Murat under the First Empire,
and such a man in our own time was Garibaldi, a talentless but energetic
adventurer who succeeded with a handful of men in laying hands on the
ancient kingdom of Naples, defended though it was by a disciplined army.
Still, though the energy of leaders of this class is a force to be reckoned
with, it is transitory, and scarcely outlasts the exciting cause that has
brought it into play. When they have returned to their ordinary course of life
the heroes animated by energy of this description often evince, as was the
case with those I have just cited, the most astonishing weakness of
character. They seem incapable of reflection and of conducting themselves
under the simplest circumstances, although they had been able to lead
others. These men are leaders who cannot exercise their function except on
the condition that they be led themselves and continually stimulated, that
they have always as their beacon a man or an idea, that they follow a line of
conduct clearly traced. The second category of leaders, that of men of
enduring strength of will, have, in spite of a less brilliant aspect, a much
more considerable influence. In this category are to be found the true
founders of religions and great undertakings: St. Paul, Mahomet,
Christopher Columbus, and de Lesseps, for example. Whether they be
intelligent or narrow-minded is of no importance: the world belongs to
them. The persistent will-force they possess is an immensely rare and
immensely powerful faculty to which everything yields. What a strong and
continuous will is capable of is not always properly appreciated. Nothing
resists it; neither nature, gods, nor man.
The most recent example of what can be effected by a strong and
continuous will is afforded us by the illustrious man who separated the
Eastern and Western worlds, and accomplished a task that during three
thousand years had been attempted in vain by the greatest sovereigns. He
failed later in an identical enterprise, but then had intervened old age, to
which everything, even the will, succumbs.
When it is desired to show what may be done by mere strength of will,
all that is necessary is to relate in detail the history of the difficulties that
had to be surmounted in connection with the cutting of the Suez Canal. An
ocular witness, Dr. Cazalis, has summed up in a few striking lines the entire
story of this great work, recounted by its immortal author.
"From day to day, episode by episode, he told the stupendous story of
the canal. He told of all he had had to vanquish, of the impossible he had
made possible, of all the opposition he encountered, of the coalition against
him, and the disappointments, the reverses, the defeats which had been
unavailing to discourage or depress him. He recalled how England had
combatted him, attacking him without cessation, how Egypt and France had
hesitated, how the French Consul had been foremost in his opposition to the
early stages of the work, and the nature of the opposition he had met with,
the attempt to force his workmen to desert from thirst by refusing them
fresh water; how the Minister of Marine and the engineers, all responsible
men of experienced and scientific training, had naturally all been hostile,
were all certain on scientific grounds that disaster was at hand, had
calculated its coming, foretelling it for such a day and hour as an eclipse is
foretold."
The book which relates the lives of all these great leaders would not
contain many names, but these names have been bound up with the most
important events in the history of civilisation.
2. The Means of Action of the Leaders: Affirmation, Repetition,
Contagion
When it is wanted to stir up a crowd for a short space of time, to induce it to
commit an act of any nature—to pillage a palace, or to die in defence of a
stronghold or a barricade, for instance—the crowd must be acted upon by
rapid suggestion, among which example is the most powerful in its effect.
To attain this end, however, it is necessary that the crowd should have been
previously prepared by certain circumstances, and, above all, that he who
wishes to work upon it should possess the quality to be studied farther on,
to which I give the name of prestige.
When, however, it is proposed to imbue the mind of a crowd with ideas
and beliefs—with modern social theories, for instance—the leaders have
recourse to different expedients. The principal of them are three in number
and clearly defined—affirmation, repetition, and contagion. Their action is
somewhat slow, but its effects, once produced, are very lasting.
Affirmation pure and simple, kept free of all reasoning and all proof, is
one of the surest means of making an idea enter the mind of crowds. The
conciser an affirmation is, the more destitute of every appearance of proof
and demonstration, the more weight it carries. The religious books and the
legal codes of all ages have always resorted to simple affirmation.
Statesmen called upon to defend a political cause, and commercial men
pushing the sale of their products by means of advertising are acquainted
with the value of affirmation.
Affirmation, however, has no real influence unless it be constantly
repeated, and so far as possible in the same terms. It was Napoleon, I
believe, who said that there is only one figure in rhetoric of serious
importance, namely, repetition. The thing affirmed comes by repetition to
fix itself in the mind in such a way that it is accepted in the end as a
demonstrated truth.
The influence of repetition on crowds is comprehensible when the
power is seen which it exercises on the most enlightened minds. This power
is due to the fact that the repeated statement is embedded in the long run in
those profound regions of our unconscious selves in which the motives of
our actions are forged. At the end of a certain time we have forgotten who is
the author of the repeated assertion, and we finish by believing it. To this
circumstance is due the astonishing power of advertisements. When we
have read a hundred, a thousand, times that X's chocolate is the best, we
imagine we have heard it said in many quarters, and we end by acquiring
the certitude that such is the fact. When we have read a thousand times that
Y's flour has cured the most illustrious persons of the most obstinate
maladies, we are tempted at last to try it when suffering from an illness of a
similar kind. If we always read in the same papers that A is an arrant scamp
and B a most honest man we finish by being convinced that this is the truth,
unless, indeed, we are given to reading another paper of the contrary
opinion, in which the two qualifications are reversed. Affirmation and
repetition are alone powerful enough to combat each other.
When an affirmation has been sufficiently repeated and there is
unanimity in this repetition—as has occurred in the case of certain famous
financial undertakings rich enough to purchase every assistance— what is
called a current of opinion is formed and the powerful mechanism of
contagion intervenes. Ideas, sentiments, emotions, and beliefs possess in
crowds a contagious power as intense as that of microbes. This
phenomenon is very natural, since it is observed even in animals when they
are together in number. Should a horse in a stable take to biting his manger
the other horses in the stable will imitate him. A panic that has seized on a
few sheep will soon extend to the whole flock. In the case of men collected
in a crowd all emotions are very rapidly contagious, which explains the
suddenness of panics. Brain disorders, like madness, are themselves
contagious. The frequency of madness among doctors who are specialists
for the mad is notorious. Indeed, forms of madness have recently been cited
—agoraphobia, for instance—which are communicable from men to
animals.
For individuals to succumb to contagion their simultaneous presence on
the same spot is not indispensable. The action of contagion may be felt from
a distance under the influence of events which give all minds an individual
trend and the characteristics peculiar to crowds. This is especially the case
when men's minds have been prepared to undergo the influence in question
by those remote factors of which I have made a study above. An example in
point is the revolutionary movement of 1848, which, after breaking out in
Paris, spread rapidly over a great part of Europe and shook a number of
thrones.
Imitation, to which so much influence is attributed in social phenomena,
is in reality a mere effect of contagion. Having shown its influence
elsewhere, I shall confine myself to reproducing what I said on the subject
fifteen years ago. My remarks have since been developed by other writers
in recent publications.
"Man, like animals, has a natural tendency to imitation. Imitation is a
necessity for him, provided always that the imitation is quite easy. It is this
necessity that makes the influence of what is called fashion so powerful.
Whether in the matter of opinions, ideas, literary manifestations, or merely
of dress, how many persons are bold enough to run counter to the fashion?
It is by examples not by arguments that crowds are guided. At every period
there exists a small number of individualities which react upon the
remainder and are imitated by the unconscious mass. It is needful however,
that these individualities should not be in too pronounced disagreement
with received ideas. Were they so, to imitate them would be too difficult
and their influence would be nil. For this very reason men who are too
superior to their epoch are generally without influence upon it. The line of
separation is too strongly marked. For the same reason too Europeans, in
spite of all the advantages of their civilisation, have so insignificant an
influence on Eastern people; they differ from them to too great an extent.
"The dual action of the past and of reciprocal imitation renders, in the
long run, all the men of the same country and the same period so alike that
even in the case of individuals who would seem destined to escape this
double influence, such as philosophers, learned men, and men of letters,
thought and style have a family air which enables the age to which they
belong to be immediately recognised. It is not necessary to talk for long
with an individual to attain to a thorough knowledge of what he reads, of
his habitual occupations, and of the surroundings amid which he lives."17
Contagion is so powerful that it forces upon individuals not only certain
opinions, but certain modes of feeling as well. Contagion is the cause of the
contempt in which, at a given period, certain works are held—the example
of "Tannhauser" may be cited—which, a few years later, for the same
reason are admired by those who were foremost in criticising them.
The opinions and beliefs of crowds are specially propagated by
contagion, but never by reasoning. The conceptions at present rife among
the working classes have been acquired at the public-house as the result of
affirmation, repetition, and contagion, and indeed the mode of creation of
the beliefs of crowds of every age has scarcely been different. Renan justly
institutes a comparison between the first founders of Christianity and "the
socialist working men spreading their ideas from public-house to public-
house"; while Voltaire had already observed in connection with the
Christian religion that "for more than a hundred years it was only embraced
by the vilest riff-raff."
It will be noted that in cases analogous to those I have just cited,
contagion, after having been at work among the popular classes, has spread
to the higher classes of society. This is what we see happening at the present
day with regard to the socialist doctrines which are beginning to be held by
those who will yet be their first victims. Contagion is so powerful a force
that even the sentiment of personal interest disappears under its action.
This is the explanation of the fact that every opinion adopted by the
populace always ends in implanting itself with great vigour in the highest
social strata, however obvious be the absurdity of the triumphant opinion.
This reaction of the lower upon the higher social classes is the more
curious, owing to the circumstance that the beliefs of the crowd always
have their origin to a greater or less extent in some higher idea, which has
often remained without influence in the sphere in which it was evolved.
Leaders and agitators, subjugated by this higher idea, take hold of it, distort
it and create a sect which distorts it afresh, and then propagates it amongst
the masses, who carry the process of deformation still further. Become a
popular truth the idea returns, as it were, to its source and exerts an
influence on the upper classes of a nation. In the long run it is intelligence
that shapes the destiny of the world, but very indirectly. The philosophers
who evolve ideas have long since returned to dust, when, as the result of the
process I have just described, the fruit of their reflection ends by
triumphing.
3. Prestige
Great power is given to ideas propagated by affirmation, repetition, and
contagion by the circumstance that they acquire in time that mysterious
force known as prestige.
Whatever has been a ruling power in the world, whether it be ideas or
men, has in the main enforced its authority by means of that irresistible
force expressed by the word "prestige." The term is one whose meaning is
grasped by everybody, but the word is employed in ways too different for it
to be easy to define it. Prestige may involve such sentiments as admiration
or fear. Occasionally even these sentiments are its basis, but it can perfectly
well exist without them. The greatest measure of prestige is possessed by
the dead, by beings, that is, of whom we do not stand in fear—by
Alexander, Caesar, Mahomet, and Buddha, for example. On the other hand,
there are fictive beings whom we do not admire—the monstrous divinities
of the subterranean temples of India, for instance—but who strike us
nevertheless as endowed with a great prestige.
Prestige in reality is a sort of domination exercised on our mind by an
individual, a work, or an idea. This domination entirely paralyses our
critical faculty, and fills our soul with astonishment and respect. The
sentiment provoked is inexplicable, like all sentiments, but it would appear
to be of the same kind as the fascination to which a magnetised person is
subjected. Prestige is the mainspring of all authority. Neither gods, kings,
nor women have ever reigned without it.
The various kinds of prestige may be grouped under two principal
heads: acquired prestige and personal prestige. Acquired prestige is that
resulting from name, fortune, and reputation. It may be independent of
personal prestige. Personal prestige, on the contrary, is something
essentially peculiar to the individual; it may coexist with reputation, glory,
and fortune, or be strengthened by them, but it is perfectly capable of
existing in their absence.
Acquired or artificial prestige is much the most common. The mere fact
that an individual occupies a certain position, possesses a certain fortune, or
bears certain titles, endows him with prestige, however slight his own
personal worth. A soldier in uniform, a judge in his robes, always enjoys
prestige. Pascal has very properly noted the necessity for judges of robes
and wigs. Without them they would be stripped of half their authority. The
most unbending socialist is always somewhat impressed by the sight of a
prince or a marquis; and the assumption of such titles makes the robbing of
tradesmen an easy matter.18
The prestige of which I have just spoken is exercised by persons; side
by side with it may be placed that exercised by opinions, literary and artistic
works, &c. Prestige of the latter kind is most often merely the result of
accumulated repetitions. History, literary and artistic history especially,
being nothing more than the repetition of identical judgments, which
nobody endeavours to verify, every one ends by repeating what he learnt at
school, till there come to be names and things which nobody would venture
to meddle with. For a modern reader the perusal of Homer results
incontestably in immense boredom; but who would venture to say so? The
Parthenon, in its present state, is a wretched ruin, utterly destitute of
interest, but it is endowed with such prestige that it does not appear to us as
it really is, but with all its accompaniment of historic memories. The special
characteristic of prestige is to prevent us seeing things as they are and to
entirely paralyse our judgment. Crowds always, and individuals as a rule,
stand in need of ready-made opinions on all subjects. The popularity of
these opinions is independent of the measure of truth or error they contain,
and is solely regulated by their prestige.
I now come to personal prestige. Its nature is very different from that of
artificial or acquired prestige, with which I have just been concerned. It is a
faculty independent of all titles, of all authority, and possessed by a small
number of persons whom it enables to exercise a veritably magnetic
fascination on those around them, although they are socially their equals,
and lack all ordinary means of domination. They force the acceptance of
their ideas and sentiments on those about them, and they are obeyed as is
the tamer of wild beasts by the animal that could easily devour him.
The great leaders of crowds, such as Buddha, Jesus, Mahomet, Joan of
Arc, and Napoleon, have possessed this form of prestige in a high degree,
and to this endowment is more particularly due the position they attained.
Gods, heroes, and dogmas win their way in the world of their own inward
strength. They are not to be discussed: they disappear, indeed, as soon as
discussed.
The great personages I have just cited were in possession of their power
of fascination long before they became illustrious, and would never have
become so without it. It is evident, for instance, that Napoleon at the zenith
of his glory enjoyed an immense prestige by the mere fact of his power, but
he was already endowed in part with this prestige when he was without
power and completely unknown. When, an obscure general, he was sent,
thanks to influential protection, to command the army of Italy, he found
himself among rough generals who were of a mind to give a hostile
reception to the young intruder dispatched them by the Directory. From the
very beginning, from the first interview, without the aid of speeches,
gestures, or threats, at the first sight of the man who was to become great
they were vanquished. Taine furnishes a curious account of this interview
taken from contemporary memoirs.
"The generals of division, amongst others Augereau, a sort of
swashbuckler, uncouth and heroic, proud of his height and his bravery,
arrive at the staff quarters very badly disposed towards the little upstart
dispatched them from Paris. On the strength of the description of him that
has been given them, Augereau is inclined to be insolent and insubordinate;
a favourite of Barras, a general who owes his rank to the events of
Vendemiaire who has won his grade by street-fighting, who is looked upon
as bearish, because he is always thinking in solitude, of poor aspect, and
with the reputation of a mathematician and dreamer. They are introduced,
and Bonaparte keeps them waiting. At last he appears, girt with his sword;
he puts on his hat, explains the measures he has taken, gives his orders, and
dismisses them. Augereau has remained silent; it is only when he is outside
that he regains his self-possession and is able to deliver himself of his
customary oaths. He admits with Massena that this little devil of a general
has inspired him with awe; he cannot understand the ascendency by which
from the very first he has felt himself overwhelmed."
Become a great man, his prestige increased in proportion as his glory
grew, and came to be at least equal to that of a divinity in the eyes of those
devoted to him. General Vandamme, a rough, typical soldier of the
Revolution, even more brutal and energetic than Augereau, said of him to
Marshal d'Arnano in 1815, as on one occasion they mounted together the
stairs of the Tuileries: "That devil of a man exercises a fascination on me
that I cannot explain even to myself, and in such a degree that, though I fear
neither God nor devil, when I am in his presence I am ready to tremble like
a child, and he could make me go through the eye of a needle to throw
myself into the fire."
Napoleon exercised a like fascination on all who came into contact with
him.19
Davoust used to say, talking of Maret's devotion and of his own: "Had
the Emperor said to us, `It is important in the interest of my policy that
Paris should be destroyed without a single person leaving it or escaping,'
Maret I am sure would have kept the secret, but he could not have abstained
from compromising himself by seeing that his family got clear of the city.
On the other hand, I, for fear of letting the truth leak out, would have let my
wife and children stay."
It is necessary to bear in mind the astounding power exerted by
fascination of this order to understand that marvellous return from the Isle
of Elba, that lightning-like conquest of France by an isolated man
confronted by all the organised forces of a great country that might have
been supposed weary of his tyranny. He had merely to cast a look at the
generals sent to lay hands on him, and who had sworn to accomplish their
mission. All of them submitted without discussion.
"Napoleon," writes the English General Wolseley, "lands in France
almost alone, a fugitive from the small island of Elba which was his
kingdom, and succeeded in a few weeks, without bloodshed, in upsetting all
organised authority in France under its legitimate king; is it possible for the
personal ascendency of a man to affirm itself in a more astonishing manner?
But from the beginning to the end of this campaign, which was his last, how
remarkable too is the ascendency he exercised over the Allies, obliging
them to follow his initiative, and how near he came to crushing them!"
His prestige outlived him and continued to grow. It is his prestige that
made an emperor of his obscure nephew. How powerful is his memory still
is seen in the resurrection of his legend in progress at the present day. Ill-
treat men as you will, massacre them by millions, be the cause of invasion
upon invasion, all is permitted you if you possess prestige in a sufficient
degree and the talent necessary to uphold it.
I have invoked, no doubt, in this case a quite exceptional example of
prestige, but one it was useful to cite to make clear the genesis of great
religions, great doctrines, and great empires. Were it not for the power
exerted on the crowd by prestige, such growths would be incomprehensible.
Prestige, however, is not based solely on personal ascendency, military
glory, and religious terror; it may have a more modest origin and still be
considerable. Our century furnishes several examples. One of the most
striking ones that posterity will recall from age to age will be supplied by
the history of the illustrious man who modified the face of the globe and the
commercial relations of the nations by separating two continents. He
succeeded in his enterprise owing to his immense strength of will, but also
owing to the fascination he exercised on those surrounding him. To
overcome the unanimous opposition he met with, he had only to show
himself. He would speak briefly, and in face of the charm he exerted his
opponents became his friends. The English in particular strenuously
opposed his scheme; he had only to put in an appearance in England to rally
all suffrages. In later years, when he passed Southampton, the bells were
rung on his passage; and at the present day a movement is on foot in
England to raise a statue in his honour.
"Having vanquished whatever there is to vanquish, men and things,
marshes, rocks, and sandy wastes," he had ceased to believe in obstacles,
and wished to begin Suez over again at Panama. He began again with the
same methods as of old; but he had aged, and, besides, the faith that moves
mountains does not move them if they are too lofty. The mountains resisted,
and the catastrophe that ensued destroyed the glittering aureole of glory that
enveloped the hero. His life teaches how prestige can grow and how it can
vanish. After rivalling in greatness the most famous heroes of history, he
was lowered by the magistrates of his country to the ranks of the vilest
criminals. When he died his coffin, unattended, traversed an indifferent
crowd. Foreign sovereigns are alone in rendering homage to his memory as
to that of one of the greatest men that history has known.20
Still, the various examples that have just been cited represent extreme
cases. To fix in detail the psychology of prestige, it would be necessary to
place them at the extremity of a series, which would range from the
founders of religions and empires to the private individual who endeavours
to dazzle his neighbours by a new coat or a decoration.
Between the extreme limits of this series would find a place all the
forms of prestige resulting from the different elements composing a
civilisation—sciences, arts, literature, &c.—and it would be seen that
prestige constitutes the fundamental element of persuasion. Consciously or
not, the being, the idea, or the thing possessing prestige is immediately
imitated in consequence of contagion, and forces an entire generation to
adopt certain modes of feeling and of giving expression to its thought. This
imitation, moreover, is, as a rule, unconscious, which accounts for the fact
that it is perfect. The modern painters who copy the pale colouring and the
stiff attitudes of some of the Primitives are scarcely alive to the source of
their inspiration. They believe in their own sincerity, whereas, if an eminent
master had not revived this form of art, people would have continued blind
to all but its naive and inferior sides. Those artists who, after the manner of
another illustrious master, inundate their canvasses with violet shades do
not see in nature more violet than was detected there fifty years ago; but
they are influenced, "suggestioned," by the personal and special
impressions of a painter who, in spite of this eccentricity, was successful in
acquiring great prestige. Similar examples might be brought forward in
connection with all the elements of civilisation.
It is seen from what precedes that a number of factors may be concerned
in the genesis of prestige; among them success was always one of the most
important. Every successful man, every idea that forces itself into
recognition, ceases, ipso facto, to be called in question. The proof that
success is one of the principal stepping-stones to prestige is that the
disappearance of the one is almost always followed by the disappearance of
the other. The hero whom the crowd acclaimed yesterday is insulted to-day
should he have been overtaken by failure. The reaction, indeed, will be the
stronger in proportion as the prestige has been great. The crowd in this case
considers the fallen hero as an equal, and takes its revenge for having
bowed to a superiority whose existence it no longer admits. While
Robespierre was causing the execution of his colleagues and of a great
number of his contemporaries, he possessed an immense prestige. When the
transposition of a few votes deprived him of power, he immediately lost his
prestige, and the crowd followed him to the guillotine with the self-same
imprecations with which shortly before it had pursued his victims. Believers
always break the statues of their former gods with every symptom of fury.
Prestige lost by want of success disappears in a brief space of time. It
can also be worn away, but more slowly by being subjected to discussion.
This latter power, however, is exceedingly sure. From the moment prestige
is called in question it ceases to be prestige. The gods and men who have
kept their prestige for long have never tolerated discussion. For the crowd
to admire, it must be kept at a distance.
17. Gustave le Bon, "L'Homme et les Societes," vol. ii. p. 116. 1881.
18. The influence of titles, decorations, and uniforms on crowds is to be traced in all countries, even
in those in which the sentiment of personal independence is the most strongly developed. I quote
in this connection a curious passage from a recent book of travel, on the prestige enjoyed in
England by great persons.
"I had observed, under various circumstances, the peculiar sort of intoxication produced in
the most reasonable Englishmen by the contact or sight of an English peer.
"Provided his fortune enables him to keep up his rank, he is sure of their affection in
advance, and brought into contact with him they are so enchanted as to put up with anything at
his hands. They may be seen to redden with pleasure at his approach, and if he speaks to them
their suppressed joy increases their redness, and causes their eyes to gleam with unusual
brilliance. Respect for nobility is in their blood, so to speak, as with Spaniards the love of
dancing, with Germans that of music, and with Frenchmen the liking for revolutions. Their
passion for horses and Shakespeare is less violent, the satisfaction and pride they derive from
these sources a less integral part of their being. There is a considerable sale for books dealing
with the peerage, and go where one will they are to be found, like the Bible, in all hands."
19. Thoroughly conscious of his prestige, Napoleon was aware that he added to it by treating rather
worse than stable lads the great personages around him, and among whom figured some of those
celebrated men of the Convention of whom Europe had stood in dread. The gossip of the period
abounds in illustrations of this fact. One day, in the midst of a Council of State, Napoleon
grossly insults Beugnot, treating him as one might an unmannerly valet. The effect produced, he
goes up to him and says, "Well, stupid, have you found your head again?" Whereupon Beugnot,
tall as a drum-major, bows very low, and the little man raising his hand, takes the tall one by the
ear, "an intoxicating sign of favour," writes Beugnot, "the familiar gesture of the master who
waxes gracious." Such examples give a clear idea of the degree of base platitude that prestige
can provoke. They enable us to understand the immense contempt of the great despot for the
men surrounding him—men whom he merely looked upon as "food for powder."
20. An Austrian paper, the Neue Freie Presse, of Vienna, has indulged on the subject of the destiny
of de Lesseps in reflections marked by a most judicious psychological insight. I therefore
reproduce them here:—
"After the condemnation of Ferdinand de Lesseps one has no longer the right to be
astonished at the sad end of Christopher Columbus. If Ferdinand de Lesseps were a rogue every
noble illusion is a crime. Antiquity would have crowned the memory of de Lesseps with an
aureole of glory, and would have made him drink from the bowl of nectar in the midst of
Olympus, for he has altered the face of the earth and accomplished works which make the
creation more perfect. The President of the Court of Appeal has immortalised himself by
condemning Ferdinand de Lesseps, for the nations will always demand the name of the man
who was not afraid to debase his century by investing with the convict's cap an aged man,
whose life redounded to the glory of his contemporaries.
"Let there be no more talk in the future of inflexible justice, there where reigns a
bureaucratic hatred of audacious feats. The nations have need of audacious men who believe in
themselves and overcome every obstacle without concern for their personal safety. Genius
cannot be prudent; by dint of prudence it could never enlarge the sphere of human activity.
". . . Ferdinand de Lesseps has known the intoxication of triumph and the bitterness of
disappointment—Suez and Panama. At this point the heart revolts at the morality of success.
When de Lesseps had succeeded in joining two seas princes and nations rendered him their
homage; to-day, when he meets with failure among the rocks of the Cordilleras, he is nothing
but a vulgar rogue. . . . In this result we see a war between the classes of society, the discontent
of bureaucrats and employes, who take their revenge with the aid of the criminal code on those
who would raise themselves above their fellows. . . . Modern legislators are filled with
embarrassment when confronted by the lofty ideas due to human genius; the public
comprehends such ideas still less, and it is easy for an advocate-general to prove that Stanley is
a murderer and de Lesseps a deceiver."
Chapter IV.
Limitations of the Variability of the Beliefs and
Opinions of Crowds
Table of Contents
1. Fixed beliefs. The invariability of certain general beliefs—
They shape the course of a civilisation—The difficulty of
uprooting them—In what respect intolerance is a virtue in a
people—The philosophic absurdity of a belief cannot
interfere with its spreading. 2. The changeable opinions of
crowds. The extreme mobility of opinions which do not arise
from general beliefs—Apparent variations of ideas and
beliefs in less than a century—The real limits of these
variations—The matters effected by the variation—The
disappearance at present in progress of general beliefs, and
the extreme diffusion of the newspaper press, have for result
that opinions are nowadays more and more changeable—
Why the opinions of crowds tend on the majority of subjects
towards indifference—Governments now powerless to direct
opinion as they formerly did—Opinions prevented to-day
from being tyrannical on account of their exceeding
divergency.
1. Fixed Beliefs
A close parallel exists between the anatomical and psychological
characteristics of living beings. In these anatomical characteristics certain
invariable, or slightly variable, elements are met with, to change which the
lapse is necessary of geological ages. Side by side with these fixed,
indestructible features are to be found others extremely changeable, which
the art of the breeder or horticulturist may easily modify, and at times to
such an extent as to conceal the fundamental characteristics from an
observer at all inattentive.
The same phenomenon is observed in the case of moral characteristics.
Alongside the unalterable psychological elements of a race, mobile and
changeable elements are to be encountered. For this reason, in studying the
beliefs and opinions of a people, the presence is always detected of a fixed
groundwork on which are engrafted opinions as changing as the surface
sand on a rock.
The opinions and beliefs of crowds may be divided, then, into two very
distinct classes. On the one hand we have great permanent beliefs, which
endure for several centuries, and on which an entire civilisation may rest.
Such, for instance, in the past were feudalism, Christianity, and
Protestantism; and such, in our own time, are the nationalist principle and
contemporary democratic and social ideas. In the second place, there are the
transitory, changing opinions, the outcome, as a rule, of general
conceptions, of which every age sees the birth and disappearance; examples
in point are the theories which mould literature and the arts—those, for
instance, which produced romanticism, naturalism, mysticism, &c.
Opinions of this order are as superficial, as a rule, as fashion, and as
changeable. They may be compared to the ripples which ceaselessly arise
and vanish on the surface of a deep lake.
The great generalised beliefs are very restricted in number. Their rise
and fall form the culminating points of the history of every historic race.
They constitute the real framework of civilisation.
It is easy to imbue the mind of crowds with a passing opinion, but very
difficult to implant therein a lasting belief. However, a belief of this latter
description once established, it is equally difficult to uproot it. It is usually
only to be changed at the cost of violent revolutions. Even revolutions can
only avail when the belief has almost entirely lost its sway over men's
minds. In that case revolutions serve to finally sweep away what had
already been almost cast aside, though the force of habit prevented its
complete abandonment. The beginning of a revolution is in reality the end
of a belief.
The precise moment at which a great belief is doomed is easily
recognisable; it is the moment when its value begins to be called in
question. Every general belief being little else than a fiction, it can only
survive on the condition that it be not subjected to examination.
But even when a belief is severely shaken, the institutions to which it
has given rise retain their strength and disappear but slowly. Finally, when
the belief has completely lost its force, all that rested upon it is soon
involved in ruin. As yet a nation has never been able to change its beliefs
without being condemned at the same time to transform all the elements of
its civilisation. The nation continues this process of transformation until it
has alighted on and accepted a new general belief: until this juncture it is
perforce in a state of anarchy. General beliefs are the indispensable pillars
of civilisations; they determine the trend of ideas. They alone are capable of
inspiring faith and creating a sense of duty.
Nations have always been conscious of the utility of acquiring general
beliefs, and have instinctively understood that their disappearance would be
the signal for their own decline. In the case of the Romans, the fanatical cult
of Rome was the belief that made them masters of the world, and when the
belief had died out Rome was doomed to die. As for the barbarians who
destroyed the Roman civilisation, it was only when they had acquired
certain commonly accepted beliefs that they attained a measure of cohesion
and emerged from anarchy.
Plainly it is not for nothing that nations have always displayed
intolerance in the defence of their opinions. This intolerance, open as it is to
criticism from the philosophic standpoint, represents in the life of a people
the most necessary of virtues. It was to found or uphold general beliefs that
so many victims were sent to the stake in the Middle Ages and that so many
inventors and innovators have died in despair even if they have escaped
martyrdom. It is in defence, too, of such beliefs that the world has been so
often the scene of the direst disorder, and that so many millions of men have
died on the battlefield, and will yet die there.
There are great difficulties in the way of establishing a general belief,
but when it is definitely implanted its power is for a long time to come
invincible, and however false it be philosophically it imposes itself upon the
most luminous intelligence. Have not the European peoples regarded as
incontrovertible for more than fifteen centuries religious legends which,
closely examined, are as barbarous21 as those of Moloch? The frightful
absurdity of the legend of a God who revenges himself for the disobedience
of one of his creatures by inflicting horrible tortures on his son remained
unperceived during many centuries. Such potent geniuses as a Galileo, a
Newton, and a Leibnitz never supposed for an instant that the truth of such
dogmas could be called in question. Nothing can be more typical than this
fact of the hypnotising effect of general beliefs, but at the same time
nothing can mark more decisively the humiliating limitations of our
intelligence.
As soon as a new dogma is implanted in the mind of crowds it becomes
the source of inspiration whence are evolved its institutions, arts, and mode
of existence. The sway it exerts over men's minds under these
circumstances is absolute. Men of action have no thought beyond realising
the accepted belief, legislators beyond applying it, while philosophers,
artists, and men of letters are solely preoccupied with its expression under
various shapes.
From the fundamental belief transient accessory ideas may arise, but
they always bear the impress of the belief from which they have sprung.
The Egyptian civilisation, the European civilisation of the Middle Ages, the
Mussulman civilisation of the Arabs are all the outcome of a small number
of religious beliefs which have left their mark on the least important
elements of these civilisations and allow of their immediate recognition.
Thus it is that, thanks to general beliefs, the men of every age are
enveloped in a network of traditions, opinions, and customs which render
them all alike, and from whose yoke they cannot extricate themselves. Men
are guided in their conduct above all by their beliefs and by the customs
that are the consequence of those beliefs. These beliefs and customs
regulate the smallest acts of our existence, and the most independent spirit
cannot escape their influence. The tyranny exercised unconsciously on
men's minds is the only real tyranny, because it cannot be fought against.
Tiberius, Ghengis Khan, and Napoleon were assuredly redoubtable tyrants,
but from the depth of their graves Moses, Buddha, Jesus, and Mahomet
have exerted on the human soul a far profounder despotism. A conspiracy
may overthrow a tyrant, but what can it avail against a firmly established
belief? In its violent struggle with Roman Catholicism it is the French
Revolution that has been vanquished, and this in spite of the fact that the
sympathy of the crowd was apparently on its side, and in spite of recourse
to destructive measures as pitiless as those of the Inquisition. The only real
tyrants that humanity has known have always been the memories of its dead
or the illusions it has forged itself.
The philosophic absurdity that often marks general beliefs has never
been an obstacle to their triumph. Indeed the triumph of such beliefs would
seem impossible unless on the condition that they offer some mysterious
absurdity. In consequence, the evident weakness of the socialist beliefs of
to-day will not prevent them triumphing among the masses. Their real
inferiority to all religious beliefs is solely the result of this consideration,
that the ideal of happiness offered by the latter being realisable only in a
future life, it was beyond the power of anybody to contest it. The socialist
ideal of happiness being intended to be realised on earth, the vanity of its
promises will at once appear as soon as the first efforts towards their
realisation are made, and simultaneously the new belief will entirely lose its
prestige. Its strength, in consequence, will only increase until the day when,
having triumphed, its practical realisation shall commence. For this reason,
while the new religion exerts to begin with, like all those that have preceded
it, a destructive influence, it will be unable, in the future, to play a creative
part.
2. The Changeable Opinions of Crowds
Above the substratum of fixed beliefs, whose power we have just
demonstrated, is found an overlying growth of opinions, ideas, and thoughts
which are incessantly springing up and dying out. Some of them exist but
for a day, and the more important scarcely outlive a generation. We have
already noted that the changes which supervene in opinions of this order are
at times far more superficial than real, and that they are always affected by
racial considerations. When examining, for instance, the political
institutions of France we showed that parties to all appearance utterly
distinct—royalists, radicals, imperialists, socialists, &c.—have an ideal
absolutely identical, and that this ideal is solely dependent on the mental
structure of the French race, since a quite contrary ideal is found under
analogous names among other races. Neither the name given to opinions
nor deceptive adaptations alter the essence of things. The men of the Great
Revolution, saturated with Latin literature, who (their eyes fixed on the
Roman Republic), adopted its laws, its fasces, and its togas, did not become
Romans because they were under the empire of a powerful historical
suggestion. The task of the philosopher is to investigate what it is which
subsists of ancient beliefs beneath their apparent changes, and to identify
amid the moving flux of opinions the part determined by general beliefs and
the genius of the race.
In the absence of this philosophic test it might be supposed that crowds
change their political or religious beliefs frequently and at will. All history,
whether political, religious, artistic, or literary, seems to prove that such is
the case.
As an example, let us take a very short period of French history, merely
that from 1790 to 1820, a period of thirty years' duration, that of a
generation. In the course of it we see the crowd at first monarchical become
very revolutionary, then very imperialist, and again very monarchical. In the
matter of religion it gravitates in the same lapse of time from Catholicism to
atheism, then towards deism, and then returns to the most pronounced
forms of Catholicism. These changes take place not only amongst the
masses, but also amongst those who direct them. We observe with
astonishment the prominent men of the Convention, the sworn enemies of
kings, men who would have neither gods nor masters, become the humble
servants of Napoleon, and afterwards, under Louis XVIII., piously carry
candles in religious processions.
Numerous, too, are the changes in the opinions of the crowd in the
course of the following seventy years. The "Perfidious Albion" of the
opening of the century is the ally of France under Napoleon's heir; Russia,
twice invaded by France, which looked on with satisfaction at French
reverses, becomes its friend.
In literature, art, and philosophy the successive evolutions of opinion
are more rapid still. Romanticism, naturalism, mysticism, &c., spring up
and die out in turn. The artist and the writer applauded yesterday are treated
on the morrow with profound contempt.
When, however, we analyse all these changes in appearance so far
reaching, what do we find? All those that are in opposition with the general
beliefs and sentiments of the race are of transient duration, and the diverted
stream soon resumes its course. The opinions which are not linked to any
general belief or sentiment of the race, and which in consequence cannot
possess stability, are at the mercy of every chance, or, if the expression be
preferred, of every change in the surrounding circumstances. Formed by
suggestion and contagion, they are always momentary; they crop up and
disappear as rapidly on occasion as the sandhills formed by the wind on the
sea-coast.
At the present day the changeable opinions of crowds are greater in
number than they ever were, and for three different reasons.
The first is that as the old beliefs are losing their influence to a greater
and greater extent, they are ceasing to shape the ephemeral opinions of the
moment as they did in the past. The weakening of general beliefs clears the
ground for a crop of haphazard opinions without a past or a future.
The second reason is that the power of crowds being on the increase,
and this power being less and less counterbalanced, the extreme mobility of
ideas, which we have seen to be a peculiarity of crowds, can manifest itself
without let or hindrance.
Finally, the third reason is the recent development of the newspaper
press, by whose agency the most contrary opinions are being continually
brought before the attention of crowds. The suggestions that might result
from each individual opinion are soon destroyed by suggestions of an
opposite character. The consequence is that no opinion succeeds in
becoming widespread, and that the existence of all of them is ephemeral.
An opinion nowadays dies out before it has found a sufficiently wide
acceptance to become general.
A phenomenon quite new in the world's history, and most characteristic
of the present age, has resulted from these different causes; I allude to the
powerlessness of governments to direct opinion.
In the past, and in no very distant past, the action of governments and
the influence of a few writers and a very small number of newspapers
constituted the real reflectors of public opinion. To-day the writers have lost
all influence, and the newspapers only reflect opinion. As for statesmen, far
from directing opinion, their only endeavour is to follow it. They have a
dread of opinion, which amounts at times to terror, and causes them to
adopt an utterly unstable line of conduct.
The opinion of crowds tends, then, more and more to become the
supreme guiding principle in politics. It goes so far to-day as to force on
alliances, as has been seen recently in the case of the Franco-Russian
alliance, which is solely the outcome of a popular movement. A curious
symptom of the present time is to observe popes, kings, and emperors
consent to be interviewed as a means of submitting their views on a given
subject to the judgment of crowds. Formerly it might have been correct to
say that politics were not a matter of sentiment. Can the same be said to-
day, when politics are more and more swayed by the impulse of changeable
crowds, who are uninfluenced by reason and can only be guided by
sentiment?
As to the press, which formerly directed opinion, it has had, like
governments, to humble itself before the power of crowds. It wields, no
doubt, a considerable influence, but only because it is exclusively the
reflection of the opinions of crowds and of their incessant variations.
Become a mere agency for the supply of information, the press has
renounced all endeavour to enforce an idea or a doctrine. It follows all the
changes of public thought, obliged to do so by the necessities of
competition under pain of losing its readers. The old staid and influential
organs of the past, such as the Constitutionnel, the Debats, or the Siecle,
which were accepted as oracles by the preceding generation, have
disappeared or have become typical modern papers, in which a maximum
of news is sandwiched in between light articles, society gossip, and
financial puffs. There can be no question to-day of a paper rich enough to
allow its contributors to air their personal opinions, and such opinions
would be of slight weight with readers who only ask to be kept informed or
to be amused, and who suspect every affirmation of being prompted by
motives of speculation. Even the critics have ceased to be able to assure the
success of a book or a play. They are capable of doing harm, but not of
doing a service. The papers are so conscious of the uselessness of
everything in the shape of criticism or personal opinion, that they have
reached the point of suppressing literary criticism, confining themselves to
citing the title of a book, and appending a "puff" of two or three lines.22 In
twenty years' time the same fate will probably have overtaken theatrical
criticism.
The close watching of the course of opinion has become to-day the
principal preoccupation of the press and of governments. The effect
produced by an event, a legislative proposal, a speech, is without
intermission what they require to know, and the task is not easy, for nothing
is more mobile and changeable than the thought of crowds, and nothing
more frequent than to see them execrate to-day what they applauded
yesterday.
This total absence of any sort of direction of opinion, and at the same
time the destruction of general beliefs, have had for final result an extreme
divergency of convictions of every order, and a growing indifference on the
part of crowds to everything that does not plainly touch their immediate
interests. Questions of doctrine, such as socialism, only recruit champions
boasting genuine convictions among the quite illiterate classes, among the
workers in mines and factories, for instance. Members of the lower middle
class, and working men possessing some degree of instruction, have either
become utterly sceptical or extremely unstable in their opinions.
The evolution which has been effected in this direction in the last
twenty-five years is striking. During the preceding period, comparatively
near us though it is, opinions still had a certain general trend; they had their
origin in the acceptance of some fundamental belief. By the mere fact that
an individual was a monarchist he possessed inevitably certain clearly
defined ideas in history as well as in science, while by the mere fact that he
was a republican, his ideas were quite contrary. A monarchist was well
aware that men are not descended from monkeys, and a republican was not
less well aware that such is in truth their descent. It was the duty of the
monarchist to speak with horror, and of the republican to speak with
veneration, of the great Revolution. There were certain names, such as those
of Robespierre and Marat, that had to be uttered with an air of religious
devotion, and other names, such as those of Caesar, Augustus, or Napoleon,
that ought never to be mentioned unaccompanied by a torrent of invective.
Even in the French Sorbonne this ingenuous fashion of conceiving history
was general.23
At the present day, as the result of discussion and analysis, all opinions
are losing their prestige; their distinctive features are rapidly worn away,
and few survive capable of arousing our enthusiasm. The man of modern
times is more and more a prey to indifference.
The general wearing away of opinions should not be too greatly
deplored. That it is a symptom of decadence in the life of a people cannot
be contested. It is certain that men of immense, of almost supernatural
insight, that apostles, leaders of crowds—men, in a word, of genuine and
strong convictions—exert a far greater force than men who deny, who
criticise, or who are indifferent, but it must not be forgotten that, given the
power possessed at present by crowds, were a single opinion to acquire
sufficient prestige to enforce its general acceptance, it would soon be
endowed with so tyrannical a strength that everything would have to bend
before it, and the era of free discussion would be closed for a long time.
Crowds are occasionally easy-going masters, as were Heliogabalus and
Tiberius, but they are also violently capricious. A civilisation, when the
moment has come for crowds to acquire a high hand over it, is at the mercy
of too many chances to endure for long. Could anything postpone for a
while the hour of its ruin, it would be precisely the extreme instability of the
opinions of crowds and their growing indifference with respect to all
general beliefs.
21. Barbarous, philosophically speaking, I mean. In practice they have created an entirely new
civilisation, and for fifteen centuries have given mankind a glimpse of those enchanted realms
of generous dreams and of hope which he will know no more.
22. These remarks refer to the French newspaper press.—Note of the Translator.
23. There are pages in the books of the French official professors of history that are very curious
from this point of view. They prove too how little the critical spirit is developed by the system
of university education in vogue in France. I cite as an example the following extracts from the
"French Revolution" of M. Rambaud, professor of history at the Sorbonne:
"The taking of the Bastille was a culminating event in the history not only of
France, but of all Europe; and inaugurated a new epoch in the history of the
world!"
With respect to Robespierre, we learn with stupefaction that "his dictatorship was based more
especially on opinion, persuasion, and moral authority; it was a sort of pontificate in the hands
of a virtuous man!" (pp. 91 and 220.)
Book III.
The Classification and Description of the Different
Kinds of Crowds
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
The Classification of Crowds
Table of Contents
The general divisions of crowds—Their classification. 1.
Heterogeneous crowds. Different varieties of them—The
influence of race—The spirit of the crowd is weak in
proportion as the spirit of the race is strong—The spirit of
the race represents the civilised state and the spirit of the
crowd the barbarian state. 2. Homogeneous crowds. Their
different varieties—Sects, castes, and classes.
We have sketched in this work the general characteristics common to
psychological crowds. It remains to point out the particular characteristics
which accompany those of a general order in the different categories of
collectivities, when they are transformed into a crowd under the influences
of the proper exciting causes. We will, first of all, set forth in a few words a
classification of crowds.
Our starting-point will be the simple multitude. Its most inferior form is
met with when the multitude is composed of individuals belonging to
different races. In this case its only common bond of union is the will, more
or less respected of a chief. The barbarians of very diverse origin who
during several centuries invaded the Roman Empire, may be cited as a
specimen of multitudes of this kind.
On a higher level than these multitudes composed of different races are
those which under certain influences have acquired common characteristics,
and have ended by forming a single race. They present at times
characteristics peculiar to crowds, but these characteristics are overruled to
a greater or less extent by racial considerations.
These two kinds of multitudes may, under certain influences
investigated in this work, be transformed into organised or psychological
crowds. We shall break up these organised crowds into the following
divisions:—
A. Heterogeneous
crowds.
1. Anonymous crowds (street crowds,
for example).
2. Crowds not anonymous (juries,
parliamentary assemblies, &c.).
B. Homogeneous
crowds.
1. Sects (political sects, religious sects,
&c.).
2. Castes (the military caste, the
priestly caste, the working caste, &c.).
3. Classes (the middle classes, the
peasant classes, &c.).
We will point out briefly the distinguishing characteristics of these
different categories of crowds.
1. Heterogeneous Crowds
It is these collectivities whose characteristics have been studied in this
volume. They are composed of individuals of any description, of any
profession, and any degree of intelligence.
We are now aware that by the mere fact that men form part of a crowd
engaged in action, their collective psychology differs essentially from their
individual psychology, and their intelligence is affected by this
differentiation. We have seen that intelligence is without influence in
collectivities, they being solely under the sway of unconscious sentiments.
A fundamental factor, that of race, allows of a tolerably thorough
differentiation of the various heterogeneous crowds.
We have often referred already to the part played by race, and have
shown it to be the most powerful of the factors capable of determining
men's actions. Its action is also to be traced in the character of crowds. A
crowd composed of individuals assembled at haphazard, but all of them
Englishmen or Chinamen, will differ widely from another crowd also
composed of individuals of any and every description, but of other races—
Russians, Frenchmen, or Spaniards, for example.
The wide divergencies which their inherited mental constitution creates
in men's modes of feeling and thinking at once come into prominence when,
which rarely happens, circumstances gather together in the same crowd and
in fairly equal proportions individuals of different nationality, and this
occurs, however identical in appearance be the interests which provoked the
gathering. The efforts made by the socialists to assemble in great congresses
the representatives of the working-class populations of different countries,
have always ended in the most pronounced discord. A Latin crowd,
however revolutionary or however conservative it be supposed, will
invariably appeal to the intervention of the State to realise its demands. It is
always distinguished by a marked tendency towards centralisation and by a
leaning, more or less pronounced, in favour of a dictatorship. An English or
an American crowd, on the contrary, sets no store on the State, and only
appeals to private initiative. A French crowd lays particular weight on
equality and an English crowd on liberty. These differences of race explain
how it is that there are almost as many different forms of socialism and
democracy as there are nations.
The genius of the race, then, exerts a paramount influence upon the
dispositions of a crowd. It is the powerful underlying force that limits its
changes of humour. It should be considered as an essential law that The
inferior characteristics of crowds are the less accentuated in proportion as
the spirit of the race is strong. The crowd state and the domination of
crowds is equivalent to the barbarian state, or to a return to it. It is by the
acquisition of a solidly constituted collective spirit that the race frees itself
to a greater and greater extent from the unreflecting power of crowds, and
emerges from the barbarian state. The only important classification to be
made of heterogeneous crowds, apart from that based on racial
considerations, is to separate them into anonymous crowds, such as street
crowds, and crowds not anonymous—deliberative assemblies and juries, for
example. The sentiment of responsibility absent from crowds of the first
description and developed in those of the second often gives a very different
tendency to their respective acts.
2. Homogeneous Crowds
Homogeneous crowds include: 1. Sects; 2. Castes; 3. Classes.
The sect represents the first step in the process of organisation of
homogeneous crowds. A sect includes individuals differing greatly as to
their education, their professions, and the class of society to which they
belong, and with their common beliefs as the connecting link. Examples in
point are religious and political sects.
The caste represents the highest degree of organisation of which the
crowd is susceptible. While the sect includes individuals of very different
professions, degrees of education and social surrounding, who are only
linked together by the beliefs they hold in common, the caste is composed
of individuals of the same profession, and in consequence similarly
educated and of much the same social status. Examples in point are the
military and priestly castes.
The class is formed of individuals of diverse origin, linked together not
by a community of beliefs, as are the members of a sect, or by common
professional occupations, as are the members of a caste, but by certain
interests and certain habits of life and education almost identical. The
middle class and the agricultural class are examples.
Being only concerned in this work with heterogeneous crowds, and
reserving the study of homogeneous crowds (sects, castes, and classes) for
another volume, I shall not insist here on the characteristics of crowds of
this latter kind. I shall conclude this study of heterogeneous crowds by the
examination of a few typical and distinct categories of crowds.
Chapter II.
Crowds Termed Criminal Crowds
Table of Contents
Crowds termed criminal crowds—A crowd may be legally
yet 
not 
psychologically 
criminal—The 
absolute
unconsciousness of the acts of crowds—Various examples—
Psychology of the authors of the September massacres—
Their reasoning, their sensibility, their ferocity, and their
morality.
Owing to the fact that crowds, after a period of excitement, enter upon a
purely automatic and unconscious state, in which they are guided by
suggestion, it seems difficult to qualify them in any case as criminal. I only
retain this erroneous qualification because it has been definitely brought
into vogue by recent psychological investigations. Certain acts of crowds
are assuredly criminal, if considered merely in themselves, but criminal in
that case in the same way as the act of a tiger devouring a Hindoo, after
allowing its young to maul him for their amusement.
The usual motive of the crimes of crowds is a powerful suggestion, and
the individuals who take part in such crimes are afterwards convinced that
they have acted in obedience to duty, which is far from being the case with
the ordinary criminal.
The history of the crimes committed by crowds illustrates what
precedes.
The murder of M. de Launay, the governor of the Bastille, may be cited
as a typical example. After the taking of the fortress the governor,
surrounded by a very excited crowd, was dealt blows from every direction.
It was proposed to hang him, to cut off his head, to tie him to a horse's tail.
While struggling, he accidently kicked one of those present. Some one
proposed, and his suggestion was at once received with acclamation by the
crowd, that the individual who had been kicked should cut the governor's
throat.
"The individual in question, a cook out of work, whose chief reason for
being at the Bastille was idle curiosity as to what was going on, esteems,
that since such is the general opinion, the action is patriotic and even
believes he deserves a medal for having destroyed a monster. With a sword
that is lent him he strikes the bared neck, but the weapon being somewhat
blunt and not cutting, he takes from his pocket a small black-handled knife
and (in his capacity of cook he would be experienced in cutting up meat)
successfully effects the operation."
The working of the process indicated above is clearly seen in this
example. We have obedience to a suggestion, which is all the stronger
because of its collective origin, and the murderer's conviction that he has
committed a very meritorious act, a conviction the more natural seeing that
he enjoys the unanimous approval of his fellow-citizens. An act of this kind
may be considered crime legally but not psychologically.
The general characteristics of criminal crowds are precisely the same as
those we have met with in all crowds: openness to suggestion, credulity,
mobility, the exaggeration of the sentiments good or bad, the manifestation
of certain forms of morality, &c.
We shall find all these characteristics present in a crowd which has left
behind it in French history the most sinister memories—the crowd which
perpetrated the September massacres. In point of fact it offers much
similarity with the crowd that committed the Saint Bartholomew massacres.
I borrow the details from the narration of M. Taine, who took them from
contemporary sources.
It is not known exactly who gave the order or made the suggestion to
empty the prisons by massacring the prisoners. Whether it was Danton, as is
probable, or another does not matter; the one interesting fact for us is the
powerful suggestion received by the crowd charged with the massacre.
The crowd of murderers numbered some three hundred persons, and
was a perfectly typical heterogeneous crowd. With the exception of a very
small number of professional scoundrels, it was composed in the main of
shopkeepers and artisans of every trade: bootmakers, locksmiths,
hairdressers, masons, clerks, messengers, &c. Under the influence of the
suggestion received they are perfectly convinced, as was the cook referred
to above, that they are accomplishing a patriotic duty. They fill a double
office, being at once judge and executioner, but they do not for a moment
regard themselves as criminals.
Deeply conscious of the importance of their duty, they begin by forming
a sort of tribunal, and in connection with this act the ingenuousness of
crowds and their rudimentary conception of justice are seen immediately. In
consideration of the large number of the accused, it is decided that, to begin
with, the nobles, priests, officers, and members of the king's household—in
a word, all the individuals whose mere profession is proof of their guilt in
the eyes of a good patriot—shall be slaughtered in a body, there being no
need for a special decision in their case. The remainder shall be judged on
their personal appearance and their reputation. In this way the rudimentary
conscience of the crowd is satisfied. It will now be able to proceed legally
with the massacre, and to give free scope to those instincts of ferocity
whose genesis I have set forth elsewhere, they being instincts which
collectivities always have it in them to develop to a high degree. These
instincts, however—as is regularly the case in crowds—will not prevent the
manifestation of other and contrary sentiments, such as a tenderheartedness
often as extreme as the ferocity.
"They have the expansive sympathy and prompt sensibility of the
Parisian working man. At the Abbaye, one of the federates, learning that the
prisoners had been left without water for twenty-six hours, was bent on
putting the gaoler to death, and would have done so but for the prayers of
the prisoners themselves. When a prisoner is acquitted (by the improvised
tribunal) every one, guards and slaughterers included, embraces him with
transports of joy and applauds frantically," after which the wholesale
massacre is recommenced. During its progress a pleasant gaiety never
ceases to reign. There is dancing and singing around the corpses, and
benches are arranged "for the ladies," delighted to witness the killing of
aristocrats. The exhibition continues, moreover, of a special description of
justice.
A slaughterer at the Abbaye having complained that the ladies placed at
a little distance saw badly, and that only a few of those present had the
pleasure of striking the aristocrats, the justice of the observation is admitted,
and it is decided that the victims shall be made to pass slowly between two
rows of slaughterers, who shall be under the obligation to strike with the
back of the sword only so as to prolong the agony. At the prison de la Force
the victims are stripped stark naked and literally "carved" for half an hour,
after which, when every one has had a good view, they are finished off by a
blow that lays bare their entrails.
The slaughterers, too, have their scruples and exhibit that moral sense
whose existence in crowds we have already pointed out. They refuse to
appropriate the money and jewels of the victims, taking them to the table of
the committees.
Those rudimentary forms of reasoning, characteristic of the mind of
crowds, are always to be traced in all their acts. Thus, after the slaughter of
the 1,200 or 1,500 enemies of the nation, some one makes the remark, and
his suggestion is at once adopted, that the other prisons, those containing
aged beggars, vagabonds, and young prisoners, hold in reality useless
mouths, of which it would be well on that account to get rid. Besides,
among them there should certainly be enemies of the people, a woman of
the name of Delarue, for instance, the widow of a poisoner: "She must be
furious at being in prison, if she could she would set fire to Paris: she must
have said so, she has said so. Another good riddance." The demonstration
appears convincing, and the prisoners are massacred without exception,
included in the number being some fifty children of from twelve to
seventeen years of age, who, of course, might themselves have become
enemies of the nation, and of whom in consequence it was clearly well to be
rid.
At the end of a week's work, all these operations being brought to an
end, the slaughterers can think of reposing themselves. Profoundly
convinced that they have deserved well of their country, they went to the
authorities and demanded a recompense. The most zealous went so far as to
claim a medal.
The history of the Commune of 1871 affords several facts analogous to
those which precede. Given the growing influence of crowds and the
successive capitulations before them of those in authority, we are destined
to witness many others of a like nature.
Chapter III.
Criminal Juries
Table of Contents
Criminal juries—General characteristics of juries—statistics
show that their decisions are independent of their
composition—The manner in which an impression may be
made on juries—The style and influence of argument—The
methods of persuasion of celebrated counsel—The nature of
those crimes for which juries are respectively indulgent or
severe—The utility of the jury as an institution, and the
danger that would result from its place being taken by
magistrates.
Being unable to study here every category of jury, I shall only examine the
most important—that of the juries of the Court of Assize. These juries
afford an excellent example of the heterogeneous crowd that is not
anonymous. We shall find them display suggestibility and but slight
capacity for reasoning, while they are open to the influence of the leaders of
crowds, and they are guided in the main by unconscious sentiments. In the
course of this investigation we shall have occasion to observe some
interesting examples of the errors that may be made by persons not versed
in the psychology of crowds.
Juries, in the first place, furnish us a good example of the slight
importance of the mental level of the different elements composing a
crowd, so far as the decisions it comes to are concerned. We have seen that
when a deliberative assembly is called upon to give its opinion on a
question of a character not entirely technical, intelligence stands for
nothing. For instance, a gathering of scientific men or of artists, owing to
the mere fact that they form an assemblage, will not deliver judgments on
general subjects sensibly different from those rendered by a gathering of
masons or grocers. At various periods, and in particular previous to 1848,
the French administration instituted a careful choice among the persons
summoned to form a jury, picking the jurors from among the enlightened
classes; choosing professors, functionaries, men of letters, &c. At the
present day jurors are recruited for the most part from among small
tradesmen, petty capitalists, and employes. Yet, to the great astonishment of
specialist writers, whatever the composition of the jury has been, its
decisions have been identical. Even the magistrates, hostile as they are to
the institution of the jury, have had to recognise the exactness of the
assertion. M. Berard des Glajeux, a former President of the Court of
Assizes, expresses himself on the subject in his "Memoirs" in the following
terms:—
"The selection of jurymen is to-day in reality in the hands of
the municipal councillors, who put people down on the list
or eliminate them from it in accordance with the political
and electoral preoccupations inherent in their situation. . . .
The majority of the jurors chosen are persons engaged in
trade, but persons of less importance than formerly, and
employes 
belonging 
to 
certain 
branches 
of 
the
administration. . . . Both opinions and professions counting
for nothing once the role of judge assumed, many of the
jurymen having the ardour of neophytes, and men of the best
intentions being similarly disposed in humble situations, the
spirit of the jury has not changed: its verdicts have remained
the same."
Of the passage just cited the conclusions, which are just, are to be borne
in mind and not the explanations, which are weak. Too much astonishment
should not be felt at this weakness, for, as a rule, counsel equally with
magistrates seem to be ignorant of the psychology of crowds and, in
consequence, of juries. I find a proof of this statement in a fact related by
the author just quoted. He remarks that Lachaud, one of the most illustrious
barristers practising in the Court of Assize, made systematic use of his right
to object to a juror in the case of all individuals of intelligence on the list.
Yet experience—and experience alone—has ended by acquainting us with
the utter uselessness of these objections. This is proved by the fact that at
the present day public prosecutors and barristers, at any rate those
belonging to the Parisian bar, have entirely renounced their right to object to
a juror; still, as M. des Glajeux remarks, the verdicts have not changed,
"they are neither better nor worse."
Like all crowds, juries are very strongly impressed by sentimental
considerations, and very slightly by argument. "They cannot resist the
sight," writes a barrister, "of a mother giving its child the breast, or of
orphans." "It is sufficient that a woman should be of agreeable appearance,"
says M. des Glajeux, "to win the benevolence of the jury."
Without pity for crimes of which it appears possible they might
themselves be the victims—such crimes, moreover, are the most dangerous
for society—juries, on the contrary, are very indulgent in the case of
breaches of the law whose motive is passion. They are rarely severe on
infanticide by girl-mothers, or hard on the young woman who throws vitriol
at the man who has seduced and deserted her, for the reason that they feel
instinctively that society runs but slight danger from such crimes,24 and that
in a country in which the law does not protect deserted girls the crime of the
girl who avenges herself is rather useful than harmful, inasmuch as it
frightens future seducers in advance.
Juries, like all crowds, are profoundly impressed by prestige, and
President des Glajeux very properly remarks that, very democratic as juries
are in their composition, they are very aristocratic in their likes and dislikes:
"Name, birth, great wealth, celebrity, the assistance of an illustrious
counsel, everything in the nature of distinction or that lends brilliancy to the
accused, stands him in extremely good stead."
The chief concern of a good counsel should be to work upon the
feelings of the jury, and, as with all crowds, to argue but little, or only to
employ rudimentary modes of reasoning. An English barrister, famous for
his successes in the assize courts, has well set forth the line of action to be
followed:—
"While pleading he would attentively observe the jury. The
most favourable opportunity has been reached. By dint of
insight and experience the counsel reads the effect of each
phrase on the faces of the jurymen, and draws his
conclusions in consequence. His first step is to be sure which
members of the jury are already favourable to his cause. It is
short work to definitely gain their adhesion, and having done
so he turns his attention to the members who seem, on the
contrary, ill-disposed, and endeavours to discover why they
are hostile to the accused. This is the delicate part of his task,
for there may be an infinity of reasons for condemning a
man, apart from the sentiment of justice."
These few lines resume the entire mechanism of the art of oratory, and
we see why the speech prepared in advance has so slight an effect, it being
necessary to be able to modify the terms employed from moment to
moment in accordance with the impression produced.
The orator does not require to convert to his views all the members of a
jury, but only the leading spirits among it who will determine the general
opinion. As in all crowds, so in juries there are a small number of
individuals who serve as guides to the rest. "I have found by experience,"
says the counsel cited above, "that one or two energetic men suffice to carry
the rest of the jury with them." It is those two or three whom it is necessary
to convince by skilful suggestions. First of all, and above all, it is necessary
to please them. The man forming part of a crowd whom one has succeeded
in pleasing is on the point of being convinced, and is quite disposed to
accept as excellent any arguments that may be offered him. I detach the
following anecdote from an interesting account of M. Lachaud, alluded to
above:—
"It is well known that during all the speeches he would
deliver in the course of an assize sessions, Lachaud never
lost sight of the two or three jurymen whom he knew or felt
to be influential but obstinate. As a rule he was successful in
winning over these refractory jurors. On one occasion,
however, in the provinces, he had to deal with a juryman
whom he plied in vain for three-quarters of an hour with his
most cunning arguments; the man was the seventh juryman,
the first on the second bench. The case was desperate.
Suddenly, in the middle of a passionate demonstration,
Lachaud stopped short, and addressing the President of the
court said: `Would you give instructions for the curtain there
in front to be drawn? The seventh juryman is blinded by the
sun.' The juryman in question reddened, smiled, and
expressed his thanks. He was won over for the defence."
Many writers, some of them most distinguished, have started of late a
strong campaign against the institution of the jury, although it is the only
protection we have against the errors, really very frequent, of a caste that is
under no control.25 A portion of these writers advocate a jury recruited
solely from the ranks of the enlightened classes; but we have already
proved that even in this case the verdicts would be identical with those
returned under the present system. Other writers, taking their stand on the
errors committed by juries, would abolish the jury and replace it by judges.
It is difficult to see how these would-be reformers can forget that the errors
for which the jury is blamed were committed in the first instance by judges,
and that when the accused person comes before a jury he has already been
held to be guilty by several magistrates, by the juge d'instruction, the public
prosecutor, and the Court of Arraignment. It should thus be clear that were
the accused to be definitely judged by magistrates instead of by jurymen, he
would lose his only chance of being admitted innocent. The errors of juries
have always been first of all the errors of magistrates. It is solely the
magistrates, then, who should be blamed when particularly monstrous
judicial errors crop up, such, for instance, as the quite recent condemnation
of Dr. L—— who, prosecuted by a juge d'instruction, of excessive stupidity,
on the strength of the denunciation of a half-idiot girl, who accused the
doctor of having performed an illegal operation upon her for thirty francs,
would have been sent to penal servitude but for an explosion of public
indignation, which had for result that he was immediately set at liberty by
the Chief of the State. The honourable character given the condemned man
by all his fellow-citizens made the grossness of the blunder self-evident.
The magistrates themselves admitted it, and yet out of caste considerations
they did all they could to prevent the pardon being signed. In all similar
affairs the jury, confronted with technical details it is unable to understand,
naturally hearkens to the public prosecutor, arguing that, after all, the affair
has been investigated by magistrates trained to unravel the most intricate
situations. Who, then, are the real authors of the error—the jurymen or the
magistrates? We should cling vigorously to the jury. It constitutes, perhaps,
the only category of crowd that cannot be replaced by any individuality. It
alone can temper the severity of the law, which, equal for all, ought in
principle to be blind and to take no cognisance of particular cases.
Inaccessible to pity, and heeding nothing but the text of the law, the judge in
his professional severity would visit with the same penalty the burglar
guilty of murder and the wretched girl whom poverty and her abandonment
by her seducer have driven to infanticide. The jury, on the other hand,
instinctively feels that the seduced girl is much less guilty than the seducer,
who, however, is not touched by the law, and that she deserves every
indulgence.
Being well acquainted with the psychology of castes, and also with the
psychology of other categories of crowds, I do not perceive a single case in
which, wrongly accused of a crime, I should not prefer to have to deal with
a jury rather than with magistrates. I should have some chance that my
innocence would be recognised by the former and not the slightest chance
that it would be admitted by the latter. The power of crowds is to be
dreaded, but the power of certain castes is to be dreaded yet more. Crowds
are open to conviction; castes never are.
24. It is to be remarked, in passing, that this division of crimes into those dangerous and those not
dangerous for society, which is well and instinctively made by juries is far from being unjust.
The object of criminal laws is evidently to protect society against dangerous criminals and not to
avenge it. On the other hand, the French code, and above all the minds of the French
magistrates, are still deeply imbued with the spirit of vengeance characteristic of the old
primitive law, and the term "vindicte" (prosecution, from the Latin vindicta, vengeance) is still
in daily use. A proof of this tendency on the part of the magistrates is found in the refusal by
many of them to apply Berenger's law, which allows of a condemned person not undergoing his
sentence unless he repeats his crime. Yet no magistrate can be ignorant, for the fact is proved by
statistics, that the application of a punishment inflicted for the first time infallibly leads to
further crime on the part of the person punished. When judges set free a sentenced person it
always seems to them that society has not been avenged. Rather than not avenge it they prefer to
create a dangerous, confirmed criminal.
25. The magistracy is, in point of fact, the only administration whose acts are under no control. In
spite of all its revolutions, democratic France does not possess that right of habeas corpus of
which England is so proud. We have banished all the tyrants, but have set up a magistrate in
each city who disposes at will of the honour and liberty of the citizens. An insignificant juge
d'instruction (an examining magistrate who has no exact counterpart in England.—Trans.), fresh
from the university, possesses the revolting power of sending to prison at will persons of the
most considerable standing, on a simple supposition on his part of their guilt, and without being
obliged to justify his act to any one. Under the pretext of pursuing his investigation he can keep
these persons in prison for six months or even a year, and free them at last without owing them
either an indemnity or excuses. The warrant in France is the exact equivalent of the lettre de
cachet, with this difference, that the latter, with the use of which the monarchy was so justly
reproached, could only be resorted to by persons occupying a very high position, while the
warrant is an instrument in the hands of a whole class of citizens which is far from passing for
being very enlightened or very independent.
Chapter IV.
Electoral Crowds
Table of Contents
General characteristics of electoral crowds—The manner of
persuading them—The qualities that should be possessed by
a candidate—Necessity of prestige—Why working men and
peasants so rarely choose candidates from their own class—
The influence of words and formulas on the elector—The
general aspect of election oratory—How the opinions of the
elector are formed—The power of political committees—
They represent the most redoubtable form of tyranny—The
committees of the Revolution— Universal suffrage cannot
be replaced in spite of its slight psychological value—Why it
is that the votes recorded would remain the same even if the
right of voting were restricted to a limited class of citizens—
What universal suffrage expresses in all countries.
Electoral crowds—that is to say, collectivities invested with the power of
electing the holders of certain functions—constitute heterogeneous crowds,
but as their action is confined to a single clearly determined matter, namely,
to choosing between different candidates, they present only a few of the
characteristics previously described. Of the characteristics peculiar to
crowds, they display in particular but slight aptitude for reasoning, the
absence of the critical spirit, irritability, credulity, and simplicity. In their
decision, moreover, is to be traced the influence of the leaders of crowds
and the part played by the factors we have enumerated: affirmation,
repetition, prestige, and contagion.
Let us examine by what methods electoral crowds are to be persuaded.
It will be easy to deduce their psychology from the methods that are most
successful.
It is of primary importance that the candidate should possess prestige.
Personal prestige can only be replaced by that resulting from wealth. Talent
and even genius are not elements of success of serious importance.
Of capital importance, on the other hand, is the necessity for the
candidate of possessing prestige, of being able, that is, to force himself
upon the electorate without discussion. The reason why the electors, of
whom a majority are working men or peasants, so rarely choose a man from
their own ranks to represent them is that such a person enjoys no prestige
among them. When, by chance, they do elect a man who is their equal, it is
as a rule for subsidiary reasons—for instance, to spite an eminent man, or
an influential employer of labour on whom the elector is in daily
dependence, and whose master he has the illusion he becomes in this way
for a moment.
The possession of prestige does not suffice, however, to assure the
success of a candidate. The elector stickles in particular for the flattery of
his greed and vanity. He must be overwhelmed with the most extravagant
blandishments, and there must be no hesitation in making him the most
fantastic promises. If he is a working man it is impossible to go too far in
insulting and stigmatising employers of labour. As for the rival candidate,
an effort must be made to destroy his chance by establishing by dint of
affirmation, repetition, and contagion that he is an arrant scoundrel, and that
it is a matter of common knowledge that he has been guilty of several
crimes. It is, of course, useless to trouble about any semblance of proof.
Should the adversary be ill-acquainted with the psychology of crowds he
will try to justify himself by arguments instead of confining himself to
replying to one set of affirmations by another; and he will have no chance
whatever of being successful.
The candidate's written programme should not be too categorical, since
later on his adversaries might bring it up against him; in his verbal
programme, however, there cannot be too much exaggeration. The most
important reforms may be fearlessly promised. At the moment they are
made these exaggerations produce a great effect, and they are not binding
for the future, it being a matter of constant observation that the elector
never troubles himself to know how far the candidate he has returned has
followed out the electoral programme he applauded, and in virtue of which
the election was supposed to have been secured.
In what precedes, all the factors of persuasion which we have described
are to be recognised. We shall come across them again in the action exerted
by words and formulas, whose magical sway we have already insisted upon.
An orator who knows how to make use of these means of persuasion can do
what he will with a crowd. Expressions such as infamous capital, vile
exploiters, the admirable working man, the socialisation of wealth, &c.,
always produce the same effect, although already somewhat worn by use.
But the candidate who hits on a new formula as devoid as possible of
precise meaning, and apt in consequence to flatter the most varied
aspirations, infallibly obtains a success. The sanguinary Spanish revolution
of 1873 was brought about by one of these magical phrases of complex
meaning on which everybody can put his own interpretation. A
contemporary writer has described the launching of this phrase in terms that
deserve to be quoted:—
"The radicals have made the discovery that a centralised
republic is a monarchy in disguise, and to humour them the
Cortes had unanimously proclaimed a federal republic,
though none of the voters could have explained what it was
he had just voted for. This formula, however, delighted
everybody; the joy was intoxicating, delirious. The reign of
virtue and happiness had just been inaugurated on earth. A
republican whose opponent refused him the title of federalist
considered himself to be mortally insulted. People addressed
each other in the streets with the words: `Long live the
federal republic!' After which the praises were sung of the
mystic virtue of the absence of discipline in the army, and of
the autonomy of the soldiers. What was understood by the
`federal republic?' There were those who took it to mean the
emancipation of the provinces, institutions akin to those of
the United States and administrative decentralisation; others
had in view the abolition of all authority and the speedy
commencement of the great social liquidation. The socialists
of Barcelona and Andalusia stood out for the absolute
sovereignty of the communes; they proposed to endow Spain
with ten thousand independent municipalities, to legislate on
their own account, and their creation to be accompanied by
the suppression of the police and the army. In the southern
provinces the insurrection was soon seen to spread from
town to town and village to village. Directly a village had
made its pronunciamento its first care was to destroy the
telegraph wires and the railway lines so as to cut off all
communication with its neighbours and Madrid. The sorriest
hamlet was determined to stand on its own bottom.
Federation had given place to cantonalism, marked by
massacres, incendiarism, and every description of brutality,
and bloody saturnalia were celebrated throughout the length
and breadth of the land."
With respect to the influence that may be exerted by reasoning on the
minds of electors, to harbour the least doubt on this subject can only be the
result of never having read the reports of an electioneering meeting. In such
a gathering affirmations, invectives, and sometimes blows are exchanged,
but never arguments. Should silence be established for a moment it is
because some one present, having the reputation of a "tough customer," has
announced that he is about to heckle the candidate by putting him one of
those embarrassing questions which are always the joy of the audience. The
satisfaction, however, of the opposition party is shortlived, for the voice of
the questioner is soon drowned in the uproar made by his adversaries. The
following reports of public meetings, chosen from hundreds of similar
examples, and taken from the daily papers, may be considered as typical:—
"One of the organisers of the meeting having asked the assembly to
elect a president, the storm bursts. The anarchists leap on to the platform to
take the committee table by storm. The socialists make an energetic
defence; blows are exchanged, and each party accuses the other of being
spies in the pay of the Government, &c. . . . A citizen leaves the hall with a
black eye.
"The committee is at length installed as best it may be in the midst of
the tumult, and the right to speak devolves upon `Comrade' X.
"The orator starts a vigorous attack on the socialists, who interrupt him
with shouts of `Idiot, scoundrel, blackguard!' &c., epithets to which
Comrade X. replies by setting forth a theory according to which the
socialists are `idiots' or `jokers.'"
"The Allemanist party had organised yesterday evening, in the Hall of
Commerce, in the Rue du Faubourg-du-Temple, a great meeting,
preliminary to the workers' fete of the 1st of May. The watchword of the
meeting was `Calm and Tranquillity!'
"Comrade G—— alludes to the socialists as `idiots' and `humbugs.'
"At these words there is an exchange of invectives and orators and
audience come to blows. Chairs, tables, and benches are converted into
weapons," &c., &c.
It is not to be imagined for a moment that this description of discussion
is peculiar to a determined class of electors and dependent on their social
position. In every anonymous assembly whatever, though it be composed
exclusively of highly educated persons, discussion always assumes the
same shape. I have shown that when men are collected in a crowd there is a
tendency towards their mental levelling at work, and proof of this is to be
found at every turn. Take, for example, the following extract from a report
of a meeting composed exclusively of students, which I borrow from the
Temps of 13th of February, 1895:—
"The tumult only increased as the evening went on; I do not
believe that a single orator succeeded in uttering two
sentences without being interrupted. At every instant there
came shouts from this or that direction or from every
direction at once. Applause was intermingled with hissing,
violent discussions were in progress between individual
members 
of 
the 
audience, 
sticks 
were 
brandished
threateningly, others beat a tattoo on the floor, and the
interrupters were greeted with yells of `Put him out!' or `Let
him speak!'
"M. C—— lavished such epithets as odious and cowardly,
monstrous, vile, venal and vindictive, on the Association,
which he declared he wanted to destroy," &c., &c.
How, it may be asked, can an elector form an opinion under such
conditions? To put such a question is to harbour a strange delusion as to the
measure of liberty that may be enjoyed by a collectivity. Crowds have
opinions that have been imposed upon them, but they never boast reasoned
opinions. In the case under consideration the opinions and votes of the
electors are in the hands of the election committees, whose leading spirits
are, as a rule, publicans, their influence over the working men, to whom
they allow credit, being great. "Do you know what an election committee
is?" writes M. Scherer, one of the most valiant champions of present-day
democracy. "It is neither more nor less than the corner-stone of our
institutions, the masterpiece of the political machine. France is governed to-
day by the election committees."26
To exert an influence over them is not difficult, provided the candidate
be in himself acceptable and possess adequate financial resources.
According to the admissions of the donors, three millions of francs sufficed
to secure the repeated elections of General Boulanger.
Such is the psychology of electoral crowds. It is identical with that of
other crowds: neither better nor worse.
In consequence I draw no conclusion against universal suffrage from
what precedes. Had I to settle its fate, I should preserve it as it is for
practical reasons, which are to be deduced in point of fact from our
investigation of the psychology of crowds. On this account I shall proceed
to set them forth.
No doubt the weak side of universal suffrage is too obvious to be
overlooked. It cannot be gainsaid that civilisation has been the work of a
small minority of superior intelligences constituting the culminating point
of a pyramid, whose stages, widening in proportion to the decrease of
mental power, represent the masses of a nation. The greatness of a
civilisation cannot assuredly depend upon the votes given by inferior
elements boasting solely numerical strength. Doubtless, too, the votes
recorded by crowds are often very dangerous. They have already cost us
several invasions, and in view of the triumph of socialism, for which they
are preparing the way, it is probable that the vagaries of popular sovereignty
will cost us still more dearly.
Excellent, however, as these objections are in theory, in practice they
lose all force, as will be admitted if the invincible strength be remembered
of ideas transformed into dogmas. The dogma of the sovereignty of crowds
is as little defensible, from the philosophical point of view, as the religious
dogmas of the Middle Ages, but it enjoys at present the same absolute
power they formerly enjoyed. It is as unattackable in consequence as in the
past were our religious ideas. Imagine a modern freethinker miraculously
transported into the midst of the Middle Ages. Do you suppose that, after
having ascertained the sovereign power of the religious ideas that were then
in force, he would have been tempted to attack them? Having fallen into the
hands of a judge disposed to send him to the stake, under the imputation of
having concluded a pact with the devil, or of having been present at the
witches sabbath, would it have occurred to him to call in question the
existence of the devil or of the sabbath? It were as wise to oppose cyclones
with discussion as the beliefs of crowds. The dogma of universal suffrage
possesses to-day the power the Christian dogmas formerly possessed.
Orators and writers allude to it with a respect and adulation that never fell
to the share of Louis XIV. In consequence the same position must be taken
up with regard to it as with regard to all religious dogmas. Time alone can
act upon them.
Besides, it would be the more useless to attempt to undermine this
dogma, inasmuch as it has an appearance of reasonableness in its favour.
"In an era of equality," Tocqueville justly remarks, "men have no faith in
each other on account of their being all alike; yet this same similitude gives
them an almost limitless confidence in the judgment of the public, the
reason being that it does not appear probable that, all men being equally
enlightened, truth and numerical superiority should not go hand in hand."
Must it be believed that with a restricted suffrage—a suffrage restricted
to those intellectually capable if it be desired—an improvement would be
effected in the votes of crowds? I cannot admit for a moment that this
would be the case, and that for the reasons I have already given touching
the mental inferiority of all collectivities, whatever their composition. In a
crowd men always tend to the same level, and, on general questions, a vote,
recorded by forty academicians is no better than that of forty water-carriers.
I do not in the least believe that any of the votes for which universal
suffrage is blamed—the re-establishment of the Empire, for instance—
would have fallen out differently had the voters been exclusively recruited
among learned and liberally educated men. It does not follow because an
individual knows Greek or mathematics, is an architect, a veterinary
surgeon, a doctor, or a barrister, that he is endowed with a special
intelligence of social questions. All our political economists are highly
educated, being for the most part professors or academicians, yet is there a
single general question—protection, bimetallism, &c.—on which they have
succeeded in agreeing? The explanation is that their science is only a very
attenuated form of our universal ignorance. With regard to social problems,
owing to the number of unknown quantities they offer, men are
substantially, equally ignorant.
In consequence, were the electorate solely composed of persons stuffed
with sciences their votes would be no better than those emitted at present.
They would be guided in the main by their sentiments and by party spirit.
We should be spared none of the difficulties we now have to contend with,
and we should certainly be subjected to the oppressive tyranny of castes.
Whether the suffrage of crowds be restricted or general, whether it be
exercised under a republic or a monarchy, in France, in Belgium, in Greece,
in Portugal, or in Spain, it is everywhere identical; and, when all is said and
done, it is the expression of the unconscious aspirations and needs of the
race. In each country the average opinions of those elected represent the
genius of the race, and they will be found not to alter sensibly from one
generation to another.
It is seen, then, that we are confronted once more by the fundamental
notion of race, which we have come across so often, and on this other
notion, which is the outcome of the first, that institutions and governments
play but a small part in the life of a people. Peoples are guided in the main
by the genius of their race, that is, by that inherited residue of qualities of
which the genius is the sum total. Race and the slavery of our daily
necessities are the mysterious master-causes that rule our destiny.
26. Committees under whatever name, clubs, syndicates, &c., constitute perhaps the most
redoubtable danger resulting from the power of crowds. They represent in reality the most
impersonal and, in consequence, the most oppressive form of tyranny. The leaders who direct
the committees being supposed to speak and act in the name of a collectivity, are freed from all
responsibility, and are in a position to do just as they choose. The most savage tyrant has never
ventured even to dream of such proscriptions as those ordained by the committees of the
Revolution. Barras has declared that they decimated the convention, picking off its members at
their pleasure. So long as he was able to speak in their name, Robespierre wielded absolute
power. The moment this frightful dictator separated himself from them, for reasons of personal
pride, he was lost. The reign of crowds is the reign of committees, that is, of the leaders of
crowds. A severer despotism cannot be imagined.
Chapter V.
Parliamentary Assemblies
Table of Contents
Parliamentary crowds present most of the characteristics
common to heterogeneous crowds that are not anonymous—
The simplicity of their opinions—Their suggestibility and its
limits—Their indestructible, fixed opinions and their
changed opinions—The reason of the predominance of
indecision—The role of the leaders—The reason of their
prestige—They are the true masters of an assembly whose
votes, on that account, are merely those of a small minority
—The absolute power they exercise—The elements of their
oratorical art—Phrases and images—The psychological
necessity the leaders are under of being in a general way of
stubborn convictions and narrow-minded—It is impossible
for a speaker without prestige to obtain recognition for his
arguments— The exaggeration of the sentiments, whether
good or bad, of assemblies— At certain moments they
become automatic—The sittings of the Convention—Cases
in which an assembly loses the characteristics of crowds—
The influence of specialists when technical questions arise—
The advantages and dangers of a parliamentary system in all
countries—It is adapted to modern needs; but it involves
financial waste and the progressive curtailment of all liberty
—Conclusion.
In parliamentary assemblies we have an example of heterogeneous crowds
that are not anonymous. Although the mode of election of their members
varies from epoch to epoch, and from nation to nation, they present very
similar characteristics. In this case the influence of the race makes itself felt
to weaken or exaggerate the characteristics common to crowds, but not to
prevent their manifestation. The parliamentary assemblies of the most
widely different countries, of Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, France, and
America present great analogies in their debates and votes, and leave the
respective governments face to face with identical difficulties.
Moreover, the parliamentary system represents the ideal of all modern
civilised peoples. The system is the expression of the idea, psychologically
erroneous, but generally admitted, that a large gathering of men is much
more capable than a small number of coming to a wise and independent
decision on a given subject.
The general characteristics of crowds are to be met with in
parliamentary assemblies: intellectual simplicity, irritability, suggestibility,
the exaggeration of the sentiments and the preponderating influence of a
few leaders. In consequence, however, of their special composition
parliamentary crowds offer some distinctive features, which we shall point
out shortly.
Simplicity in their opinions is one of their most important
characteristics. In the case of all parties, and more especially so far as the
Latin peoples are concerned, an invariable tendency is met with in crowds
of this kind to solve the most complicated social problems by the simplest
abstract principles and general laws applicable to all cases. Naturally the
principles vary with the party; but owing to the mere fact that the individual
members are a part of a crowd, they are always inclined to exaggerate the
worth of their principles, and to push them to their extreme consequences.
In consequence parliaments are more especially representative of extreme
opinions.
The most perfect example of the ingenuous simplification of opinions
peculiar to assemblies is offered by the Jacobins of the French Revolution.
Dogmatic and logical to a man, and their brains full of vague generalities,
they busied themselves with the application of fixed-principles without
concerning themselves with events. It has been said of them, with reason,
that they went through the Revolution without witnessing it. With the aid of
the very simple dogmas that served them as guide, they imagined they
could recast society from top to bottom, and cause a highly refined
civilisation to return to a very anterior phase of the social evolution. The
methods they resorted to to realise their dream wore the same stamp of
absolute ingenuousness. They confined themselves, in reality, to destroying
what stood in their way. All of them, moreover—Girondists, the Men of the
Mountain, the Thermidorians, &c.—were alike animated by the same spirit.
Parliamentary crowds are very open to suggestion; and, as in the case of
all crowds, the suggestion comes from leaders possessing prestige; but the
suggestibility of parliamentary assemblies has very clearly defined limits,
which it is important to point out.
On all questions of local or regional interest every member of an
assembly has fixed, unalterable opinions, which no amount of argument can
shake. The talent of a Demosthenes would be powerless to change the vote
of a Deputy on such questions as protection or the privilege of distilling
alcohol, questions in which the interests of influential electors are involved.
The suggestion emanating from these electors and undergone before the
time to vote arrives, sufficiently outweighs suggestions from any other
source to annul them and to maintain an absolute fixity of opinion.27
On general questions—the overthrow of a Cabinet, the imposition of a
tax, &c.—there is no longer any fixity of opinion, and the suggestions of
leaders can exert an influence, though not in quite the same way as in an
ordinary crowd. Every party has its leaders, who possess occasionally an
equal influence. The result is that the Deputy finds himself placed between
two contrary suggestions, and is inevitably made to hesitate. This explains
how it is that he is often seen to vote in contrary fashion in an interval of a
quarter of an hour or to add to a law an article which nullifies it; for
instance, to withdraw from employers of labour the right of choosing and
dismissing their workmen, and then to very nearly annul this measure by an
amendment.
It is for the same reason that every Chamber that is returned has some
very stable opinions, and other opinions that are very shifting. On the
whole, the general questions being the more numerous, indecision is
predominant in the Chamber—the indecision which results from the ever-
present fear of the elector, the suggestion received from whom is always
latent, and tends to counterbalance the influence of the leaders.
Still, it is the leaders who are definitely the masters in those numerous
discussions, with regard to the subject-matter of which the members of an
assembly are without strong preconceived opinions.
The necessity for these leaders is evident, since, under the name of
heads of groups, they are met with in the assemblies of every country. They
are the real rulers of an assembly. Men forming a crowd cannot do without
a master, whence it results that the votes of an assembly only represent, as a
rule, the opinions of a small minority.
The influence of the leaders is due in very small measure to the
arguments they employ, but in a large degree to their prestige. The best
proof of this is that, should they by any circumstance lose their prestige,
their influence disappears.
The prestige of these political leaders is individual, and independent of
name or celebrity: a fact of which M. Jules Simon gives us some very
curious examples in his remarks on the prominent men of the Assembly of
1848, of which he was a member:—
"Two months before he was all-powerful, Louis Napoleon was entirely
without the least importance.
"Victor Hugo mounted the tribune. He failed to achieve success.
He was listened to as Felix Pyat was listened to, but he did not obtain
as much applause. `I don't like his ideas,' Vaulabelle said to me,
speaking of Felix Pyat,' but he is one of the greatest writers and the
greatest orator of France.' Edgar Quinet, in spite of his exceptional and
powerful intelligence, was held in no esteem whatever. He had been
popular for awhile before the opening of the Assembly; in the
Assembly he had no popularity.
"The splendour of genius makes itself less felt in political
assemblies than anywhere else. They only give heed to eloquence
appropriate to the time and place and to party services, not to services
rendered the country. For homage to be rendered Lamartine in 1848
and Thiers in 1871, the stimulant was needed of urgent, inexorable
interest. As soon as the danger was passed the parliamentary world
forgot in the same instant its gratitude and its fright."
I have quoted the preceding passage for the sake of the facts it contains,
not of the explanations it offers, their psychology being somewhat poor. A
crowd would at once lose its character of a crowd were it to credit its
leaders with their services, whether of a party nature or rendered their
country. The crowd that obeys a leader is under the influence of his
prestige, and its submission is not dictated by any sentiment of interest or
gratitude.
In consequence the leader endowed with sufficient prestige wields
almost absolute power. The immense influence exerted during a long series
of years, thanks to his prestige, by a celebrated Deputy,28 beaten at the last
general election in consequence of certain financial events, is well known.
He had only to give the signal and Cabinets were overthrown. A writer has
clearly indicated the scope of his action in the following lines:—
"It is due, in the main, to M. X—— that we paid three times
as dearly as we should have done for Tonkin, that we
remained so long on a precarious footing in Madagascar, that
we were defrauded of an empire in the region of the Lower
Niger, and that we have lost the preponderating situation we
used to occupy in Egypt. The theories of M. X—— have
cost us more territories than the disasters of Napoleon I."
We must not harbour too bitter a grudge against the leader in question. It
is plain that he has cost us very dear; but a great part of his influence was
due to the fact that he followed public opinion, which, in colonial matters,
was far from being at the time what it has since become. A leader is seldom
in advance of public opinion; almost always all he does is to follow it and to
espouse all its errors.
The means of persuasion of the leaders we are dealing with, apart from
their prestige, consist in the factors we have already enumerated several
times. To make a skilful use of these resources a leader must have arrived at
a comprehension, at least in an unconscious manner, of the psychology of
crowds, and must know how to address them. He should be aware, in
particular, of the fascinating influence of words, phrases, and images. He
should possess a special description of eloquence, composed of energetic
affirmations—unburdened 
with 
proofs— 
and 
impressive 
images,
accompanied by very summary arguments. This is a kind of eloquence that
is met with in all assemblies, the English Parliament included, the most
serious though it is of all.
"Debates in the House of Commons," says the English philosopher
Maine, "may be constantly read in which the entire discussion is confined
to an exchange of rather weak generalities and rather violent personalities.
General formulas of this description exercise a prodigious influence on the
imagination of a pure democracy. It will always be easy to make a crowd
accept general assertions, presented in striking terms, although they have
never been verified, and are perhaps not susceptible of verification."
Too much importance cannot be attached to the "striking terms" alluded
to in the above quotation. We have already insisted, on several occasions,
on the special power of words and formulas. They must be chosen in such a
way as to evoke very vivid images. The following phrase, taken from a
speech by one of the leaders of our assemblies, affords an excellent
example:—
"When the same vessel shall bear away to the fever-haunted
lands of our penitentiary settlements the politician of shady
reputation and the anarchist guilty of murder, the pair will be
able to converse together, and they will appear to each other
as the two complementary aspects of one and the same state
of society."
The image thus evoked is very vivid, and all the adversaries of the
speaker felt themselves threatened by it. They conjured up a double vision
of the fever-haunted country and the vessel that may carry them away; for is
it not possible that they are included in the somewhat ill-defined category of
the politicians menaced? They experienced the lurking fear that the men of
the Convention must have felt whom the vague speeches of Robespierre
threatened with the guillotine, and who, under the influence of this fear,
invariably yielded to him.
It is all to the interest of the leaders to indulge in the most improbable
exaggerations. The speaker of whom I have just cited a sentence was able to
affirm, without arousing violent protestations, that bankers and priests had
subsidised the throwers of bombs, and that the directors of the great
financial companies deserve the same punishment as anarchists.
Affirmations of this kind are always effective with crowds. The affirmation
is never too violent, the declamation never too threatening. Nothing
intimidates the audience more than this sort of eloquence. Those present are
afraid that if they protest they will be put down as traitors or accomplices.
As I have said, this peculiar style of eloquence has ever been of
sovereign effect in all assemblies. In times of crisis its power is still further
accentuated. The speeches of the great orators of the assemblies of the
French Revolution are very interesting reading from this point of view. At
every instant they thought themselves obliged to pause in order to denounce
crime and exalt virtue, after which they would burst forth into imprecations
against tyrants, and swear to live free men or perish. Those present rose to
their feet, applauded furiously, and then, calmed, took their seats again.
On occasion, the leader may be intelligent and highly educated, but the
possession of these qualities does him, as a rule, more harm than good. By
showing how complex things are, by allowing of explanation and
promoting comprehension, intelligence always renders its owner indulgent,
and blunts, in a large measure, that intensity and violence of conviction
needful for apostles. The great leaders of crowds of all ages, and those of
the Revolution in particular, have been of lamentably narrow intellect;
while it is precisely those whose intelligence has been the most restricted
who have exercised the greatest influence.
The speeches of the most celebrated of them, of Robespierre, frequently
astound one by their incoherence: by merely reading them no plausible
explanation is to be found of the great part played by the powerful dictator:
—
"The commonplaces and redundancies of pedagogic
eloquence and Latin culture at the service of a mind childish
rather than undistinguished, and limited in its notions of
attack and defence to the defiant attitude of schoolboys. Not
an idea, not a happy turn of phrase, or a telling hit: a storm
of declamation that leaves us bored. After a dose of this
unexhilarating reading one is attempted to exclaim `Oh!'
with the amiable Camille Desmoulins."
It is terrible at times to think of the power that strong conviction
combined with extreme narrowness of mind gives a man possessing
prestige. It is none the less necessary that these conditions should be
satisfied for a man to ignore obstacles and display strength of will in a high
measure. Crowds instinctively recognise in men of energy and conviction
the masters they are always in need of.
In a parliamentary assembly the success of a speech depends almost
solely on the prestige possessed by the speaker, and not at all on the
arguments he brings forward. The best proof of this is that when for one
cause or another a speaker loses his prestige, he loses simultaneously all his
influence, that is, his power of influencing votes at will.
When an unknown speaker comes forward with a speech containing
good arguments, but only arguments, the chances are that he will only
obtain a hearing. A Deputy who is a psychologist of insight, M. Desaubes,
has recently traced in the following lines the portrait of the Deputy who
lacks prestige:—
"When he takes his place in the tribune he draws a document from his
portfolio, spreads it out methodically before him, and makes a start
with assurance.
"He flatters himself that he will implant in the minds of his
audience the conviction by which he is himself animated. He has
weighed and reweighed his arguments; he is well primed with figures
and proofs; he is certain he will convince his hearers. In the face of the
evidence he is to adduce all resistance would be futile. He begins,
confident in the justice of his cause, and relying upon the attention of
his colleagues, whose only anxiety, of course, is to subscribe to the
truth.
"He speaks, and is at once surprised at the restlessness of the
House, and a little annoyed by the noise that is being made.
"How is it silence is not kept? Why this general inattention? What
are those Deputies thinking about who are engaged in conversation?
What urgent motive has induced this or that Deputy to quit his seat?
"An expression of uneasiness crosses his face; he frowns and stops.
Encouraged by the President, he begins again, raising his voice. He is
only listened to all the less. He lends emphasis to his words, and
gesticulates: the noise around him increases. He can no longer hear
himself, and again stops; finally, afraid that his silence may provoke
the dreaded cry, `The Closure!' he starts off again. The clamour
becomes unbearable."
When parliamentary assemblies reach a certain pitch of excitement they
become identical with ordinary heterogeneous crowds, and their sentiments
in consequence present the peculiarity of being always extreme. They will
be seen to commit acts of the greatest heroism or the worst excesses. The
individual is no longer himself, and so entirely is this the case that he will
vote measures most adverse to his personal interests.
The history of the French Revolution shows to what an extent
assemblies are capable of losing their self-consciousness, and of obeying
suggestions most contrary to their interests. It was an enormous sacrifice for
the nobility to renounce its privileges, yet it did so without hesitation on a
famous night during the sittings of the Constituant Assembly. By
renouncing their inviolability the men of the Convention placed themselves
under a perpetual menace of death and yet they took this step, and were not
afraid to decimate their own ranks, though perfectly aware that the scaffold
to which they were sending their colleagues to-day might be their own fate
to-morrow. The truth is they had attained to that completely automatic state
which I have described elsewhere, and no consideration would hinder them
from yielding to the suggestions by which they were hypnotised. The
following passage from the memoirs of one of them, Billaud-Varennes, is
absolutely typical on this score: "The decisions with which we have been so
reproached," he says, "Were not desired by us two days, a single day before
they were taken: it was the crisis and nothing else that gave rise to them."
Nothing can be more accurate.
The same phenomena of unconsciousness were to be witnessed during
all the stormy sittings of the Convention.
"They approved and decreed measures," says Taine, "which they held in
horror—measures which were not only stupid and foolish, but measures
that were crimes—the murder of innocent men, the murder of their friends.
The Left, supported by the Right, unanimously and amid loud applause,
sent to the scaffold Danton, its natural chief, and the great promoter and
leader of the Revolution. Unanimously and amid the greatest applause the
Right, supported by the Left, votes the worst decrees of the revolutionary
government. Unanimously and amid cries of admiration and enthusiasm,
amid demonstrations of passionate sympathy for Collot d'Herbois, Couthon,
and Robespierre, the Convention by spontaneous and repeated re-elections
keeps in office the homicidal government which the Plain detests because it
is homicidal, and the Mountain detests because it is decimated by it. The
Plain and the Mountain, the majority and the minority, finish by consenting
to help on their own suicide. The 22 Prairial the entire Convention offered
itself to the executioner; the 8 Thermidor, during the first quarter of an hour
that followed Robespierre's speech, it did the same thing again."
This picture may appear sombre. Yet it is accurate. Parliamentary
assemblies, sufficiently excited and hypnotised, offer the same
characteristics. They become an unstable flock, obedient to every
impulsion. The following description of the Assembly of 1848 is due to M.
Spuller, a parliamentarian whose faith in democracy is above suspicion. I
reproduce it from the Revue litteraire, and it is thoroughly typical. It offers
an example of all the exaggerated sentiments which I have described as
characteristic of crowds, and of that excessive changeableness which
permits of assemblies passing, from moment to moment, from one set of
sentiments to another entirely opposite.
"The Republican party was brought to its perdition by its divisions, its
jealousies, its suspicions, and, in turn, its blind confidence and its limitless
hopes. Its ingenuousness and candour were only equalled by its universal
mistrust. An absence of all sense of legality, of all comprehension of
discipline, together with boundless terrors and illusions; the peasant and the
child are on a level in these respects. Their calm is as great as their
impatience; their ferocity is equal to their docility. This condition is the
natural consequence of a temperament that is not formed and of the lack of
education. Nothing astonishes such persons, and everything disconcerts
them. Trembling with fear or brave to the point of heroism, they would go
through fire and water or fly from a shadow.
"They are ignorant of cause and effect and of the connecting links
between events. They are as promptly discouraged as they are exalted, they
are subject to every description of panic, they are always either too highly
strung or too downcast, but never in the mood or the measure the situation
would require. More fluid than water they reflect every line and assume
every shape. What sort of a foundation for a government can they be
expected to supply?"
Fortunately all the characteristics just described as to be met with in
parliamentary assemblies are in no wise constantly displayed. Such
assemblies only constitute crowds at certain moments. The individuals
composing them retain their individuality in a great number of cases, which
explains how it is that an assembly is able to turn out excellent technical
laws. It is true that the author of these laws is a specialist who has prepared
them in the quiet of his study, and that in reality the law voted is the work
of an individual and not of an assembly. These laws are naturally the best.
They are only liable to have disastrous results when a series of amendments
has converted them into the outcome of a collective effort. The work of a
crowd is always inferior, whatever its nature, to that of an isolated
individual. It is specialists who safeguard assemblies from passing ill-
advised or unworkable measures. The specialist in this case is a temporary
leader of crowds. The Assembly is without influence on him, but he has
influence over the Assembly.
In spite of all the difficulties attending their working, parliamentary
assemblies are the best form of government mankind has discovered as yet,
and more especially the best means it has found to escape the yoke of
personal tyrannies. They constitute assuredly the ideal government at any
rate for philosophers, thinkers, writers, artists, and learned men—in a word,
for all those who form the cream of a civilisation.
Moreover, in reality they only present two serious dangers, one being
inevitable financial waste, and the other the progressive restriction of the
liberty of the individual.
The first of these dangers is the necessary consequence of the
exigencies and want of foresight of electoral crowds. Should a member of
an assembly propose a measure giving apparent satisfaction to democratic
ideas, should he bring in a Bill, for instance, to assure old-age pensions to
all workers, and to increase the wages of any class of State employes, the
other Deputies, victims of suggestion in their dread of their electors, will
not venture to seem to disregard the interests of the latter by rejecting the
proposed measure, although well aware they are imposing a fresh strain on
the Budget and necessitating the creation of new taxes. It is impossible for
them to hesitate to give their votes. The consequences of the increase of
expenditure are remote and will not entail disagreeable consequences for
them personally, while the consequences of a negative vote might clearly
come to light when they next present themselves for re-election.
In addition to this first cause of an exaggerated expenditure there is
another not less imperative—the necessity of voting all grants for local
purposes. A Deputy is unable to oppose grants of this kind because they
represent once more the exigencies of the electors, and because each
individual Deputy can only obtain what he requires for his own
constituency on the condition of acceding to similar demands on the part of
his colleagues.29
The second of the dangers referred to above—the inevitable restrictions
on liberty consummated by parliamentary assemblies—is apparently less
obvious, but is, nevertheless, very real. It is the result of the innumerable
laws—having always a restrictive action—which parliaments consider
themselves obliged to vote and to whose consequences, owing to their
shortsightedness, they are in a great measure blind.
The danger must indeed be most inevitable, since even England itself,
which assuredly offers the most popular type of the parliamentary regime,
the type in which the representative is most independent of his elector, has
been unable to escape it. Herbert Spencer has shown, in a work already old,
that the increase of apparent liberty must needs be followed by the decrease
of real liberty. Returning to this contention in his recent book, "The
Individual versus the State," he thus expresses himself with regard to the
English Parliament:—
"Legislation since this period has followed the course, I
pointed out. Rapidly multiplying dictatorial measures have
continually tended to restrict individual liberties, and this in
two ways. Regulations have been established every year in
greater number, imposing a constraint on the citizen in
matters in which his acts were formerly completely free, and
forcing him to accomplish acts which he was formerly at
liberty to accomplish or not to accomplish at will. At the
same time heavier and heavier public, and especially local,
burdens have still further restricted his liberty by
diminishing the portion of his profits he can spend as he
chooses, and by augmenting the portion which is taken from
him to be spent according to the good pleasure of the public
authorities."
This progressive restriction of liberties shows itself in every country in a
special shape which Herbert Spencer has not pointed out; it is that the
passing of these innumerable series of legislative measures, all of them in a
general way of a restrictive order, conduces necessarily to augment the
number, the power, and the influence of the functionaries charged with their
application. These functionaries tend in this way to become the veritable
masters of civilised countries. Their power is all the greater owing to the
fact that, amidst the incessant transfer of authority, the administrative caste
is alone in being untouched by these changes, is alone in possessing
irresponsibility, impersonality, and perpetuity. There is no more oppressive
despotism than that which presents itself under this triple form.
This incessant creation of restrictive laws and regulations, surrounding
the pettiest actions of existence with the most complicated formalities,
inevitably has for its result the confining within narrower and narrower
limits of the sphere in which the citizen may move freely. Victims of the
delusion that equality and liberty are the better assured by the multiplication
of laws, nations daily consent to put up with trammels increasingly
burdensome. They do not accept this legislation with impunity. Accustomed
to put up with every yoke, they soon end by desiring servitude, and lose all
spontaneousness and energy. They are then no more than vain shadows,
passive, unresisting and powerless automata.
Arrived at this point, the individual is bound to seek outside himself the
forces he no longer finds within him. The functions of governments
necessarily increase in proportion as the indifference and helplessness of the
citizens grow. They it is who must necessarily exhibit the initiative,
enterprising, and guiding spirit in which private persons are lacking. It falls
on them to undertake everything, direct everything, and take everything
under their protection. The State becomes an all-powerful god. Still
experience shows that the power of such gods was never either very durable
or very strong.
This progressive restriction of all liberties in the case of certain peoples,
in spite of an outward license that gives them the illusion that these liberties
are still in their possession, seems at least as much a consequence of their
old age as of any particular system. It constitutes one of the precursory
symptoms of that decadent phase which up to now no civilisation has
escaped.
Judging by the lessons of the past, and by the symptoms that strike the
attention on every side, several of our modern civilisations have reached
that phase of extreme old age which precedes decadence. It seems
inevitable that all peoples should pass through identical phases of existence,
since history is so often seen to repeat its course.
It is easy to note briefly these common phases of the evolution of
civilisations, and I shall terminate this work with a summary of them. This
rapid sketch will perhaps throw some gleams of light on the causes of the
power at present wielded by crowds.
If we examine in their main lines the genesis of the greatness and of the
fall of the civilisations that preceded our own, what do we see?
At the dawn of civilisation a swarm of men of various origin, brought
together by the chances of migrations, invasions, and conquests. Of
different blood, and of equally different languages and beliefs, the only
common bond of union between these men is the half-recognised law of a
chief. The psychological characteristics of crowds are present in an eminent
degree in these confused agglomerations. They have the transient cohesion
of crowds, their heroism, their weaknesses, their impulsiveness, and their
violence. Nothing is stable in connection with them. They are barbarians.
At length time accomplishes its work. The identity of surroundings, the
repeated intermingling of races, the necessities of life in common exert their
influence. The assemblage of dissimilar units begins to blend into a whole,
to form a race; that is, an aggregate possessing common characteristics and
sentiments to which heredity will give greater and greater fixity. The crowd
has become a people, and this people is able to emerge from its barbarous
state. However, it will only entirely emerge therefrom when, after long
efforts, struggles necessarily repeated, and innumerable recommencements,
it shall have acquired an ideal. The nature of this ideal is of slight
importance; whether it be the cult of Rome, the might of Athens, or the
triumph of Allah, it will suffice to endow all the individuals of the race that
is forming with perfect unity of sentiment and thought.
At this stage a new civilisation, with its institutions, its beliefs, and its
arts, may be born. In pursuit of its ideal, the race will acquire in succession
the qualities necessary to give it splendour, vigour, and grandeur. At times
no doubt it will still be a crowd, but henceforth, beneath the mobile and
changing characteristics of crowds, is found a solid substratum, the genius
of the race which confines within narrow limits the transformations of a
nation and overrules the play of chance.
After having exerted its creative action, time begins that work of
destruction from which neither gods nor men escape. Having reached a
certain level of strength and complexity a civilisation ceases to grow, and
having ceased to grow it is condemned to a speedy decline. The hour of its
old age has struck.
This inevitable hour is always marked by the weakening of the ideal
that was the mainstay of the race. In proportion as this ideal pales all the
religious, political, and social structures inspired by it begin to be shaken.
With the progressive perishing of its ideal the race loses more and more
the qualities that lent it its cohesion, its unity, and its strength. The
personality and intelligence of the individual may increase, but at the same
time this collective egoism of the race is replaced by an excessive
development of the egoism of the individual, accompanied by a weakening
of character and a lessening of the capacity for action. What constituted a
people, a unity, a whole, becomes in the end an agglomeration of
individualities lacking cohesion, and artificially held together for a time by
its traditions and institutions. It is at this stage that men, divided by their
interests and aspirations, and incapable any longer of self-government,
require directing in their pettiest acts, and that the State exerts an absorbing
influence.
With the definite loss of its old ideal the genius of the race entirely
disappears; it is a mere swarm of isolated individuals and returns to its
original state—that of a crowd. Without consistency and without a future, it
has all the transitory characteristics of crowds. Its civilisation is now
without stability, and at the mercy of every chance. The populace is
sovereign, and the tide of barbarism mounts. The civilisation may still seem
brilliant because it possesses an outward front, the work of a long past, but
it is in reality an edifice crumbling to ruin, which nothing supports, and
destined to fall in at the first storm.
To pass in pursuit of an ideal from the barbarous to the civilised state,
and then, when this ideal has lost its virtue, to decline and die, such is the
cycle of the life of a people.
27. The following reflection of an English parliamentarian of long experience doubtless applies to
these opinions, fixed beforehand, and rendered unalterable by electioneering necessities:
"During the fifty years that I have sat at Westminster, I have listened to thousands of speeches;
but few of them have changed my opinion, not one of them has changed my vote."
28. M. Clemenceau.—Note of the Translator.
29. In its issue of April 6, 1895, the Economiste published a curious review of the figures that may
be reached by expenditure caused solely by electoral considerations, and notably of the outlay
on railways. To put Langayes (a town of 3,000 inhabitants, situated on a mountain) in
communication with Puy, a railway is voted that will cost 15 millions of francs. Seven millions
are to be spent to put Beaumont (3,500 inhabitants) in communication with Castel-Sarrazin; 7
millions to put Oust (a village of 523 inhabitants) in communication with Seix (1,200
inhabitants); 6 millions to put Prade in communication with the hamlet of Olette (747
inhabitants), &c. In 1895 alone 90 millions of francs were voted for railways of only local
utility. There is other no less important expenditure necessitated also by electioneering
considerations. The law instituting workingmen's pensions will soon involve a minimum annual
outlay of 165 millions, according to the Minister of Finance, and of 800 millions according to
the academician M. Leroy-Beaulieu. It is evident that the continued growth of expenditure of
this kind must end in bankruptcy. Many European countries—Portugal, Greece, Spain, Turkey
—have reached this stage, and others, such as Italy, will soon be reduced to the same extremity.
Still too much alarm need not be felt at this state of things, since the public has successively
consented to put up with the reduction of four-fifths in the payment of their coupons by these
different countries. Bankruptcy under these ingenious conditions allows the equilibrium of
Budgets difficult to balance to be instantly restored. Moreover, wars, socialism, and economic
conflicts hold in store for us a profusion of other catastrophes in the period of universal
disintegration we are traversing, and it is necessary to be resigned to living from hand to mouth
without too much concern for a future we cannot control.
The Psychology of Revolution
(Gustave Le Bon)
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Introduction. The Revision of History
Part I. The Psychological Elements of Revolutionary Movements
Book I. General Characteristics of Revolutions
Chapter I. Scientific and Political Revolutions
Chapter II. Religious Revolutions
Chapter III. The Action of Governments in Revolutions
Chapter IV. The Part Played by the People in Revolutions
Book II. The Forms of Mentality Prevalent During Revolution
Chapter I. Individual Variations of Character in Time of Revolution
Chapter II. The Mystic Mentality and the Jacobin Mentality
Chapter III. The Revolutionary and Criminal Mentalities
Chapter IV. The Psychology of Revolutionary Crowds
Chapter V. The Psychology of the Revolutionary Assemblies
Part II. The French Revolution
Book I. The Origins of the French Revolution
Chapter I. The Opinions of Historians Concerning the French
Revolution
Chapter II. The Psychological Foundations of the Ancien Regime
Chapter III. Mental Anarchy at the Time of the Revolution and the
Influence Attributed to the Philosophers
Chapter IV. Psychological Illusions Respecting the French Revolution
Book II. The Rational, Affective, Mystic, and Collective Influences
Active During the Revolution
Chapter I. The Psychology of the Constituent Assembly
Chapter II. The Psychology of the Legislative Assembly
Chapter III. The Psychology of the Convention
Chapter IV. The Government of the Convention
Chapter V. Instances of Revolutionary Violence
Chapter VI. The Armies of the Revolution
Chapter VII. Psychology of the Leaders of the Revolution
Book III. The Conflict Between Ancestral Influences and Revolutionary
Principles
Chapter I. The Last Convulsions of Anarchy—The Directory
Chapter II. The Restoration of Order. The Consular Republic
Chapter III. Political Consequences of the Conflict Between
Traditions and Revolutionary Principles During the Last Century
Part III. The Recent Evolution of the Revolutionary Principles
Chapter I. The Progress of Democratic Beliefs Since the Revolution
Chapter II. The Results of Democratic Evolution
Chapter III. The New Forms of Democratic Belief
Conclusions
Introduction.
The Revision of History
Table of Contents
The present age is not merely an epoch of discovery; it is also a period of
revision of the various elements of knowledge. Having recognised that there
are no phenomena of which the first cause is still accessible, science has
resumed the examination of her ancient certitudes, and has proved their
fragility. To-day she sees her ancient principles vanishing one by one.
Mechanics is losing its axioms, and matter, formerly the eternal substratum
of the worlds, becomes a simple aggregate of ephemeral forces in transitory
condensation.
Despite its conjectural side, by virtue of which it to some extent escapes
the severest form of criticism, history has not been free from this universal
revision. There is no longer a single one of its phases of which we can say
that it is certainly known. What appeared to be definitely acquired is now
once more put in question.
Among the events whose study seemed completed was the French
Revolution. Analysed by several generations of writers, one might suppose
it to be perfectly elucidated. What new thing can be said of it, except in
modification of some of its details?
And yet its most positive defenders are beginning to hesitate in their
judgments. Ancient evidence proves to be far from impeccable. The faith in
dogmas once held sacred is shaken. The latest literature of the Revolution
betrays these uncertainties. Having related, men are more and more chary of
drawing conclusions.
Not only are the heroes of this great drama discussed without
indulgence, but thinkers are asking whether the new dispensation which
followed the ancien regime would not have established itself naturally,
without violence, in the course of progressive civilisation. The results
obtained no longer seem in correspondence either with their immediate cost
or with the remoter consequences which the Revolution evoked from the
possibilities of history.
Several causes have led to the revision of this tragic period. Time has
calmed passions, numerous documents have gradually emerged from the
archives, and the historian is learning to interpret them independently.
But it is perhaps modern psychology that has most effectually
influenced our ideas, by enabling us more surely to read men and the
motives of their conduct.
Among those of its discoveries which are henceforth applicable to
history we must mention, above all, a more profound understanding of
ancestral influences, the laws which rule the actions of the crowd, data
relating to the disaggregation of personality, mental contagion, the
unconscious formation of beliefs, and the distinction between the various
forms of logic.
To tell the truth, these applications of science, which are utilised in this
book, have not been so utilised hitherto. Historians have generally stopped
short at the study of documents, and even that study is sufficient to excite
the doubts of which I have spoken.
The great events which shape the destinies of peoples— revolutions, for
example, and the outbreak of religious beliefs— are sometimes so difficult
to explain that one must limit oneself to a mere statement.
From the time of my first historical researches I have been struck by the
impenetrable aspect of certain essential phenomena, those relating to the
genesis of beliefs especially; I felt convinced that something fundamental
was lacking that was essential to their interpretation. Reason having said all
it could say, nothing more could be expected of it, and other means must be
sought of comprehending what had not been elucidated.
For a long time these important questions remained obscure to me.
Extended travel, devoted to the study of the remnants of vanished
civilisations, had not done much to throw light upon them.
Reflecting upon it continually, I was forced to recognise that the
problem was composed of a series of other problems, which I should have
to study separately. This I did for a period of twenty years, presenting the
results of my researches in a succession of volumes.
One of the first was devoted to the study of the psychological laws of
the evolution of peoples. Having shown that the historic races—that is, the
races formed by the hazards of history—finally acquired psychological
characteristics as stable as their anatomical characteristics, I attempted to
explain how a people transforms its institutions, its languages, and its arts. I
explained in the same work why it was that individual personalities, under
the influence of sudden variations of environment, might be entirely
disaggregated.
But besides the fixed collectivities formed by the peoples, there are
mobile and transitory collectivities known as crowds. Now these crowds or
mobs, by the aid of which the great movements of history are
accomplished, have characteristics absolutely different from those of the
individuals who compose them. What are these characteristics, and how are
they evolved? This new problem was examined in The Psychology of the
Crowd.
Only after these studies did I begin to perceive certain influences which
had escaped me.
But this was not all. Among the most important factors of history one
was preponderant—the factor of beliefs. How are these beliefs born, and are
they really rational and voluntary, as was long taught? Are they not rather
unconscious and independent of all reason? A difficult question, which I
dealt with in my last book, Opinions and Beliefs.
So long as psychology regards beliefs as voluntary and rational they
will remain inexplicable. Having proved that they are usually irrational and
always involuntary, I was able to propound the solution of this important
problem; how it was that beliefs which no reason could justify were
admitted without difficulty by the most enlightened spirits of all ages.
The solution of the historical difficulties which had so long been sought
was thenceforth obvious. I arrived at the conclusion that beside the rational
logic which conditions thought, and was formerly regarded as our sole
guide, there exist very different forms of logic: affective logic, collective
logic, and mystic logic, which usually overrule the reason and engender the
generative impulses of our conduct.
This fact well established, it seemed to me evident that if a great
number of historical events are often uncomprehended, it is because we
seek to interpret them in the light of a logic which in reality has very little
influence upon their genesis.
All these researches, which are here summed up in a few lines,
demanded long years for their accomplishment. Despairing of completing
them, I abandoned them more than once to return to those labours of the
laboratory in which one is always sure of skirting the truth and of acquiring
fragments at least of certitude.
But while it is very interesting to explore the world of material
phenomena, it is still more so to decipher men, for which reason I have
always been led back to psychology.
Certain principles deduced from my researches appearing likely to
prove fruitful, I resolved to apply them to the study of concrete instances,
and was thus led to deal with the Psychology of Revolutions—notably that
of the French Revolution.
Proceeding in the analysis of our great Revolution, the greater part of
the opinions determined by the reading of books deserted me one by one,
although I had considered them unshakable.
To explain this period we must consider it as a whole, as many
historians have done. It is composed of phenomena simultaneous but
independent of one another.
Each of its phases reveals events engendered by psychological laws
working with the regularity of clockwork. The actors in this great drama
seem to move like the characters of a previously determined drama. Each
says what he must say, acts as he is bound to act.
To be sure, the actors in the revolutionary drama differed from those of
a written drama in that they had not studied their parts, but these were
dictated by invisible forces.
Precisely because they were subjected to the inevitable progression of
logics incomprehensible to them we see them as greatly astonished by the
events of which they were the heroes as are we ourselves. Never did they
suspect the invisible powers which forced them to act. They were the
masters neither of their fury nor their weakness. They spoke in the name of
reason, pretending to be guided by reason, but in reality it was by no means
reason that impelled them.
"The decisions for which we are so greatly reproached," wrote Billaud-
Varenne, "were more often than otherwise not intended or desired by us two
days or even one day beforehand: the crisis alone evoked them."
Not that we must consider the events of the Revolution as dominated by
an imperious fatality. The readers of our works will know that we recognise
in the man of superior qualities the role of averting fatalities. But he can
dissociate himself only from a few of such, and is often powerless before
the sequence of events which even at their origin could scarcely be ruled.
The scientist knows how to destroy the microbe before it has time to act,
but he knows himself powerless to prevent the evolution of the resulting
malady.
When any question gives rise to violently contradictory opinions we
may be sure that it belongs to the province of beliefs and not to that of
knowledge.
We have shown in a preceding work that belief, of unconscious origin
and independent of all reason, can never be influenced by reason.
The Revolution, the work of believers, has seldom been judged by any
but believers. Execrated by some and praised by others, it has remained one
of those dogmas which are accepted or rejected as a whole, without the
intervention of rational logic.
Although in its beginnings a religious or political revolution may very
well be supported by rational elements, it is developed only by the aid of
mystic and affective elements which are absolutely foreign to reason.
The historians who have judged the events of the French Revolution in
the name of rational logic could not comprehend them, since this form of
logic did not dictate them. As the actors of these events themselves
understood them but ill, we shall not be far from the truth in saying that our
Revolution was a phenomenon equally misunderstood by those who caused
it and by those who have described it. At no period of history did men so
little grasp the present, so greatly ignore the past, and so poorly divine the
future.
. . . The power of the Revolution did not reside in the principles—which
for that matter were anything but novel—which it sought to propagate, nor
in the institutions which it sought to found. The people cares very little for
institutions and even less for doctrines. That the Revolution was potent
indeed, that it made France accept the violence, the murders, the ruin and
the horror of a frightful civil war, that finally it defended itself victoriously
against a Europe in arms, was due to the fact that it had founded not a new
system of government but a new religion.
Now history shows us how irresistible is the might of a strong belief.
Invincible Rome herself had to bow before the armies of nomad shepherds
illuminated by the faith of Mahommed. For the same reason the kings of
Europe could not resist the tatterdemalion soldiers of the Convention. Like
all apostles, they were ready to immolate themselves in the sole end of
propagating their beliefs, which according to their dream were to renew the
world.
The religion thus founded had the force of other religions, if not their
duration. Yet it did not perish without leaving indelible traces, and its
influence is active still.
We shall not consider the Revolution as a clean sweep in history, as its
apostles believed it. We know that to demonstrate their intention of creating
a world distinct from the old they initiated a new era and professed to break
entirely with all vestiges of the past.
But the past never dies. It is even more truly within us than without us.
Against their will the reformers of the Revolution remained saturated with
the past, and could only continue, under other names, the traditions of the
monarchy, even exaggerating the autocracy and centralisation of the old
system. Tocqueville had no difficulty in proving that the Revolution did
little but overturn that which was about to fall.
If in reality the Revolution destroyed but little it favoured the fruition of
certain ideas which continued thenceforth to develop.
The fraternity and liberty which it proclaimed never greatly seduced the
peoples, but equality became their gospel: the pivot of socialism and of the
entire evolution of modern democratic ideas. We may therefore say that the
Revolution did not end with the advent of the Empire, nor with the
successive restorations which followed it. Secretly or in the light of day it
has slowly unrolled itself and still affects men's minds.
The study of the French Revolution to which a great part of this book is
devoted will perhaps deprive the reader of more than one illusion, by
proving to him that the books which recount the history of the Revolution
contain in reality a mass of legends very remote from reality.
These legends will doubtless retain more life than history itself. Do not
regret this too greatly. It may interest a few philosophers to know the truth,
but the peoples will always prefer dreams. Synthetising their ideal, such
dreams will always constitute powerful motives of action. One would lose
courage were it not sustained by false ideas, said Fontenelle. Joan of Arc,
the Giants of the Convention, the Imperial epic—all these dazzling images
of the past will always remain sources of hope in the gloomy hours that
follow defeat. They form part of that patrimony of illusions left us by our
fathers, whose power is often greater than that of reality. The dream, the
ideal, the legend—in a word, the unreal—it is that which shapes history.
Part I.
The Psychological Elements of Revolutionary
Movements
Table of Contents
Book I.
General Characteristics of Revolutions
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Scientific and Political Revolutions
Table of Contents
1. Classification of Revolutions.
We generally apply the term revolution to sudden political changes, but the
expression may be employed to denote all sudden transformations, or
transformations apparently sudden, whether of beliefs, ideas, or doctrines.
We have considered elsewhere the part played by the rational, affective,
and mystic factors in the genesis of the opinions and beliefs which
determine conduct. We need not therefore return to the subject here.
A revolution may finally become a belief, but it often commences under
the action of perfectly rational motives: the suppression of crying abuses, of
a detested despotic government, or an unpopular sovereign, &c.
Although the origin of a revolution may be perfectly rational, we must
not forget that the reasons invoked in preparing for it do not influence the
crowd until they have been transformed into sentiments. Rational logic can
point to the abuses to be destroyed, but to move the multitude its hopes
must be awakened. This can only be effected by the action of the affective
and mystic elements which give man the power to act. At the time of the
French Revolution, for example, rational logic, in the hands of the
philosophers, demonstrated the inconveniences of the ancien regime, and
excited the desire to change it. Mystic logic inspired belief in the virtues of
a society created in all its members according to certain principles.
Affective logic unchained the passions confined by the bonds of ages and
led to the worst excesses. Collective logic ruled the clubs and the
Assemblies and impelled their members to actions which neither rational
nor affective nor mystic logic would ever have caused them to commit.
Whatever its origin, a revolution is not productive of results until it has
sunk into the soul of the multitude. Then events acquire special forms
resulting from the peculiar psychology of crowds. Popular movements for
this reason have characteristics so pronounced that the description of one
will enable us to comprehend the others.
The multitude is, therefore, the agent of a revolution; but not its point of
departure. The crowd represents an amorphous being which can do nothing,
and will nothing, without a head to lead it. It will quickly exceed the
impulse once received, but it never creates it.
The sudden political revolutions which strike the historian most forcibly
are often the least important. The great revolutions are those of manners and
thought. Changing the name of a government does not transform the
mentality of a people. To overthrow the institutions of a people is not to re-
shape its soul.
The true revolutions, those which transform the destinies of the peoples,
are most frequently accomplished so slowly that the historians can hardly
point to their beginnings. The term evolution is, therefore, far more
appropriate than revolution.
The various elements we have enumerated as entering into the genesis
of the majority of revolutions will not suffice to classify them. Considering
only the designed object, we will divide them into scientific revolutions,
political revolutions, and religious revolutions.
2. Scientific Revolutions.
Scientific revolutions are by far the most important. Although they attract
but little attention, they are often fraught with remote consequences, such as
are not engendered by political revolutions. We will therefore put them first,
although we cannot study them here.
For instance, if our conceptions of the universe have profoundly
changed since the time of the Revolution, it is because astronomical
discoveries 
and 
the 
application 
of 
experimental 
methods 
have
revolutionised them, by demonstrating that phenomena, instead of being
conditioned by the caprices of the gods, are ruled by invariable laws.
Such revolutions are fittingly spoken of as evolution, on account of their
slowness. But there are others which, although of the same order, deserve
the name of revolution by reason of their rapidity: we may instance the
theories of Darwin, overthrowing the whole science of biology in a few
years; the discoveries of Pasteur, which revolutionised medicine during the
lifetime of their author; and the theory of the dissociation of matter, proving
that the atom, formerly supposed to be eternal, is not immune from the laws
which condemn all the elements of the universe to decline and perish.
These scientific revolutions in the domain of ideas are purely
intellectual. Our sentiments and beliefs do not affect them. Men submit to
them without discussing them. Their results being controllable by
experience, they escape all criticism.
3. Political Revolutions.
Beneath and very remote from these scientific revolutions, which generate
the progress of civilisations, are the religious and political revolutions,
which have no kinship with them. While scientific revolutions derive solely
from rational elements, political and religious beliefs are sustained almost
exclusively by affective and mystic factors. Reason plays only a feeble part
in their genesis.
I insisted at some length in my book Opinions and Beliefs on the
affective and mystic origin of beliefs, showing that a political or religious
belief constitutes an act of faith elaborated in unconsciousness, over which,
in spite of all appearances, reason has no hold. I also showed that belief
often reaches such a degree of intensity that nothing can be opposed to it.
The man hypnotised by his faith becomes an Apostle, ready to sacrifice his
interests, his happiness, and even his life for the triumph of his faith. The
absurdity of his belief matters little; for him it is a burning reality.
Certitudes of mystic origin possess the marvellous power of entire
domination over thought, and can only be affected by time.
By the very fact that it is regarded as an absolute truth a belief
necessarily becomes intolerant. This explains the violence, hatred, and
persecution which were the habitual accompaniments of the great political
and religious revolutions, notably of the Reformation and the French
Revolution.
Certain periods of French history remain incomprehensible if we forget
the affective and mystic origin of beliefs, their necessary intolerance, the
impossibility of reconciling them when they come into mutual contact, and,
finally, the power conferred by mystic beliefs upon the sentiments which
place themselves at their service.
The foregoing conceptions are too novel as yet to have modified the
mentality of the historians. They will continue to attempt to explain, by
means of rational logic, a host of phenomena which are foreign to it.
Events such as the Reformation, which overwhelmed France for a
period of fifty years, were in no wise determined by rational influences. Yet
rational influences are always invoked in explanation, even in the most
recent works. Thus, in the General History of Messrs. Lavisse and
Rambaud, we read the following explanation of the Reformation:—
"It was a spontaneous movement, born here and there amidst
the people, from the reading of the Gospels and the free
individual reflections which were suggested to simple
persons by an extremely pious conscience and a very bold
reasoning power."
Contrary to the assertion of these historians, we may say with certainty,
in the first place, that such movements are never spontaneous, and secondly,
that reason takes no part in their elaboration.
The force of the political and religious beliefs which have moved the
world resides precisely in the fact that, being born of affective and mystic
elements, they are neither created nor directed by reason.
Political or religious beliefs have a common origin and obey the same
laws. They are formed not with the aid of reason, but more often contrary to
all reason. Buddhism, Islamism, the Reformation, Jacobinism, Socialism,
&c., seem very different forms of thought. Yet they have identical affective
and mystic bases, and obey a logic that has no affinity with rational logic.
Political revolutions may result from beliefs established in the minds of
men, but many other causes produce them. The word discontent sums them
up. As soon as discontent is generalised a party is formed which often
becomes strong enough to struggle against the Government.
Discontent must generally have been accumulating for a long time in
order to produce its effects. For this reason a revolution does not always
represent a phenomenon in process of termination followed by another
which is commencing but rather a continuous phenomenon, having
somewhat accelerated its evolution. All the modern revolutions, however,
have been abrupt movements, entailing the instantaneous overthrow of
governments. Such, for example, were the Brazilian, Portuguese, Turkish,
and Chinese revolutions.
To the contrary of what might be supposed, the very conservative
peoples are addicted to the most violent revolutions. Being conservative,
they are not able to evolve slowly, or to adapt themselves to variations of
environment, so that when the discrepancy becomes too extreme they are
bound to adapt themselves suddenly. This sudden evolution constitutes a
revolution.
Peoples able to adapt themselves progressively do not always escape
revolution. It was only by means of a revolution that the English, in 1688,
were able to terminate the struggle which had dragged on for a century
between the monarchy, which sought to make itself absolute, and the
nation, which claimed the right to govern itself through the medium of its
representatives.
The great revolutions have usually commenced from the top, not from
the bottom; but once the people is unchained it is to the people that
revolution owes its might.
It is obvious that revolutions have never taken place, and will never take
place, save with the aid of an important fraction of the army. Royalty did
not disappear in France on the day when Louis XVI. was guillotined, but at
the precise moment when his mutinous troops refused to defend him.
It is more particularly by mental contagion that armies become
disaffected, being indifferent enough at heart to the established order of
things. As soon as the coalition of a few officers had succeeded in
overthrowing the Turkish Government the Greek officers thought to imitate
them and to change their government, although there was no analogy
between the two regimes.
A military movement may overthrow a government—and in the Spanish
republics the Government is hardly ever destroyed by any other means—
but if the revolution is to be productive of great results it must always be
based upon general discontent and general hopes.
Unless it is universal and excessive, discontent alone is not sufficient to
bring about a revolution. It is easy to lead a handful of men to pillage,
destroy, and massacre, but to raise a whole people, or any great portion of
that people, calls for the continuous or repeated action of leaders. These
exaggerate the discontent; they persuade the discontented that the
government is the sole cause of all the trouble, especially of the prevailing
dearth, and assure men that the new system proposed by them will engender
an age of felicity. These ideas germinate, propagating themselves by
suggestion and contagion, and the moment arrives when the revolution is
ripe.
In this fashion the Christian Revolution and the French Revolution were
prepared. That the latter was effected in a few years, while the first required
many, was due to the fact that the French Revolution promptly had an
armed force at its disposal, while Christianity was long in winning material
power. In the beginning its only adepts were the lowly, the poor, and the
slaves, filled with enthusiasm by the prospect of seeing their miserable life
transformed into an eternity of delight. By a phenomenon of contagion from
below, of which history affords us more than one example, the doctrine
finally invaded the upper strata of the nation, but it was a long time before
an emperor considered the new faith sufficiently widespread to be adopted
as the official religion.
4. The Results of Political Revolutions.
When a political party is triumphant it naturally seeks to organise society in
accordance with its interests. The organisation will differ accordingly as the
revolution has been effected by the soldiers, the Radicals, or the
Conservatives, &c.
The new laws and institutions will depend on the interests of the
triumphant party and of the classes which have assisted it—the clergy for
instance.
If the revolution has triumphed only after a violent struggle, as was the
case with the French Revolution, the victors will reject at one sweep the
whole arsenal of the old law. The supporters of the fallen regime will be
persecuted, exiled, or exterminated.
The maximum of violence in these persecutions is attained when the
triumphant party is defending a belief in addition to its material interests.
Then the conquered need hope for no pity. Thus may be explained the
expulsion of the Moors from Spain, the autodafes of the Inquisition, the
executions of the Convention, and the recent laws against the religious
congregations in France.
The absolute power which is assumed by the victors leads them
sometimes to extreme measures, such as the Convention's decree that gold
was to be replaced by paper, that goods were to be sold at determined
prices, &c. Very soon it runs up against a wall of unavoidable necessities,
which turn opinion against its tyranny, and finally leave it defenceless
before attack, as befell at the end of the French Revolution. The same thing
happened recently to a Socialist Australian ministry composed almost
exclusively of working-men. It enacted laws so absurd, and accorded such
privileges to the trade unions, that public opinion rebelled against it so
unanimously that in three months it was overthrown.
But the cases we have considered are exceptional. The majority of
revolutions have been accomplished in order to place a new sovereign in
power. Now this sovereign knows very well that the first condition of
maintaining his power consists in not too exclusively favouring a single
class, but in seeking to conciliate all. To do this he will establish a sort of
equilibrium between them, so as not to be dominated by any one of these
classes. To allow one class to become predominant is to condemn himself
presently to accept that class as his master. This law is one of the most
certain of political psychology. The kings of France understood it very well
when they struggled so energetically against the encroachments first of the
nobility and then of the clergy. If they had not done so their fate would have
been that of the German Emperors of the Middle Ages, who,
excommunicated by the Pope, were reduced, like Henry IV. at Canossa, to
make a pilgrimage and humbly to sue for the Pope's forgiveness.
This same law has continually been verified during the course of
history. When at the end of the Roman Empire the military caste became
preponderant, the emperors depended entirely upon their soldiers, who
appointed and deposed them at will.
It was therefore a great advantage for France that she was so long
governed by a monarch almost absolute, supposed to hold his power by
divine right, and surrounded therefore by a considerable prestige. Without
such an authority he could have controlled neither the feudal nobility, nor
the clergy, nor the parliaments. If Poland, towards the end of the sixteenth
century, had also possessed an absolute and respected monarchy, she would
not have descended the path of decadence which led to her disappearance
from the map of Europe.
We have shewn in this chapter that political revolutions may be
accompanied by important social transformations. We shall soon see how
slight are these transformations compared to those produced by religious
revolutions.
Chapter II.
Religious Revolutions
Table of Contents
1. The importance of the study of Religious Revolutions in respect of the
comprehension of the great Political Revolutions.
A portion of this work will be devoted to the French Revolution. It was full
of acts of violence which naturally had their psychological causes.
These exceptional events will always fill us with astonishment, and we
even feel them to be inexplicable. They become comprehensible, however,
if we consider that the French Revolution, constituting a new religion, was
bound to obey the laws which condition the propagation of all beliefs. Its
fury and its hecatombs will then become intelligible.
In studying the history of a great religious revolution, that of the
Reformation, we shall see that a number of psychological elements which
figured therein were equally active during the French Revolution. In both
we observe the insignificant bearing of the rational value of a belief upon its
propagation, the inefficacy of persecution, the impossibility of tolerance
between contrary beliefs, and the violence and the desperate struggles
resulting from the conflict of different faiths. We also observe the
exploitation of a belief by interests quite independent of that belief. Finally
we see that it is impossible to modify the convictions of men without also
modifying their existence.
These phenomena verified, we shall see plainly why the gospel of the
Revolution was propagated by the same methods as all the religious
gospels, notably that of Calvin. It could not have been propagated
otherwise.
But although there are close analogies between the genesis of a religious
revolution, such as the Reformation, and that of a great political revolution
like our own, their remote consequences are very different, which explains
the difference of duration which they display. In religious revolutions no
experience can reveal to the faithful that they are deceived, since they
would have to go to heaven to make the discovery. In political revolutions
experience quickly demonstrates the error of a false doctrine and forces
men to abandon it.
Thus at the end of the Directory the application of Jacobin beliefs had
led France to such a degree of ruin, poverty, and despair that the wildest
Jacobins themselves had to renounce their system. Nothing survived of their
theories except a few principles which cannot be verified by experience,
such as the universal happiness which equality should bestow upon
humanity.
2. The beginnings of the Reformation and its first disciples.
The Reformation was finally to exercise a profound influence upon the
sentiments and moral ideas of a great proportion of mankind. Modest in its
beginnings, it was at first a simple struggle against the abuses of the clergy,
and, from a practical point of view, a return to the prescriptions of the
Gospel. It never constituted, as has been claimed, an aspiration towards
freedom of thought. Calvin was as intolerant as Robespierre, and all the
theorists of the age considered that the religion of subjects must be that of
the prince who governed them. Indeed in every country where the
Reformation was established the sovereign replaced the Pope of Rome, with
the same rights and the same powers.
In France, in default of publicity and means of communication, the new
faith spread slowly enough at first. It was about 1520 that Luther recruited a
few adepts, and only towards 1535 was the new belief sufficiently
widespread for men to consider it necessary to burn its disciples.
In conformity with a well-known psychological law, these executions
merely favoured the propagation of the Reformation. Its first followers
included priests and magistrates, but were principally obscure artisans.
Their conversion was effected almost exclusively by mental contagion and
suggestion.
As soon as a new belief extends itself, we see grouped round it many
persons who are indifferent to the belief, but who find in it a pretext or
opportunity for gratifying their passions or their greed. This phenomenon
was observed at the time of the Reformation in many countries, notably in
Germany and in England.
Luther having taught that the clergy had no need of wealth, the German
lords found many merits in a faith which enabled them to seize upon the
goods of the Church. Henry VIII. enriched himself by a similar operation.
Sovereigns who were often molested by the Pope could as a rule only look
favourably upon a doctrine which added religious powers to their political
powers and made each of them a Pope. Far from diminishing the absolutism
of rulers, the Reformation only exaggerated it.
3. Rational value of the doctrines of the Reformation.
The Reformation overturned all Europe, and came near to ruining France,
of which it made a battle-field for a period of fifty years. Never did a cause
so insignificant from the rational point of view produce such great results.
Here is one of the innumerable proofs of the fact that beliefs are
propagated independently of all reason. The theological doctrines which
aroused men's passions so violently, and notably those of Calvin, are not
even worthy of examination in the light of rational logic.
Greatly concerned about his salvation, having an excessive fear of the
devil, which his confessor was unable to allay, Luther sought the surest
means of pleasing God that he might avoid Hell.
Having commenced by denying the Pope the right to sell indulgences,
he presently entirely denied his authority, and that of the Church,
condemned religious ceremonies, confession, and the worship of the saints,
and declared that Christians should have no rules of conduct other than the
Bible. He also considered that no one could be saved without the grace of
God.
This last theory, known as that of predestination, was in Luther rather
uncertain, but was stated precisely by Calvin, who made it the very
foundation of a doctrine to which the majority of Protestants are still
subservient. According to him: "From all eternity God has predestined
certain men to be burned and others to be saved." Why this monstrous
iniquity? Simply because "it is the will of God."
Thus according to Calvin, who for that matter merely developed certain
assertions of St. Augustine, an all-powerful God would amuse Himself by
creating living beings simply in order to burn them during all eternity,
without paying any heed to their acts or merits. It is marvellous that such
revolting insanity could for such a length of time subjugate so many minds
—marvellous that it does so still.1
The psychology of Calvin is not without affinity with that of
Robespierre. Like the latter, the master of the pure truth, he sent to death
those who would not accept his doctrines. God, he stated, wishes "that one
should put aside all humanity when it is a question of striving for his glory."
The case of Calvin and his disciples shows that matters which rationally
are the most contradictory become perfectly reconciled in minds which are
hypnotised by a belief. In the eyes of rational logic, it seems impossible to
base a morality upon the theory of predestination, since whatever they do
men are sure of being either saved or damned. However, Calvin had no
difficulty in erecting a most severe morality upon this totally illogical basis.
Considering themselves the elect of God, his disciples were so swollen by
pride and the sense of their own dignity that they felt obliged to serve as
models in their conduct.
4. Propagation of the Reformation.
The new faith was propagated not by speech, still less by process of
reasoning, but by the mechanism described in our preceding work: that is,
by the influence of affirmation, repetition, mental contagion, and prestige.
At a much later date revolutionary ideas were spread over France in the
same fashion.
Persecution, as we have already remarked, only favoured this
propagation. Each execution led to fresh conversions, as was seen in the
early years of the Christian Church. Anne Dubourg, Parliamentary
councillor, condemned to be burned alive, marched to the stake exhorting
the crowd to be converted. "His constancy," says a witness, "made more
Protestants among the young men of the colleges than the books of Calvin."
To prevent the condemned from speaking to the people their tongues
were cut out before they were burned. The horror of their sufferings was
increased by attaching the victims to an iron chain, which enabled the
executioners to plunge them into the fire and withdraw them several times
in succession.
But nothing induced the Protestants to retract, even the offer of an
amnesty after they had felt the fire.
In 1535 Francis I., forsaking his previous tolerance, ordered six fires to
be lighted simultaneously in Paris. The Convention, as we know, limited
itself to a single guillotine in the same city. It is probable that the sufferings
of the victims were not very excruciating; the insensibility of the Christian
martyrs had already been remarked. Believers are hypnotised by their faith,
and we know to-day that certain forms of hypnotism engender complete
insensibility.
The new faith progressed rapidly. In 1560 there were two thousand
reformed churches in France, and many great lords, at first indifferent
enough, adhered to the new doctrine.
5. Conflict between different religious beliefs—Impossibility of Tolerance.
I have already stated that intolerance is always an accompaniment of
powerful religious beliefs. Political and religious revolutions furnish us
with numerous proofs of this fact, and show us also that the mutual
intolerance of sectaries of the same religion is always much greater than
that of the defenders of remote and alien faiths, such as Islamism and
Christianity. In fact, if we consider the faiths for whose sake France was so
long rent asunder, we shall find that they did not differ on any but accessory
points. Catholics and Protestants adored exactly the same God, and only
differed in their manner of adoring Him. If reason had played the smallest
part in the elaboration of their belief, it could easily have proved to them
that it must be quite indifferent to God whether He sees men adore Him in
this fashion or in that.
Reason being powerless to affect the brain of the convinced, Protestants
and Catholics continued their ferocious conflicts. All the efforts of their
sovereigns to reconcile them were in vain. Catherine de Medicis, seeing the
party of the Reformed Church increasing day by day in spite of persecution,
and attracting a considerable number of nobles and magistrates, thought to
disarm them by convoking at Poissy, in 1561, an assembly of bishops and
pastors with the object of fusing the two doctrines. Such an enterprise
indicated that the queen, despite her subtlety, knew nothing of the laws of
mystic logic. Not in all history can one cite an example of a belief destroyed
or reduced by means of refutation. Catherine did not even know that
although toleration is with difficulty possible between individuals, it is
impossible between collectivities. Her attempt failed completely. The
assembled theologians hurled texts and insults at one another's heads, but
no one was moved. Catherine thought to succeed better in 1562 by
promulgating an edict according Protestants the right to unite in the public
celebration of their cult.
This tolerance, very admirable from a philosophical point of view, but
not at all wise from the political standpoint, had no other result beyond
exasperating both parties. In the Midi, where the Protestants were strongest,
they persecuted the Catholics, sought to convert them by violence, cut their
throats if they did not succeed, and sacked their cathedrals. In the regions
where the Catholics were more numerous the Reformers suffered like
persecutions.
Such hostilities as these inevitably engendered civil war. Thus arose the
so-called religious wars, which so long spilled the blood of France. The
cities were ravaged, the inhabitants massacred, and the struggle rapidly
assumed that special quality of ferocity peculiar to religious or political
conflicts, which, at a later date, was to reappear in the wars of La Vendee.
Old men, women, and children, all were exterminated. A certain Baron
d'Oppede, first president of the Parliament of Aix, had already set an
example by killing 3,000 persons in the space of ten days, with refinements
of cruelty, and destroying three cities and twenty-two villages. Montluc, a
worthy forerunner of Carrier, had the Calvinists thrown living into the wells
until these were full. The Protestants were no more humane. They did not
spare even the Catholic churches, and treated the tombs and statues just as
the delegates of the Convention were to treat the royal tombs of Saint
Denis.
Under the influence of these conflicts France was progressively
disintegrated, and at the end of the reign of Henri III. was parcelled out into
veritable little confederated municipal republics, forming so many
sovereign states. The royal power was vanishing. The States of Blois
claimed to dictate their wishes to Henri III., who had fled from his capital.
In 1577 the traveller Lippomano, who traversed France, saw important
cities— Orleans, Tours, Blois, Poitiers—entirely devastated, the cathedrals
and churches in ruins, and the tombs shattered. This was almost the state of
France at the end of the Directory.
Among the events of this epoch, that which has left the darkest memory,
although it was not perhaps the most murderous, was the massacre of St.
Bartholomew in 1572, ordered, according to the historians, by Catherine de
Medicis and Charles IX.
One does not require a very profound knowledge of psychology to
realise that no sovereign could have ordered such an event. St.
Bartholomew's Day was not a royal but a popular crime. Catherine de
Medicis, believing her existence and that of the king threatened by a plot
directed by four or five Protestant leaders then in Paris, sent men to kill
them in their houses, according to the summary fashion of the time. The
massacre which followed is very well explained by M. Battifol in the
following terms:—
"At the report of what was afoot the rumour immediately ran
through Paris that the Huguenots were being massacred;
Catholic gentlemen, soldiers of the guard, archers, men of
the people, in short all Paris, rushed into the streets, arms in
hand, in order to participate in the execution, and the general
massacre commenced, to the sound of ferocious cries of
`The Huguenots! Kill, kill!' They were struck down, they
were drowned, they were hanged. All that were known as
heretics were so served. Two thousand persons were killed in
Paris."
By contagion, the people of the provinces imitated those of Paris, and
six to eight thousand Protestants were slain.
When time had somewhat cooled religious passions, all the historians,
even the Catholics, spoke of St. Bartholomew's Day with indignation. They
thus showed how difficult it is for the mentality of one epoch to understand
that of another.
Far from being criticised, St. Bartholomew's Day provoked an
indescribable enthusiasm throughout the whole of Catholic Europe.
Philip II. was delirious with joy when he heard the news, and the King
of France received more congratulations than if he had won a great battle.
But it was Pope Gregory XIII. above all who manifested the keenest
satisfaction. He had a medal struck to commemorate the happy event,2
ordered joy-fires to be lit and cannon fired, celebrated several masses, and
sent for the painter Vasari to depict on the walls of the Vatican the principal
scenes of carnage. Further, he sent to the King of France an ambassador
instructed to felicitate that monarch upon his fine action. It is historical
details of this kind that enable us to comprehend the mind of the believer.
The Jacobins of the Terror had a mentality very like that of Gregory XIII.
Naturally the Protestants were not indifferent to such a hecatomb, and
they made such progress that in 1576 Henri III. was reduced to granting
them, by the Edict of Beaulieu, entire liberty of worship, eight strong
places, and, in the Parliaments, Chambers composed half of Catholics and
half of Huguenots.
These forced concessions did not lead to peace. A Catholic League was
created, having the Duke of Guise at its head, and the conflict continued.
But it could not last for ever. We know how Henri IV. put an end to it, at
least for a time, by his abjuration in 1593, and by the Edict of Nantes.
The struggle was quieted but not terminated. Under Louis XIII. the
Protestants were still restless, and in 1627 Richelieu was obliged to besiege
La Rochelle, where 15,000 Protestants perished. Afterwards, possessing
more political than religious feeling, the famous Cardinal proved extremely
tolerant toward the Reformers.
This tolerance could not last. Contrary beliefs cannot come into contact
without seeking to annihilate each other, as soon as one feels capable of
dominating the other. Under Louis XIV. the Protestants had become by far
the weaker, and were forced to renounce the struggle and live at peace.
Their number was then about 1,200,000, and they possessed more than 600
churches, served by about 700 pastors. The presence of these heretics on
French soil was intolerable to the Catholic clergy, who endeavoured to
persecute them in various ways. As these persecutions had little result,
Louis XIV. resorted to dragonnading them in 1685, when many individuals
perished, but without further result. Under the pressure of the clergy,
notably of Bossuett, the Edict of Nantes was revoked, and the Protestants
were forced to accept conversion or to leave France. This disastrous
emigration lasted a long time, and is said to have cost France 400,000
inhabitants, men of notable energy, since they had the courage to listen to
their conscience rather than their interests.
6. The results of Religious Revolutions.
If religious revolutions were judged only by the gloomy story of the
Reformation, we should be forced to regard them as highly disastrous. But
all have not played a like part, the civilising influence of certain among
them being considerable.
By giving a people moral unity they greatly increase its material power.
We see this notably when a new faith, brought by Mohammed, transforms
the petty and impotent tribes of Arabia into a formidable nation.
Such a new religious belief does not merely render a people
homogeneous. It attains a result that no philosophy, no code ever attained: it
sensibly transforms what is almost unchangeable, the sentiments of a race.
We see this at the period when the most powerful religious revolution
recorded by history overthrew paganism to substitute a God who came from
the plains of Galilee. The new ideal demanded the renunciation of all the
joys of existence in order to acquire the eternal happiness of heaven. No
doubt such an ideal was readily accepted by the poor, the enslaved, the
disinherited who were deprived of all the joys of life here below, to whom
an enchanting future was offered in exchange for a life without hope. But
the austere existence so easily embraced by the poor was also embraced by
the rich. In this above all was the power of the new faith manifested.
Not only did the Christian revolution transform manners: it also
exercised, for a space of two thousand years, a preponderating influence
over civilisation. Directly a religious faith triumphs all the elements of
civilisation naturally adapt themselves to it, so that civilisation is rapidly
transformed. Writers, artists and philosophers merely symbolise, in their
works, the ideas of the new faith.
When any religious or political faith whatsoever has triumphed, not
only is reason powerless to affect it, but it even finds motives which impel
it to interpret and so justify the faith in question, and to strive to impose it
upon others. There were probably as many theologians and orators in the
time of Moloch, to prove the utility of human sacrifices, as there were at
other periods to glorify the Inquisition, the massacre of St. Bartholomew,
and the hecatombs of the Terror.
We must not hope to see peoples possessed by strong beliefs readily
achieve tolerance. The only people who attained to toleration in the ancient
world were the polytheists. The nations which practise toleration at the
present time are those that might well be termed polytheistical, since, as in
England and America, they are divided into innumerable sects. Under
identical names they really adore very different deities.
The multiplicity of beliefs which results in such toleration finally results
also in weakness. We therefore come to a psychological problem not
hitherto resolved: how to possess a faith at once powerful and tolerant.
The foregoing brief explanation reveals the large part played by
religious revolutions and the power of beliefs. Despite their slight rational
value they shape history, and prevent the peoples from remaining a mass of
individuals without cohesion or strength. Man has needed them at all times
to orientate his thought and guide his conduct. No philosophy has as yet
succeeded in replacing them.
1. The doctrine of predestination is still taught in Protestant catechisms, as is proved by the
following passage extracted from the last edition of an official catechism for which I sent to
Edinburgh:
"By the decree of God, for the manifestation of His glory, some men
and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others
foreordained to everlasting death.
"These angels and men, thus predestinated and foreordained, are
particularly and unchangeably designed; and their number is so certain
and definite that it cannot be either increased or diminished.
"Those of mankind that are predestinated unto life, God, before the
foundation of the world was laid, according to His eternal and
immutable purpose, and the secret counsel and good pleasure of His
will, hath chosen in Christ unto everlasting glory, out of His mere free
grace and love, without any foresight of faith or good works, or
perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the creature, as
conditions, or causes moving him thereunto; and all to the praise of his
glorious grace.
"As God hath appointed the elect unto glory, so hath He, by the
eternal and most free purpose of His will, foreordained all the means
thereunto. Wherefore they who are elected being fallen in Adam, are
redeemed by Christ; are effectually called unto faith in Christ by His
spirit working in due season; are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept
by His power through faith unto salvation. Neither are any other
redeemed by Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified,
and saved, but the elect only."
2. The medal must have been distributed pretty widely, for the cabinet of medals at the Bibliotheque
Nationale possesses three examples: one in gold, one in silver, and one in copper. This medal,
reproduced by Bonnani in his Numism. Pontific. (vol. i. p. 336), represents on one side Gregory
XIII., and on the other an angel striking Huguenots with a sword. The exergue is Ugonotorum
strages, that is, Massacre of the Huguenots. (The word strages may be translated by carnage or
massacre, a sense which it possesses in Cicero and Livy; or again by disaster, ruin, a sense
attributed to it in Virgil and Tacitus.)
Chapter III.
The Action of Governments in Revolutions
Table of Contents
1. The feeble resistance of Governments in time of Revolution.
Many modern nations—France, Spain, Italy, Austria, Poland, Japan, Turkey,
Portugal, &c.—have known revolutions within the last century. These were
usually characterised by their instantaneous quality and the facility with
which the governments attacked were overthrown.
The instantaneous nature of these revolutions is explained by the
rapidity of mental contagion due to modern methods of publicity. The slight
resistance of the governments attacked is more surprising. It implies a total
inability to comprehend and foresee created by a blind confidence in their
own strength.
The facility with which governments fall is not however a new
phenomenon. It has been proved more than once, not only in autocratic
systems, which are always overturned by palace conspiracies, but also in
governments perfectly instructed in the state of public opinion by the press
and their own agents.
Among these instantaneous downfalls one of the most striking was that
which followed the Ordinances of Charles X. This monarch was, as we
know, overthrown in four days. His minister Polignac had taken no
measures of defence, and the king was so confident of the tranquillity of
Paris that he had gone hunting. The army was not in the least hostile, as in
the reign of Louis XVI., but the troops, badly officered, disbanded before
the attacks of a few insurgents.
The overthrow of Louis-Philippe was still more typical, since it did not
result from any arbitrary action on the part of the sovereign. This monarch
was not surrounded by the hatred which finally surrounded Charles X., and
his fall was the result of an insignificant riot which could easily have been
repressed.
Historians, who can hardly comprehend how a solidly constituted
government, supported by an imposing army, can be overthrown by a few
rioters, naturally attributed the fall of Louis-Philippe to deep-seated causes.
In reality the incapacity of the generals entrusted with his defence was the
real cause of his fall.
This case is one of the most instructive that could be cited, and is
worthy of a moment's consideration. It has been perfectly investigated by
General Bonnal, in the light of the notes of an eye-witness, General
Elchingen. Thirty-six thousand troops were then in Paris, but the weakness
and incapacity of their officers made it impossible to use them.
Contradictory orders were given, and finally the troops were forbidden to
fire on the people, who, moreover—and nothing could have been more
dangerous—were permitted to mingle with the troops. The riot succeeded
without fighting and forced the king to abdicate.
Applying to the preceding case our knowledge of the psychology of
crowds, General Bonnal shows how easily the riot which overthrew Louis-
Philippe could have been controlled. He proves, notably, that if the
commanding officers had not completely lost their heads quite a small body
of troops could have prevented the insurgents from invading the Chamber
of Deputies. This last, composed of monarchists, would certainly have
proclaimed the Count of Paris under the regency of his mother.
Similar phenomena were observable in the revolutions of Spain and
Portugal.
These facts show the role of petty accessory circumstances in great
events, and prove that one must not speak too readily of the general laws of
history. Without the riot which overthrew Louis-Philippe, we should
probably have seen neither the Republic of 1848, nor the Second Empire,
nor Sedan, nor the invasion, nor the loss of Alsace.
In the revolutions of which I have just been speaking the army was of
no assistance to the government, but did not turn against it. It sometimes
happens otherwise. It is often the army which effects the revolution, as in
Turkey and Portugal. The innumerable revolutions of the Latin republics of
America are effected by the army.
When a revolution is effected by an army the new rulers naturally fall
under its domination. I have already recalled the fact that this was the case
at the end of the Roman Empire, when the emperors were made and
unmade by the soldiery.
The same thing has sometimes been witnessed in modern times. The
following extract from a newspaper, with reference to the Greek revolution,
shows what becomes of a government dominated by its army:—
"One day it was announced that eighty officers of the navy
would send in their resignations if the government did not
dismiss the leaders of whom they complained. Another time
it was the agricultural labourers on a farm (metairie)
belonging to the Crown Prince who demanded the partition
of the soil among them. The navy protested against the
promotion promised to Colonel Zorbas. Colonel Zorbas,
after a week of discussion with Lieutenant Typaldos, treated
with the President of the Council as one power with another.
During this time the Federation of the corporations abused
the officers of the navy. A deputy demanded that these
officers and their families should be treated as brigands.
When Commander Miaoulis fired on the rebels, the sailors,
who first of all had obeyed Typaldos, returned to duty. This
is no longer the harmonious Greece of Pericles and
Themistocles. It is a hideous camp of Agramant."
A revolution cannot be effected without the assistance or at least the
neutrality of the army, but it often happens that the movement commences
without it. This was the case with the revolutions of 1830 and 1848, and
that of 1870, which overthrew the Empire after the humiliation of France by
the surrender of Sedan.
The majority of revolutions take place in the capitals, and by means of
contagion spread through the country; but this is not a constant rule. We
know that during the French Revolution La Vendee, Brittany, and the Midi
revolted spontaneously against Paris.
2. How the resistance of Governments may overcome Revolution.
In the greater number of the revolutions enumerated above, we have seen
governments perish by their weakness. As soon as they were touched they
fell.
The Russian Revolution proved that a government which defends itself
energetically may finally triumph.
Never was revolution more menacing to the government. After the
disasters suffered in the Orient, and the severities of a too oppressive
autocratic regime, all classes of society, including a portion of the army and
the fleet, had revolted. The railways, posts, and telegraph services had
struck, so that communications between the various portions of the vast
empire were interrupted.
The rural class itself, forming the majority of the nation, began to feel
the influence of the revolutionary propaganda. The lot of the peasants was
wretched. They were obliged, by the system of the mir, to cultivate soil
which they could not acquire. The government resolved immediately to
conciliate this large class of peasants by turning them into proprietors.
Special laws forced the landlords to sell the peasants a portion of their
lands, and banks intended to lend the buyers the necessary purchase-money
were created. The sums lent were to be repaid by small annuities deducted
from the product of the sale of the crops.
Assured of the neutrality of the peasants, the government could contend
with the fanatics who were burning the towns, throwing bombs among the
crowds, and waging a merciless warfare. All those who could be taken were
killed. Such extermination is the only method discovered since the
beginning of the world by which a society can be protected against the
rebels who wish to destroy it.
The victorious government understood moreover the necessity of
satisfying the legitimate claims of the enlightened portion of the nation. It
created a parliament instructed to prepare laws and control expenditure.
The history of the Russian Revolution shows us how a government, all
of whose natural supports have crumbled in succession, can, with wisdom
and firmness, triumph over the most formidable obstacles. It has been very
justly said that governments are not overthrown, but that they commit
suicide.
3. Revolutions effected by Governments.—Examples: China, Turkey, &c.
Governments almost invariably fight revolutions; they hardly ever create
them. Representing the needs of the moment and general opinion, they
follow the reformers timidly; they do not precede them. Sometimes,
however, certain governments have attempted those sudden reforms which
we know as revolutions. The stability or instability of the national mind
decrees the success or failure of such attempts.
They succeed when the people on whom the government seeks to
impose new institutions is composed of semi-barbarous tribes, without
fixed laws, without solid traditions; that is to say, without a settled national
mind. Such was the condition of Russia in the days of Peter the Great. We
know how he sought to Europeanise the semi-Asiatic populations by means
of force.
Japan is another example of a revolution effected by a government, but
it was her machinery, not her mind that was reformed.
It needs a very powerful autocrat, seconded by a man of genius, to
succeed, even partially, in such a task. More often than not the reformer
finds that the whole people rises up against him. Then, to the contrary of
what befalls in an ordinary revolution, the autocrat is revolutionary and the
people is conservative. But an attentive study will soon show you that the
peoples are always extremely conservative.
Failure is the rule with these attempts. Whether effected by the upper
classes or the lower, revolutions do not change the souls of peoples that
have been a long time established. They only change those things that are
worn by time and ready to fall.
China is at the present time making a very interesting but impossible
experiment, in seeking, by means of the government, suddenly to renew the
institutions of the country. The revolution which overturned the dynasty of
her ancient sovereigns was the indirect consequence of the discontent
provoked by reforms which the government had sought to impose with a
view to ameliorating the condition of China. The suppression of opium and
gaming, the reform of the army, and the creation of schools, involved an
increase of taxation which, as well as the reforms themselves, greatly
indisposed the general opinion.
A few cultured Chinese educated in the schools of Europe profited by
this discontent to raise the people and proclaim a republic, an institution of
which the Chinese could have had no conception.
It surely cannot long survive, for the impulse which has given birth to it
is not a movement of progress, but of reaction. The word republic, to the
Chinaman intellectualised by his European education, is simply
synonymous with the rejection of the yoke of laws, rules, and long-
established restraints. Cutting off his pigtail, covering his head with a cap,
and calling himself a Republican, the young Chinaman thinks to give the
rein to all his instincts. This is more or less the idea of a republic that a large
part of the French people entertained at the time of the great Revolution.
China will soon discover the fate that awaits a society deprived of the
armour slowly wrought by the past. After a few years of bloody anarchy it
will be necessary to establish a power whose tyranny will inevitably be far
severer than that which was overthrown. Science has not yet discovered the
magic ring capable of saving a society without discipline. There is no need
to impose discipline when it has become hereditary, but when the primitive
instincts have been allowed to destroy the barriers painfully erected by slow
ancestral labours, they cannot be reconstituted save by an energetic tyranny.
As a proof of these assertions we may instance an experiment analogous
to that undertaken by China; that recently attempted by Turkey. A few years
ago young men instructed in European schools and full of good intentions
succeeded, with the aid of a number of officers, in overthrowing a Sultan
whose tyranny seemed insupportable. Having acquired our robust Latin
faith in the magic power of formulae, they thought they could establish the
representative system in a country half-civilised, profoundly divided by
religious hatred, and peopled by divers races.
The attempt has not prospered hitherto. The authors of the reformation
had to learn that despite their liberalism they were forced to govern by
methods very like those employed by the government overthrown. They
could neither prevent summary executions nor wholesale massacres of
Christians, nor could they remedy a single abuse.
It would be unjust to reproach them. What in truth could they have done
to change a people whose traditions have been fixed so long, whose
religious passions are so intense, and whose Mohammedans, although in the
minority, legitimately claim to govern the sacred city of their faith
according to their code? How prevent Islam from remaining the State
religion in a country where civil law and religious law are not yet plainly
separated, and where faith in the Koran is the only tie by which the idea of
nationality can be maintained?
It was difficult to destroy such a state of affairs, so that we were bound
to see the re-establishment of an autocratic organisation with an appearance
of constitutionalism—that is to say, practically the old system once again.
Such attempts afford a good example of the fact that a people cannot choose
its institutions until it has transformed its mind.
4. Social elements which survive the changes of Government after
Revolution.
What we shall say later on as to the stable foundation of the national soul
will enable us to appreciate the force of systems of government that have
been long established, such as ancient monarchies. A monarch may easily
be overthrown by conspirators, but these latter are powerless against the
principles which the monarch represents. Napoleon at his fall was replaced
not by his natural heir, but by the heir of kings. The latter incarnated an
ancient principle, while the son of the Emperor personified ideas that were
as yet imperfectly established in men's minds.
For the same reason a minister, however able, however great the
services he has rendered to his country, can very rarely overthrow his
Sovereign. Bismarck himself could not have done so. This great minister
had single-handed created the unity of Germany, yet his master had only to
touch him with his finger and he vanished. A man is as nothing before a
principle supported by opinion.
But even when, for various reasons, the principle incarnated by a
government is annihilated with that government, as happened at the time of
the French Revolution, all the elements of social organisation do not perish
at the same time.
If we knew nothing of France but the disturbances of the last hundred
years and more we might suppose the country to live in a state of profound
anarchy. Now her economic, industrial, and even her political life
manifests, on the contrary, a continuity that seems to be independent of all
revolutions and governments.
The fact is that beside the great events of which history treats are the
little facts of daily life which the books neglect to tell. They are ruled by
imperious necessities which halt for no man. Their total mass forms the real
framework of the life of the people.
While the study of great events shows us that the nominal government
of France has been frequently changed in the space of a century, an
examination of the little daily events will prove, on the contrary, that her
real government has been little altered.
Who in truth are the real rulers of a people? Kings and ministers, no
doubt, in the great crises of national life, but they play no part whatever in
the little realities which make up the life of every day. The real directing
forces of a country are the administrations, composed of impersonal
elements which are never affected by the changes of government.
Conservative of traditions, they are anonymous and lasting, and constitute
an occult power before which all others must eventually bow. Their action
has even increased to such a degree that, as we shall presently show, there is
a danger that they may form an anonymous State more powerful than the
official State. France has thus come to be governed by heads of departments
and government clerks. The more we study the history of revolutions the
more we discover that they change practically nothing but the label. To
create a revolution is easy, but to change the soul of a people is difficult
indeed.
Chapter IV.
The Part Played by the People in Revolutions
Table of Contents
1. The stability and malleability of the national mind.
The knowledge of a people at any given moment of its history involves an
understanding of its environment and above all of its past. Theoretically one
may deny that past, as did the men of the Revolution, as many men of the
present day have done, but its influence remains indestructible.
In the past, built up by slow accumulations of centuries, was formed the
aggregation of thoughts, sentiments, traditions, and prejudices constituting
the national mind which makes the strength of a race. Without it no
progress is possible. Each generation would necessitate a fresh beginning.
The aggregate composing the soul of a people is solidly established only
if it possesses a certain rigidity, but this rigidity must not pass a certain
limit, or there would be no such thing as malleability.
Without rigidity the ancestral soul would have no fixity, and without
malleability it could not adapt itself to the changes of environment resulting
from the progress of civilization.
Excessive malleability of the national mind impels a people to incessant
revolutions. Excess of rigidity leads it to decadence. Living species, like the
races of humanity, disappear when, too fixedly established by a long past,
they become incapable of adapting themselves to new conditions of
existence.
Few peoples have succeeded in effecting a just equilibrium between
these two contrary qualities of stability and malleability. The Romans in
antiquity and the English in modern times may be cited among those who
have best attained it.
The peoples whose mind is most fixed and established often effect the
most violent revolutions. Not having succeeded in evolving progressively,
in adapting themselves to changes of environment, they are forced to adapt
themselves violently when such adaptation becomes indispensable.
Stability is only acquired very slowly. The history of a race is above all
the story of its long efforts to establish its mind. So long as it has not
succeeded it forms a horde of barbarians without cohesion and strength.
After the invasions of the end of the Roman Empire France took several
centuries to form a national soul.
She finally achieved one; but in the course of centuries this soul finally
became too rigid. With a little more malleability, the ancient monarchy
would have been slowly transformed as it was elsewhere, and we should
have avoided, together with the Revolution and its consequences, the heavy
task of remaking a national soul.
The preceding considerations show us the part of race in the genesis of
revolutions, and explain why the same revolutions will produce such
different effects in different countries; why, for example, the ideas of the
French Revolution, welcomed with such enthusiasm by some peoples, were
rejected by others.
Certainly England, although a very stable country, has suffered two
revolutions and slain a king; but the mould of her mental armour was at
once stable enough to retain the acquisitions of the past and malleable
enough to modify them only within the necessary limits. Never did England
dream, as did the men of the French Revolution, of destroying the ancestral
heritage in order to erect a new society in the name of reason.
"While the Frenchman," writes M. A. Sorel, "despised his government,
detested his clergy, hated the nobility, and revolted against the laws, the
Englishman was proud of his religion, his constitution, his aristocracy, his
House of Lords. These were like so many towers of the formidable Bastille
in which he entrenched himself, under the British standard, to judge Europe
and cover her with contempt. He admitted that the command was disputed
inside the fort, but no stranger must approach."
The influence of race in the destiny of the peoples appears plainly in the
history of the perpetual revolutions of the Spanish republics of South
America. Composed of half-castes, that is to say, of individuals whose
diverse heredities have dissociated their ancestral characteristics, these
populations have no national soul and therefore no stability. A people of
half-castes is always ungovernable.
If we would learn more of the differences of political capacity which the
racial factor creates we must examine the same nation as governed by two
races successively.
The event is not rare in history. It has been manifested in a striking
manner of late in Cuba and the Philippines, which passed suddenly from the
rule of Spain to that of the United States.
We know in what anarchy and poverty Cuba existed under Spanish rule;
we know, too, to what a degree of prosperity the island was brought in a
few years when it fell into the hands of the United States.
The same experience was repeated in the Philippines, which for
centuries had been governed by Spain. Finally the country was no more
than a vast jungle, the home of epidemics of every kind, where a miserable
population vegetated without commerce or industry. After a few years of
American rule the country was entirely transformed: malaria, yellow fever,
plague and cholera had entirely disappeared. The swamps were drained; the
country was covered with railways, factories and schools. In thirteen years
the mortality was reduced by two-thirds.
It is to such examples that we must refer the theorist who has not yet
grasped the profound significance of the word race, and how far the
ancestral soul of a people rules over its destiny.
2. How the people regards Revolution.
The part of the people has been the same in all revolutions. It is never the
people that conceives them nor directs them. Its activity is released by
means of leaders.
Only when the direct interests of the people are involved do we see, as
recently in Champagne, any fraction of the people rising spontaneously. A
movement thus localised constitutes a mere riot.
Revolution is easy when the leaders are very influential. Of this
Portugal and Brazil have recently furnished proofs. But new ideas penetrate
the people very slowly indeed. Generally it accepts a revolution without
knowing why, and when by chance it does succeed in understanding why,
the revolution is over long ago.
The people will create a revolution because it is persuaded to do so, but
it does not understand very much of the ideas of its leaders; it interprets
them in its own fashion, and this fashion is by no means that of the true
authors of the revolution. The French Revolution furnished a striking
example of this fact.
The Revolution of 1789 had as its real object the substitution of the
power of the nobility by that of the bourgeoisie; that is, an old elite which
had become incapable was to be replaced by a new elite which did possess
capacity.
There was little question of the people in this first phase of the
Revolution. The sovereignty of the people was proclaimed, but it amounted
only to the right of electing its representatives.
Extremely illiterate, not hoping, like the middle classes, to ascend the
social scale, not in any way feeling itself the equal of the nobles, and not
aspiring ever to become their equal, the people had views and interests very
different to those of the upper classes of society.
The struggles of the assembly with the royal power led it to call for the
intervention of the people in these struggles. It intervened more and more,
and the bourgeois revolution rapidly became a popular revolution.
An idea having no force of its own, and acting only by virtue of
possessing an affective and mystic substratum which supports it, the
theoretical ideas of the bourgeoisie, before they could act on the people, had
to be transformed into a new and very definite faith, springing from obvious
practical interests.
This transformation was rapidly effected when the people heard the men
envisaged by it as the Government assuring it that it was the equal of its
former masters. It began to regard itself as a victim, and proceeded to
pillage, burn, and massacre, imagining that in so doing it was exercising a
right.
The great strength of the revolutionary principles was that they gave a
free course to the instincts of primitive barbarity which had been restrained
by the secular and inhibitory action of environment, tradition, and law.
All the social bonds that formerly contained the multitude were day by
day dissolving, so that it conceived a notion of unlimited power, and the joy
of seeing its ancient masters ferreted out and despoiled. Having become the
sovereign people, were not all things permissible to it?
The motto of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, a true manifestation of hope
and faith at the beginning of the Revolution, soon merely served to cover a
legal justification of the sentiments of jealousy, cupidity, and hatred of
superiors, the true motives of crowds unrestrained by discipline. This is
why the Revolution so soon ended in disorder, violence, and anarchy.
From the moment when the Revolution descended from the middle to
the lower classes of society, it ceased to be a domination of the instinctive
by the rational, and became, on the contrary, the effort of the instinctive to
overpower the rational.
This legal triumph of the atavistic instincts was terrible. The whole
effort of societies an effort indispensable to their continued existence—had
always been to restrain, thanks to the power of tradition, customs, and
codes, certain natural instincts which man has inherited from his primitive
animality. It is possible to dominate them—and the more a people does
overcome them the more civilised it is—but they cannot be destroyed. The
influence of various exciting causes will readily result in their reappearance.
This is why the liberation of popular passions is so dangerous. The
torrent, once escaped from its bed, does not return until it has spread
devastation far and wide. "Woe to him who stirs up the dregs of a nation,"
said Rivarol at the beginning of the Revolution. "There is no age of
enlightenment for the populace."
3. The supposed Part of the People during Revolution.
The laws of the psychology of crowds show us that the people never acts
without leaders, and that although it plays a considerable part in revolutions
by following and exaggerating the impulses received, it never directs its
own movements.
In all political revolutions we discover the action of leaders. They do
not create the ideas which serve as the basis of revolutions, but they utilise
them as a means of action. Ideas, leaders, armies, and crowds constitute
four elements which all have their part to play in revolutions.
The crowd, roused by the leaders, acts especially by means of its mass.
Its action is comparable to that of the shell which perforates an armour-plate
by the momentum of a force it did not create. Rarely does the crowd
understand anything of the revolutions accomplished with its assistance. It
obediently follows its leaders without even trying to find out what they
want. It overthrew Charles X. because of his Ordinances without having
any idea of the contents of the latter, and would have been greatly
embarrassed had it been asked at a later date why it overthrew Louis-
Philippe.
Deceived by appearances, many authors, from Michelet to Aulard, have
supposed that the people effected our great Revolution.
"The principal actor," said Michelet, "is the people."
"It is an error to say," writes M. Aulard, "that the French Revolution was
effected by a few distinguished people or a few heroes. . . . I believe that in
the whole history of the period included between 1789 and 1799 not a
single person stands out who led or shaped events: neither Louis XVI. nor
Mirabeau nor Danton nor Robespierre. Must we say that it was the French
people that was the real hero of the French Revolution? Yes—provided we
see the French people not as a multitude but as a number of organised
groups."
And in a recent work M. A. Cochin insists on this conception of popular
action.
"And here is the wonder: Michelet is right. In proportion as we know
them better the facts seem to consecrate the fiction: this crowd, without
chiefs and without laws, the very image of chaos, did for five years govern
and command, speak and act, with a precision, a consistency, and an
entirety that were marvellous. Anarchy gave lessons in order and discipline
to the defeated party of order . . . twenty-five millions of men, spread over
an area of 30,000 square leagues, acted as one."
Certainly if this simultaneous conduct of the people had been
spontaneous, as the author supposes, it would have been marvellous. M.
Aulard himself understands very well the impossibilities of such a
phenomenon, for he is careful, in speaking of the people, to say that he is
speaking of groups, and that these groups may have been guided by leaders:
—
"And what, then, cemented the national unity? Who saved
this nation, attacked by the king and rent by civil war? Was it
Danton? Was it Robespierre? Was it Carnot? Certainly these
individual men were of service: but unity was in fact
maintained and independence assured by the grouping of the
French into communes and popular societies—people's
clubs. It was the municipal and Jacobin organisation of
France that forced the coalition of Europe to retreat. But in
each group, if we look more closely, there were two or three
individuals more capable than the rest, who, whether leaders
or led, executed decisions and had the appearance of leaders,
but who (if, for instance, we read the proceedings of the
people's clubs) seem to us to have drawn their strength far
more from their group than from themselves.
M. Aulard's mistake consists in supposing that all these groups were
derived "from a spontaneous movement of fraternity and reason." France at
that time was covered with thousands of little clubs, receiving a single
impulsion from the great Jacobin Club of Paris, and obeying it with perfect
docility. This is what reality teaches us, though the illusions of the Jacobins
do not permit them to accept the fact.3
4. The Popular Entity and its Constituent Elements.
In order to answer to certain theoretical conceptions the people was erected
into a mystic entity, endowed with all the powers and all the virtues,
incessantly praised by the politicians, and overwhelmed with flattery. We
shall see what we are to make of this conception of the part played by the
people in the French Revolution.
To the Jacobins of this epoch, as to those of our own days, this popular
entity constitutes a superior personality possessing the attributes, peculiar to
divinities, of never having to answer for its actions and never making a
mistake. Its wishes must be humbly acceded. The people may kill, burn,
ravage, commit the most frightful cruelties, glorify its hero to-day and
throw him into the gutter to-morrow; it is all one; the politicians will not
cease to vaunt its virtues, its high wisdom, and to bow to its every
decision.4
Now in what does this entity really consist, this mysterious fetich which
revolutionists have revered for more than a century?
It may be decomposed into two distinct categories. The first includes the
peasants, traders, and workers of all sorts who need tranquillity and order
that they may exercise their calling. This people forms the majority, but a
majority which never caused a revolution. Living in laborious silence, it is
ignored by the historians.
The second category, which plays a capital part in all national
disturbances, consists of a subversive social residue dominated by a
criminal mentality. Degenerates of alcoholism and poverty, thieves,
beggars, destitute "casuals," indifferent workers without employment—
these constitute the dangerous bulk of the armies of insurrection.
The fear of punishment prevents many of them from becoming
criminals at ordinary times, but they do become criminals as soon as they
can exercise their evil instincts without danger.
To this sinister substratum are due the massacres which stain all
revolutions.
It was this class which, guided by its leaders, continually invaded the
great revolutionary Assemblies. These regiments of disorder had no other
ideal than that of massacre, pillage, and incendiarism. Their indifference to
theories and principles was complete.
To the elements recruited from the lowest dregs of the populace are
added, by way of contagion, a host of idle and indifferent persons who are
simply drawn into the movement. They shout because there are men
shouting, and revolt because there is a revolt, without having the vaguest
idea of the cause of shouting or revolution. The suggestive power of their
environment absolutely hypnotises them, and impels them to action.
These noisy and maleficent crowds, the kernel of all insurrections, from
antiquity to our own times, are the only crowds known to the orator. To the
orator they are the sovereign people. As a matter of fact this sovereign
people is principally composed of the lower populace of whom Thiers said:
—
"Since the time when Tacitus saw it applaud the crimes of
the emperors the vile populace has not changed. These
barbarians who swarm at the bottom of societies are always
ready to stain the people with every crime, at the beck of
every power, and to the dishonour of every cause."
At no period of history was the role of the lowest elements of the
population exercised in such a lasting fashion as in the French Revolution.
The massacres began as soon as the beast was unchained—that is, from
1789, long before the Convention. They were carried out with all possible
refinements of cruelty. During the killing of September the prisoners were
slowly chopped to bits by sabre- cuts in order to prolong their agonies and
amuse the spectators, who experienced the greatest delight before the
spectacle of the convulsions of the victims and their shrieks of agony.
Similar scenes were observed all over France, even in the early days of
the Revolution, although the foreign war did not excuse them then, nor any
other pretext.
From March to September a whole series of burnings, killings, and
pillagings drenched all France in blood. Taine cites one hundred and twenty
such cases. Rouen, Lyons, Strasbourg, &c., fell into the power of the
populace.
The Mayor of Troyes, his eyes destroyed by blows of scissors, was
murdered after hours of suffering. The Colonel of Dragoons Belzuce was
cut to pieces while living. In many places the hearts of the victims were torn
out and carried about the cities on the point of a pike.
Such is the behaviour of the base populace so soon as imprudent hands
have broken the network of constraints which binds its ancestral savagery.
It meets with every indulgence because it is in the interests of the politicians
to flatter it. But let us for a moment suppose the thousands of beings who
constitute it condensed into one single being. The personality thus formed
would appear as a cruel and narrow and abominable monster, more horrible
than the bloodiest tyrants of history.
This impulsive and ferocious people has always been easily dominated
so soon as a strong power has opposed it. If its violence is unlimited, so is
its servility. All the despotisms have had it for their servant. The Caesars are
certain of being acclaimed by it, whether they are named Caligula, Nero,
Marat, Robespierre, or Boulanger.
Beside these destructive hordes whose action during revolution is
capital, there exists, as we have already remarked, the mass of the true
people, which asks only the right to labour. It sometimes benefits by
revolutions, but never causes them. The revolutionary theorists know little
of it and distrust it, aware of its traditional and conservative basis. The
resistant nucleus of a country, it makes the strength and continuity of the
latter.
Extremely docile through fear, easily influenced by its leaders, it will
momentarily commit every excess while under their influence, but the
ancestral inertia of the race will soon take charge again, which is the reason
why it so quickly tires of revolution. Its traditional soul quickly incites it to
oppose itself to anarchy when the latter goes too far. At such times it seeks
the leader who will restore order.
This people, resigned and peaceable, has evidently no very lofty nor
complicated political conceptions. Its governmental ideal is always very
simple, is something very like dictatorship. This is why, from the times of
the Greeks to our own, dictatorship has always followed anarchy. It
followed it after the first Revolution, when Bonaparte was acclaimed, and
again when, despite opposition, four successive plebiscites raised Louis
Napoleon to the head of the republic, ratified his coup d'etat, re-established
the Empire, and in 1870, before the war, approved of his rule.
Doubtless in these last instances the people was deceived. But without
the revolutionary conspiracies which led to disorder, it would not have been
impelled to seek the means of escape therefrom.
The facts recalled in this chapter must not be forgotten if we wish fully
to comprehend the various roles of the people during revolution. Its action
is considerable, but very unlike that imagined by the legends whose
repetition alone constitutes their vitality.
3. In the historical manuals which M. Aulard has prepared for the use of classes in collaboration
with M. Debidour the role attributed to the people as an entity is even more marked. We see it
intervening continually and spontaneously; here are a few examples:—
The "Day" of June the 20th: "The king dismissed the Girondist members. The people of Paris,
indignant, rose spontaneously and invaded the Tuileries."
The "Day" of August 10th: "The Legislative Assembly dared not overthrow it; it was the
people of Paris, aided by the Federals of the Departments, who effected this revolution at the
price of its blood."
The conflict of the Girondists and the Mountain: "This discord in the face of the enemy
was dangerous. The people put an end to it on the days of the 31st of May and the 2nd of June,
1793, when it forced the Convention to expel the leaders of the Gironde from its midst and to
decree their arrest."
4. These pretensions do at least seem to be growing untenable to the more advanced republicans.
"The rage with the socialists" writes M. Clemenceau, "is to endow with all the virtues, as
though by a superhuman reason, the crowd whose reason cannot be much to boast of." The
famous statesman might say more correctly that reason not only cannot be prominent in the
crowd but is practically nonexistent.
Book II.
The Forms of Mentality Prevalent During
Revolution
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Individual Variations of Character in Time of
Revolution
Table of Contents
1. Transformations of Personality.
I have dwelt at length elsewhere upon a certain theory of character, without
which it is absolutely impossible to understand divers transformations or
inconsistencies of conduct which occur at certain moments, notably in time
of revolution. Here are the principal points of this theory:
Every individual possesses, besides his habitual mentality, which, when
the environment does not alter, is almost constant, various possibilities of
character which may be evoked by passing events.
The people who surround us are the creatures of certain circumstances,
but not of all circumstances. Our ego consists of the association of
innumerable cellular egos, the residues of ancestral personalities. By their
combination they form an equilibrium which is fairly permanent when the
social environment does not vary. As soon as this environment is
considerably modified, as in time of insurrection, this equilibrium is broken,
and the dissociated elements constitute, by a fresh aggregation, a new
personality, which is manifested by ideas, feelings, and actions very
different from those formerly observed in the same individual. Thus it is
that during the Terror we see honest bourgeois and peaceful magistrates
who were noted for their kindness turned into bloodthirsty fanatics.
Under the influence of environment the old personality may therefore
give place to one entirely new. For this reason the actors in great religious
and political crises often seem of a different essence to ourselves; yet they
do not differ from us; the repetition of the same events would bring back the
same men.
Napoleon perfectly understood these possibilities of character when he
said, in Saint Helena:—
"It is because I know just how great a part chance plays in
our political decisions, that I have always been without
prejudices, and very indulgent as to the part men have taken
during our disturbances. . . . In time of revolution one can
only say what one has done; it would not be wise to say that
one could not have done otherwise. . . . Men are difficult to
understand if we want to be just. . . . Do they know
themselves? Do they account for themselves very clearly?
There are virtues and vices of circumstance."
When the normal personality has been disaggregated under the
influence of certain events, how does the new personality form itself? By
several means, the most active of which is the acquisition of a strong belief.
This orientates all the elements of the understanding, as the magnet collects
into regular curves the filings of a magnetic metal.
Thus were formed the personalities observed in times of great crises: the
Crusades, the Reformation, the Revolution notably.
At normal times the environment varies little, so that as a rule we see
only a single personality in the individuals that surround us. Sometimes,
however, it happens that we observe several, which in certain circumstances
may replace one another.
These personalities may be contradictory and even inimical. This
phenomenon, exceptional under normal conditions, is considerably
accentuated in certain pathological conditions. Morbid psychology has
recorded several examples of multiple personality in a single subject, such
as the cases cited by Morton Prince and Pierre Janet.
In all these variations of personality it is not the intelligence which is
modified, but the feelings, whose association forms the character.
2. Elements of Character Predominant in Time of Revolution.
During revolution we see several sentiments developed which are
commonly repressed, but to which the destruction of social constraints
gives a free vent.
These constraints, consisting of the law, morality, and tradition, are not
always completely broken. Some survive the upheaval and serve to some
extent to damp the explosion of dangerous sentiments.
The most powerful of these restraints is the soul of the race. This
determines a manner of seeing, feeling, and willing common to the majority
of the individuals of the same people; it constitutes a hereditary custom, and
nothing is more powerful than the ties of custom.
This racial influence limits the variations of a people and determines its
destiny within certain limits in spite of all superficial changes.
For example, to take only the instances of history, it would seem that the
mentality of France must have varied enormously during a single century.
In a few years it passed from the Revolution to Caesarism, returned to the
monarchy, effected another Revolution, and then summoned a new Caesar.
In reality only the outsides of things had changed.
We cannot insist further here on the limits of national variability, but
must now consider the influence of certain affective elements, whose
development during revolution contributes to modify individual or
collective personalities. In particular I will mention hatred, fear, ambition,
jealousy or envy, vanity, and enthusiasm. We observe their influence during
several of the upheavals of history, notably during the course of the French
Revolution, which will furnish us with most of our examples.
Hatred.—The hatred of persons, institutions, and things which animated
the men of the Revolution is one of these affective phenomena which are
the more striking the more one studies their psychology. They detested, not
only their enemies, but the members of their own party. "If one were to
accept unreservedly," said a recent writer, "the judgments which they
expressed of one another, we should have to conclude that they were all
traitors and boasters, all incapable and corrupt, all assassins or tyrants." We
know with what hatred, scarcely appeased by the death of their enemies,
men persecuted the Girondists, Dantonists, Hebertists, Robespierrists, &c.
One of the chief causes of this feeling resided in the fact that these
furious sectaries, being apostles in possession of the absolute verity, were
unable, like all believers, to tolerate the sight of infidels. A mystic or
sentimental certitude is always accompanied by the need of forcing itself on
others, is never convinced, and does not shrink from wholesale slaughter
when it has the power to commit it.
If the hatreds that divided the men of the Revolution had been of
rational origin they would not have lasted long, but, arising from affective
and mystic factors, men could neither forget nor forgive. Their sources
being identical in the different parties, they manifested themselves on every
hand with identical violence.
It has been proved, by means of documents, that the Girondists were no
less sanguinary than the Montagnards. They were the first to declare, with
Petion, that the vanquished parties should perish. They also, according to
M. Aulard, attempted to justify the massacres of September. The Terror
must not be considered simply as a means of defence, but as the general
process of destruction to which triumphant believers have always treated
their detested enemies. Men who can put up with the greatest divergence of
ideas cannot tolerate differences of belief.
In religious or political warfare the vanquished can hope for no quarter.
From Sulla, who cut the throats of two hundred senators and five or six
thousand Romans, to the men who suppressed the Commune, and shot
down more than twenty thousand after their victory, this bloody law has
never failed. Proved over and over again in the past, it will doubtless be so
in the future.
The hatreds of the Revolution did not arise entirely from divergence of
belief. Other sentiments—envy, ambition, and self-love—also engendered
them. The rivalry of individuals aspiring to power led the chiefs of the
various groups in succession to the scaffold.
We must remember, moreover, that the need of division and the hatred
resulting therefrom seem to be constituent elements of the Latin mind. They
cost our Gaulish ancestors their independence, and had already struck
Caesar.
"No city," he said, "but was divided into two factions; no canton, no
village, no house in which the spirit of party did not breathe. It was very
rarely that a year went by without a city taking up arms to attack or repulse
its neighbours."
As man has only recently entered upon the age of knowledge, and has
always hitherto been guided by sentiments and beliefs, we may conceive
the vast importance of hatred as a factor of his history.
Commandant Colin, professor at the College of War, remarks in the
following terms on the importance of this feeling during certain wars:—
"In war more than at any other time there is no better
inspiring force than hatred; it was hatred that made Blucher
victorious over Napoleon. Analyse the most wonderful
manoeuvres, the most decisive operations, and if they are not
the work of an exceptional man, a Frederick or a Napoleon,
you will find they are inspired by passion more than by
calculation. What would the war of 1870 have been without
the hatred which we bore the Germans?"
The writer might have added that the intense hatred of the Japanese for
the Russians, who had so humiliated them, might be classed among the
causes of their success. The Russian soldiers, ignorant of the very existence
of the Japanese, had no animosity against them, which was one of the
reasons of their failure.
There was assuredly a good deal of talk of fraternity at the time of the
Revolution, and there is even more to-day. Pacificism, humanitarianism,
and solidarity have become catchwords of the advanced parties, but we
know how profound are the hatreds concealed beneath these terms, and
what dangers overhang our modern society.
Fear.—Fear plays almost as large a part in revolutions as hatred. During
the French Revolution there were many examples of great individual
courage and many exhibitions of collective cowardice.
Facing the scaffold, the men of the Convention were always brave in the
extreme; but before the threats of the rioters who invaded the Assembly
they constantly exhibited an excessive pusillanimity, obeying the most
absurd injunctions, as we shall see if we re-read the history of the
revolutionary Assemblies.
All the forms of fear were observed at this period. One of the most
widespread was the fear of appearing moderate. Members of the
Assemblies, public prosecutors, representatives "on mission," judges of the
revolutionary tribunals, &c., all sought to appear more advanced than their
rivals. Fear was one of the principal elements of the crimes committed at
this period. If by some miracle it could have been eliminated from the
revolutionary Assemblies, their conduct would have been quite other than it
was, and the Revolution itself would have taken a very different direction.
Ambition, Envy, Vanity, &c.—In normal times the influence of these
various affective elements is forcibly contained by social necessities.
Ambition, for instance, is necessarily limited in a hierarchical form of
society. Although the soldier does sometimes become a general, it is only
after a long term of service. In time of revolution, on the other hand, there is
no need to wait. Every one may reach the upper ranks almost immediately,
so that all ambitions are violently aroused. The humblest man believes
himself fitted for the highest employments, and by this very fact his vanity
grows out of all measure.
All the passions being more or less aroused, including ambition and
vanity, we see the development of jealousy and envy of those who have
succeeded more quickly than others.
The effect of jealousy, always important in times of revolution, was
especially so during the great French Revolution. Jealousy of the nobility
constituted one of its most important factors. The middle classes had
increased in capacity and wealth, to the point of surpassing the nobility.
Although they mingled with the nobles more and more, they felt, none the
less, that they were held at a distance, and this they keenly resented. This
frame of mind had unconsciously made the bourgeoisie keen supporters of
the philosophic doctrine of equality.
Wounded self-love and jealousy were thus the causes of hatreds that we
can scarcely conceive today, when the social influence of the nobility is so
small. Many members of the Convention—Carrier, Marat, and others—
remembered with anger that they had once occupied subordinate positions
in the establishments of great nobles. Mme. Roland was never able to forget
that, when she and her mother were invited to the house of a great lady
under the ancien regime, they had been sent to dine in the servants' quarters.
The philosopher Rivarol has very well described in the following
passage, already cited by Taine, the influence of wounded self- love and
jealousy upon the revolutionary hatreds:—
"It is not," he writes, "the taxes, nor the lettres de cachet, nor
any of the other abuses of authority; it is not the sins of the
intendants, nor the long and ruinous delays of justice, that
has most angered the nation; it is the prejudices of the
nobility for which it has exhibited the greatest hatred. What
proves this clearly is the fact that it is the bourgeois, the men
of letters, the men of money, in fact all those who are jealous
of the nobility, who have raised the poorer inhabitants of the
cities against them, and the peasants in the country districts."
This very true statement partly justifies the saying of Napoleon:
"Vanity made the Revolution; liberty was only the pretext."
Enthusiasm.—The enthusiasm of the founders of the Revolution
equalled that of the apostles of the faith of Mohammed. And it was really a
religion that the bourgeois of the first Assembly thought to found. They
thought to have destroyed an old world, and to have built a new one upon
its ruins. Never did illusion more seductive fire the hearts of men. Equality
and fraternity, proclaimed by the new dogmas, were to bring the reign of
eternal happiness to all the peoples. Man had broken for ever with a past of
barbarity and darkness. The regenerated world would in future be
illuminated by the lucid radiance of pure reason. On all hands the most
brilliant oratorical formulae saluted the expected dawn.
That this enthusiasm was so soon replaced by violence was due to the
fact that the awakening was speedy and terrible. One can readily conceive
the indignant fury with which the apostles of the Revolution attacked the
daily obstacles opposed to the realisation of their dreams. They had sought
to reject the past, to forget tradition, to make man over again. But the past
reappeared incessantly, and men refused to change. The reformers, checked
in their onward march, would not give in. They sought to impose by force a
dictatorship which speedily made men regret the system abolished, and
finally led to its return.
It is to be remarked that although the enthusiasm of the first days did
not last in the revolutionary Assemblies, it survived very much longer in the
armies, and constituted their chief strength. To tell the truth, the armies of
the Revolution were republican long before France became so, and
remained republican long after France had ceased to be so.
The variations of character considered in this chapter, being conditioned
by certain common aspirations and identical changes of environment,
finally became concrete in a small number of fairly homogeneous
mentalities. Speaking only of the more characteristic, we may refer them to
four types: the Jacobin, mystic, revolutionary, and criminal mentalities.
Chapter II.
The Mystic Mentality and the Jacobin Mentality
Table of Contents
1. Classification of Mentalities predominant in Time of Revolution.
The classifications without which the study of the sciences is impossible
must necessarily establish the discontinuous in the continuous, and for that
reason are to a certain extent artificial. But they are necessary, since the
continuous is only accessible in the form of the discontinuous.
To create broad distinctions between the various mentalities observable
in time of revolution, as we are about to do, is obviously to separate
elements which encroach upon one another, which are fused or
superimposed. We must resign ourselves to losing a little in exactitude in
order to gain in lucidity. The fundamental types enumerated at the end of
the preceding chapter, and which we are about to describe, synthetise
groups which would escape analysis were we to attempt to study them in all
their complexity.
We have shown that man is influenced by different logics, which under
normal conditions exist in juxtaposition, without mutually influencing one
another. Under the action of various events they enter into mutual conflict,
and the irreducible differences which divide them are visibly manifested,
involving considerable individual and social upheavals.
Mystic logic, which we shall presently consider as it appears in the
Jacobin mind, plays a very important part. But it is not alone in its action.
The other forms of logic—affective logic, collective logic, and rational
logic—may predominate according to circumstances.
2. The Mystic Mentality.
Leaving aside for the moment the influence of affective, rational, and
collective logic, we will occupy ourselves solely with the considerable part
played by the mystic elements which have prevailed in so many
revolutions, and notably in the French Revolution.
The chief characteristic of the mystic temperament consists in the
attribution of a mysterious power to superior beings or forces, which are
incarnated in the form of idols, fetiches, words, or formulae.
The mystic spirit is at the bottom of all the religious and most political
beliefs. These latter would often vanish could we deprive them of the
mystic elements which are their chief support.
Grafted on the sentiments and passionate impulses which it directs,
mystic logic constitutes the might of the great popular movements. Men
who would be by no means ready to allow themselves to be killed for the
best of reasons will readily sacrifice their lives to a mystic ideal which has
become an object of adoration.
The principles of the Revolution speedily inspired a wave of mystic
enthusiasm analogous to those provoked by the various religious beliefs
which had preceded it. All they did was to change the orientation of a
mental ancestry which the centuries had solidified.
So there is nothing astonishing in the savage zeal of the men of the
Convention. Their mystic mentality was the same as that of the Protestants
at the time of the Reformation. The principal heroes of the Terror—
Couthon, Saint-Just, Robespierre, &c.—were Apostles. Like Polyeuctes,
destroying the altars of the false gods to propagate his faith, they dreamed
of converting the globe. Their enthusiasm spilled itself over the earth.
Persuaded that their magnificent formulae were sufficient to overturn
thrones, they did not hesitate to declare war upon kings. And as a strong
faith is always superior to a doubtful faith, they victoriously faced all
Europe.
The mystic spirit of the leaders of the Revolution was betrayed in the
least details of their public life. Robespierre, convinced that he was
supported by the Almighty, assured his hearers in a speech that the Supreme
Being had "decreed the Republic since the beginning of time." In his quality
of High Pontiff of a State religion he made the Convention vote a decree
declaring that "the French People recognises the existence of the Supreme
Being and the immortality of the soul." At the festival of this Supreme
Being, seated on a kind of throne, he preached a lengthy sermon.
The Jacobin Club, directed by Robespierre, finally assumed all the
functions of a council. There Maximilien proclaimed "the idea of a Great
Being who watches over oppressed innocence and who punishes triumphant
crime."
All the heretics who criticised the Jacobin orthodoxy were
excommunicated—that is, were sent to the Revolutionary Tribunal, which
they left only for the scaffold.
The mystic mentality of which Robespierre was the most celebrated
representative did not die with him. Men of identical mentality are to be
found among the French politicians of to-day. The old religious beliefs no
longer rule their minds, but they are the creatures of political creeds which
they would very soon force on others, as did Robespierre, if they had the
chance of so doing. Always ready to kill if killing would spread their faith,
the mystics of all ages have employed the same means of persuasion as
soon as they have become the masters.
It is therefore quite natural that Robespierre should still have many
admirers. Minds moulded like his are to be met with in their thousands. His
conceptions were not guillotined with him. Old as humanity, they will only
disappear with the last believer.
This mystic aspect of all revolutions has escaped the majority of the
historians. They will persist for a long time yet in trying to explain by
means of rational logic a host of phenomena which have nothing to do with
reason. I have already cited a passage from the history of MM. Lavisse and
Rambaud, in which the Reformation is explained as "the result of the free
individual reflections suggested to simple folk by an extremely pious
conscience, and a bold and courageous reason."
Such movements are never comprehended by those who imagine that
their origin is rational. Political or religious, the beliefs which have moved
the world possess a common origin and follow the same laws. They are
formed, not by the reason, but more often contrary to reason. Buddhism,
Christianity, Islamism, the Reformation, sorcery, Jacobinism, socialism,
spiritualism, &c., seem very different forms of belief, but they have, I
repeat, identical mystic and affective bases, and obey forms of logic which
have no affinity with rational logic. Their might resides precisely in the fact
that reason has as little power to create them as to transform them.
The mystic mentality of our modern political apostles is strongly
marked in an article dealing with one of our recent ministers, which I cite
from a leading journal:
"One may ask into what category does M. A——fall? Could we say,
for instance, that he belongs to the group of unbelievers? Far from it!
Certainly M. A—— has not adopted any positive faith; certainly he
curses Rome and Geneva, rejecting all the traditional dogmas and all
the known Churches. But if he makes a clean sweep it is in order to
found his own Church on the ground so cleared, a Church more
dogmatic than all the rest; and his own inquisition, whose brutal
intolerance would have no reason to envy the most notorious of
Torquemadas.
" 'We cannot,' he says, 'allow such a thing as scholastic neutrality.
We demand lay instruction in all its plenitude, and are consequently
the enemies of educational liberty.' If he does not suggest erecting the
stake and the pyre, it is only on account of the evolution of manners,
which he is forced to take into account to a certain extent, whether he
will or no. But, not being able to commit men to the torture, he invokes
the secular arm to condemn their doctrines to death. This is exactly the
point of view of the great inquisitors. It is the same attack upon
thought. This freethinker has so free a spirit that every philosophy he
does not accept appears to him, not only ridiculous and grotesque, but
criminal. He flatters himself that he alone is in possession of the
absolute truth. Of this he is so entirely sure that everyone who
contradicts him seems to him an execrable monster and a public
enemy. He does not suspect for a moment that after all his personal
views are only hypotheses, and that he is all the more laughable for
claiming a Divine right for them precisely because they deny divinity.
Or, at least, they profess to do so; but they re-establish it in another
shape, which immediately makes one regret the old. M. A—— is a
sectary of the goddess Reason, of whom he has made a Moloch, an
oppressive deity hungry for sacrifice. No more liberty of thought for
any one except for himself and his friends; such is the free thought of
M. A——. The outlook is truly attractive. But perhaps too many idols
have been cast down during the last few centuries for men to bow
before this one."
We must hope for the sake of liberty that these gloomy fanatics will
never finally become our masters.
Given the silent power of reason over mystic beliefs, it is quite useless
to seek to discuss, as is so often done, the rational value of revolutionary or
political ideas. Only their influence can interest us. It matters little that the
theories of the supposed equality of men, the original goodness of mankind,
the possibility of re-making society by means of laws, have been given the
lie by observation and experience. These empty illusions must be counted
among the most potent motives of action that humanity has known.
3. The Jacobin Mentality.
Although the term "Jacobin mentality" does not really belong to any true
classification, I employ it here because it sums up a clearly defined
combination which constitutes a veritable psychological species.
This mentality dominates the men of the French Revolution, but is not
peculiar to them, as it still represents one of the most active elements in our
politics.
The mystic mentality which we have already considered is an essential
factor of the Jacobin mind, but it is not in itself enough to constitute that
mind. Other elements, which we shall now examine, must be added.
The Jacobins do not in the least suspect their mysticism. On the
contrary, they profess to be guided solely by pure reason. During the
Revolution they invoked reason incessantly, and considered it as their only
guide to conduct.
The majority of historians have adopted this rationalist conception of
the Jacobin mind, and Taine fell into the same error. It is in the abuse of
rationalism that he seeks the origin of a great proportion of the acts of the
Jacobins. The pages in which he has dealt with the subject contain many
truths, however, and as they are in other ways very remarkable, I reproduce
the most important passages here:—
"Neither exaggerated self-love nor dogmatic reasoning is
rare in the human species. In all countries these two roots of
the Jacobin spirit subsist, secret and indestructible. . . . At
twenty years of age, when a young man is entering into the
world, his reason is stimulated simultaneously with his pride.
In the first place, whatever society he may move in, it is
contemptible to pure reason, for it has not been constructed
by a philosophic legislator according to a principle, but
successive generations have arranged it according to their
multiple and ever-changing needs. It is not the work of logic,
but of history, and the young reasoner shrugs his shoulders at
the sight of this old building, whose site is arbitrary, whose
architecture is incoherent, and whose inconveniences are
obvious. . . . The majority of young people, above all those
who have their way to make, are more or less Jacobin on
leaving college. . . . Jacobinism is born of social
decomposition just as mushrooms are born of a fermenting
soil. Consider the authentic monuments of its thought—the
speeches of Robespierre and Saint-Just, the debates of the
Legislative Assembly and the Convention, the harangues,
addresses, and reports of Girondists and Montagnards. Never
did men speak so much to say so little; the empty verbiage
and swollen emphasis swamp any truth there may be beneath
their monotony and their turgidity. The Jacobin is full of
respect for the phantoms of his reasoning brain; in his eyes
they are more real than living men, and their suffrage is the
only suffrage he recognises—he will march onward in all
sincerity at the head of a procession of imaginary followers.
The millions of metaphysical wills which he has created in
the image of his own will sustain him by their unanimous
assent, and he will project outwards, like a chorus of triumph
and acclamation, the inward echo of his own voice."
While admiring Taine's description, I think he has not exactly grasped
the psychology of the Jacobin.
The mind of the true Jacobin, at the time of the Revolution as now, was
composed of elements which we must analyse if we are to understand its
function.
This analysis will show in the first place that the Jacobin is not a
rationalist, but a believer. Far from building his belief on reason, he moulds
reason to his belief, and although his speeches are steeped in rationalism he
employs it very little in his thoughts and his conduct.
A Jacobin who reasoned as much as he is accused of reasoning would
be sometimes accessible to the voice of reason. Now, observation proves,
from the time of the Revolution to our own days, that the Jacobin is never
influenced by reasoning, however just, and it is precisely here that his
strength resides.
And why is he not accessible to reason? Simply because his vision of
things, always extremely limited, does not permit of his resisting the
powerful and passionate impulses which guide him.
These two elements, feeble reason and strong passions, would not of
themselves constitute the Jacobin mind. There is another.
Passion supports convictions, but hardly ever creates them. Now, the
true Jacobin has forcible convictions. What is to sustain them? Here the
mystic elements whose action we have already studied come into play. The
Jacobin is a mystic who has replaced the old divinities by new gods.
Imbued with the power of words and formulae, he attributes to these a
mysterious power. To serve these exigent divinities he does not shrink from
the most violent measures. The laws voted by our modern Jacobins furnish
a proof of this fact.
The Jacobin mentality is found especially in narrow and passionate
characters. It implies, in fact, a narrow and rigid mind, inaccessible to all
criticism and to all considerations but those of faith.
The mystic and affective elements which dominate the mind of the
Jacobin condemn him to an extreme simplicity. Grasping only the
superficial relations of things, nothing prevents him from taking for realities
the chimerical images which are born of his imagination. The sequence of
phenomena and their results escape him. He never raises his eyes from his
dream.
As we may see, it is not by the development of his logical reason that
the Jacobin exceeds. He possesses very little logic of this kind, and
therefore he often becomes dangerous. Where a superior man would
hesitate or halt the Jacobin, who has placed his feeble reason at the service
of his impulses, goes forward with certainty.
So that although the Jacobin is a great reasoner, this does not mean that
he is in the least guided by reason. When he imagines he is being led by
reason it is really his passions and his mysticism that lead him. Like all
those who are convinced and hemmed in by the walls of faith, he can never
escape therefrom.
A true aggressive theologian, he is astonishingly like the disciples of
Calvin described in a previous chapter. Hypnotised by their faith, nothing
could deter them from their object. All those who contradicted their articles
of faith were considered worthy of death. They too seemed to be powerful
reasoners. Ignorant, like the Jacobins, of the secret forces that led them,
they believed that reason was their sole guide, while in reality they were the
slaves of mysticism and passion.
The truly rationalistic Jacobin would be incomprehensible, and would
merely make reason despair. The passionate and mystical Jacobin is, on the
contrary, easily intelligible.
With these three elements—a very weak reasoning power, very strong
passions, and an intense mysticism—we have the true psychological
components of the mind of the Jacobin.
Chapter III.
The Revolutionary and Criminal Mentalities
Table of Contents
1. The Revolutionary Mentality.
We have just seen that the mystic elements are one of the components of the
Jacobin mentality. We shall now see that they enter into another form of
mentality which is also clearly defined, the revolutionary mentality.
In all ages societies have contained a certain number of restless spirits,
unstable and discontented, ready to rebel against any established order of
affairs. They are actuated by the mere love of revolt, and if some magic
power could realise all their desires they would simply revolt again.
This special mentality often results from a faulty adaptation of the
individual to his surroundings, or from an excess of mysticism, but it may
also be merely a question of temperament or arise from pathological
disturbances.
The need of revolt presents very different degrees of intensity, from
simple discontent expressed in words directed against men and things to the
need of destroying them. Sometimes the individual turns upon himself the
revolutionary frenzy that he cannot otherwise exercise. Russia is full of
these madmen, who, not content with committing arson or throwing bombs
at hazard into the crowd, finally mutilate themselves, like the Skopzis and
other analogous sects.
These perpetual rebels are generally highly suggestible beings, whose
mystic mentality is obsessed by fixed ideas. Despite the apparent energy
indicated by their actions they are really weak characters, and are incapable
of mastering themselves sufficiently to resist the impulses that rule them.
The mystic spirit which animates them furnishes pretexts for their violence,
and enables them to regard themselves as great reformers.
In normal times the rebels which every society contains are restrained
by the laws, by their environment—in short, by all the usual social
constraints, and therefore remain undetected. But as soon as a time of
disturbance begins these constraints grow weaker, and the rebel can give a
free reign to his instincts. He then becomes the accredited leader of a
movement. The motive of the revolution matters little to him; he will give
his life indifferently for the red flag or the white, or for the liberation of a
country which he has heard vaguely mentioned.
The revolutionary spirit is not always pushed to the extremes which
render it dangerous. When, instead of deriving from affective or mystic
impulses, it has an intellectual origin, it may become a source of progress. It
is thanks to those spirits who are sufficiently independent to be
intellectually revolutionary that a civilisation is able to escape from the
yoke of tradition and habit when this becomes too heavy. The sciences, arts,
and industries especially have progressed by the aid of such men. Galileo,
Lavoisier, Darwin, and Pasteur were such revolutionaries.
Although it is not necessary that a nation should possess any large
number of such spirits, it is very necessary that it should possess some.
Without them men would still be living in caves.
The revolutionary audacity which results in discoveries implies very
rare faculties. It necessitates notably an independence of mind sufficient to
escape from the influence of current opinions, and a judgement that can
grasp, under superficial analogies, the hidden realities. This form of
revolutionary spirit is creative, while that examined above is destructive.
The revolutionary mentality may, therefore, be compared to certain
physiological states in the life of the individual which are normally useful,
but which, when exaggerated, take a pathological form which is always
hurtful.
2. The Criminal Mentality.
All the civilised societies inevitably drag behind them a residue of
degenerates, of the unadapted, of persons affected by various taints.
Vagabonds, beggars, fugitives from justice, thieves, assassins, and starving
creatures that live from day to day, may constitute the criminal population
of the great cities. In ordinary times these waste products of civilisation are
more or less restrained by the police. During revolution nothing restrains
them, and they can easily gratify their instincts to murder and plunder. In
the dregs of society the revolutionaries of all times are sure of finding
recruits. Eager only to kill and to plunder, little matters to them the cause
they are sworn to defend. If the chances of murder and pillage are better in
the party attacked, they will promptly change their colours.
To these criminals, properly so called, the incurable plague of all
societies, we must add the class of semi-criminals. Wrongdoers on
occasion, they never rebel so long as the fear of the established order
restrains them, but as soon as it weakens they enrol themselves in the army
of revolution.
These two categories—habitual and occasional criminals—form an
army of disorder which is fit for nothing but the creation of disorder. All the
revolutionaries, all the founders of religious or political leagues, have
constantly counted on their support.
We have already stated that this population, with its criminal mentality,
exercised a considerable influence during the French Revolution. It always
figured in the front rank of the riots which occurred almost daily. Certain
historians have spoken with respect and emotion of the way in which the
sovereign people enforced its will upon the Convention, invading the hall
armed with pikes, the points of which were sometimes decorated with
newly severed heads. If we analyse the elements composing the pretended
delegations of the sovereign people, we shall find that, apart from a small
number of simple souls who submitted to the impulses of the leaders, the
mass was almost entirely formed of the bandits of whom I have been
speaking. To them were due the innumerable murders of which the
massacres of September and the killing of the Princesse de Lamballe were
merely typical.
They terrorised all the great Assemblies, from the Constituent Assembly
to the Convention, and for ten years they helped to ravage France. If by
some miracle this army of criminals could have been eliminated, the
progress of the Revolution would have been very different. They stained it
with blood from its dawn to its decline. Reason could do nothing with them
but they could do much against reason.
Chapter IV.
The Psychology of Revolutionary Crowds
Table of Contents
1. General Characteristics of the Crowd.
Whatever their origin, revolutions do not produce their full effects until they
have penetrated the soul of the multitude. They therefore represent a
consequence of the psychology of crowds.
Although I have studied collective psychology at length in another
volume, I must here recall its principal laws.
Man, as part of a multitude, is a very different being from the same man
as an isolated individual. His conscious individuality vanishes in the
unconscious personality of the crowd.
Material contact is not absolutely necessary to produce in the individual
the mentality of the crowd. Common passions and sentiments, provoked by
certain events, are often sufficient to create it.
The collective mind, momentarily formed, represents a very special
kind of aggregate. Its chief peculiarity is that it is entirely dominated by
unconscious elements, and is subject to a peculiar collective logic.
Among the other characteristics of crowds, we must note their infinite
credulity and exaggerated sensibility, their short- sightedness, and their
incapacity to respond to the influences of reason. Affirmation, contagion,
repetition, and prestige constitute almost the only means of persuading
them. Reality and experience have no effect upon them. The multitude will
admit anything; nothing is impossible in the eyes of the crowd.
By reason of the extreme sensibility of crowds, their sentiments, good
or bad, are always exaggerated. This exaggeration increases still further in
times of revolution. The least excitement will then lead the multitude to act
with the utmost fury. Their credulity, so great even in the normal state, is
still further increased; the most improbable statements are accepted. Arthur
Young relates that when he visited the springs near Clermont, at the time of
the French Revolution, his guide was stopped by the people, who were
persuaded that he had come by order of the Queen to mine and blow up the
town. The most horrible tales concerning the Royal Family were circulated,
depicting it as a nest of ghouls and vampires.
These various characteristics show that man in the crowd descends to a
very low degree in the scale of civilisation. He becomes a savage, with all a
savage's faults and qualities, with all his momentary violence, enthusiasm,
and heroism. In the intellectual domain a crowd is always inferior to the
isolated unit. In the moral and sentimental domain it may be his superior. A
crowd will commit a crime as readily as an act of abnegation.
Personal characteristics vanish in the crowd, which exerts an
extraordinary influence upon the individuals which form it. The miser
becomes generous, the sceptic a believer, the honest man a criminal, the
coward a hero. Examples of such transformations abounded during the great
Revolution.
As part of a jury or a parliament, the collective man renders verdicts or
passes laws of which he would never have dreamed in his isolated
condition.
One of the most notable consequences of the influence of a collectivity
upon the individuals who compose it is the unification of their sentiments
and wills. This psychological unity confers a remarkable force upon
crowds.
The formation of such a mental unity results chiefly from the fact that in
a crowd gestures and actions are extremely contagious. Acclamations of
hatred, fury, or love are immediately approved and repeated.
What is the origin of these common sentiments, this common will?
They are propagated by contagion, but a point of departure is necessary
before this contagion can take effect. Without a leader the crowd is an
amorphous entity incapable of action.
A knowledge of the laws relating to the psychology of crowds is
indispensable to the interpretation of the elements of our Revolution, and to
a comprehension of the conduct of revolutionary assemblies, and the
singular transformations of the individuals who form part of them. Pushed
by the unconscious forces of the collective soul, they more often than not
say what they did not intend, and vote what they would not have wished to
vote.
Although the laws of collective psychology have sometimes been
divined instinctively by superior statesmen, the majority of Governments
have not understood and do not understand them. It is because they do not
understand them that so many of them have fallen so easily. When we see
the facility with which certain Governments were overthrown by an
insignificant riot—as happened in the case of the monarchy of Louis-
Philippe—the dangers of an ignorance of collective psychology are evident.
The marshal in command of the troops in 1848, which were more than
sufficient to defend the king, certainly did not understand that the moment
he allowed the crowd to mingle with the troops the latter, paralysed by
suggestion and contagion, would cease to do their duty. Neither did he
know that as the multitude is extremely sensible to prestige it needs a great
display of force to impress it, and that such a display will at once suppress
hostile demonstrations. He was equally ignorant of the fact that all
gatherings should be dispersed immediately. All these things have been
taught by experience, but in 1848 these lessons had not been grasped. At the
time of the great Revolution the psychology of crowds was even less
understood.
2. How the Stability of the Racial Mind limits the Oscillations of the Mind
of the Crowd.
A people can in a sense be likened to a crowd. It possesses certain
characteristics, but the oscillations of these characteristics are limited by the
soul or mind of the race. The mind of the race has a fixity unknown to the
transitory mind of the crowd.
When a people possesses an ancestral soul established by a long past the
soul of the crowd is always dominated thereby.
A people differs from a crowd also in that it is composed of a collection
of groups, each having different interests and passions. In a crowd properly
so-called—a popular assembly, for example—there are unities which may
belong to very different social categories.
A people sometimes seems as mobile as a crowd, but we must not forget
that behind its mobility, its enthusiasms, its violence and destructiveness,
the extremely tenacious and conservative instincts of the racial mind persist.
The history of the Revolution and the century which has followed shows
how the conservative spirit finally overcomes the spirit of destruction. More
than one system of government which the people has shattered has been
restored by the people.
It is not as easy to work upon the mind of the people—that is, the mind
of the race—as on the mind of a crowd. The means of action are indirect
and slower (journals, conferences, speeches, books, &c.). The elements of
persuasion always come under the headings already given: affirmation,
repetition, prestige, and contagion.
Mental contagion may affect a whole people instantaneously, but more
often it operates slowly, creeping from group to group. Thus was the
Reformation propagated in France.
A people is far less excitable than a crowd; but certain events— national
insults, threats of invasion, &c.—may arouse it instantly. Such a
phenomenon was observed on several occasions during the Revolution,
notably at the time of the insolent manifesto issued by the Duke of
Brunswick. The Duke knew little indeed of the psychology of the French
race when he proffered his threats. Not only did he considerably prejudice
the cause of Louis XVI.; but he also damaged his own, since his
intervention raised from the soil an army eager to fight him.
This sudden explosion of feeling throughout a whole race has been
observed in all nations. Napoleon did not understand the power of such
explosions when he invaded Spain and Russia. One may easily disaggregate
the facile mind of a crowd, but one can do nothing before the permanent
soul of a race. Certainly the Russian peasant is a very indifferent being,
gross and narrow by nature, yet at the first news of invasion he was
transformed. One may judge of this fact on reading a letter written by
Elizabeth, wife of the Emperor Alexander I.
"From the moment when Napoleon had crossed our frontiers
it was as though an electric spark had spread through all
Russia; and if the immensity of its area had made it possible
for the news to penetrate simultaneously to every corner of
the Empire a cry of indignation would have arisen so terrible
that I believe it would have resounded to the ends of the
earth. As Napoleon advances this feeling is growing yet
stronger. Old men who have lost all or nearly all their goods
are saying: 'We shall find a way of living. Anything is
preferable to a shameful peace.' Women all of whose kin are
in the army regard the dangers they are running as
secondary, and fear nothing but peace. Happily this peace,
which would be the death-warrant of Russia, will not be
negotiated; the Emperor does not conceive of such an idea,
and even if he would he could not. This is the heroic side of
our position."
The Empress describes to her mother the two following traits, which
give some idea of the degree of resistance of which the soul of the Russian
is capable:—
"The Frenchmen had caught some unhappy peasants in Moscow,
whom they thought to force to serve in their ranks, and in order that
they should not be able to escape they branded their hands as one
brands horses in the stud. One of them asked what this mark meant; he
was told it signified that he was a French soldier. 'What! I am a soldier
of the Emperor of the French!' he said. And immediately he took his
hatchet, cut off his hand, and threw it at the feet of those present,
saying, 'Take it—there's your mark!'
"At Moscow, too, the French had taken a score of peasants of
whom they wished to make an example in order to frighten the
villagers, who were picking off the French foraging parties and were
making war as well as the detachments of regular troops. They ranged
them against a wall and read their sentence in Russian. They waited for
them to beg for mercy: instead of that they took farewell of one
another and made their sign of the cross. The French fired on the first
of them; they waited for the rest to beg for pardon in their terror, and to
promise to change their conduct. They fired on the second, and on the
third, and so on all the twenty, without a single one having attempted
to implore the clemency of the enemy. Napoleon has not once had the
pleasure of profaning this word in Russia."
Among the characteristics of the popular mind we must mention that in
all peoples and all ages it has been saturated with mysticism. The people
will always be convinced that superior beings—divinities, Governments, or
great men—have the power to change things at will. This mystic side
produces an intense need of adoration. The people must have a fetich, either
a man or a doctrine. This is why, when threatened with anarchy, it calls for a
Messiah to save it.
Like the crowd, but more slowly, the people readily passes from
adoration to hatred. A man may be the hero of the people at one period, and
finally earn its curses. These variations of popular opinion concerning
political personalities may be observed in all times. The history of
Cromwell furnishes us with a very curious example.5
4. The Role of the Leader in Revolutionary Movements.
All the varieties of crowds—homogeneous and heterogeneous, assemblies,
peoples, clubs, &c.—are, as we have often repeated, aggregates incapable
of unity and action so long as they find no master to lead them.
I have shown elsewhere, making use of certain physiological
experiments, that the unconscious collective mind of the crowd seems
bound up with the mind of the leader. The latter gives it a single will and
imposes absolute obedience.
The leader acts especially through suggestion. His success depends on
his fashion of provoking this suggestion. Many experiments have shown to
what point a collectivity may be subjected to suggestion.6
According to the suggestions of the leaders, the multitude will be calm,
furious, criminal, or heroic. These various suggestions may sometimes
appear to present a rational aspect, but they will only appear to be
reasonable. A crowd is in reality inaccessible to reason; the only ideas
capable of influencing it will always be sentiments evoked in the form of
images.
The history of the Revolution shows on every page how easily the
multitude follows the most contradictory impulses given by its different
leaders. We see it applaud just as vigorously at the triumph of the
Girondists, the Hebertists, the Dantonists, and the Terrorists as at their
successive downfalls. One may be quite sure, also, that the crowd
understood nothing of these events.
At a distance one can only confusedly perceive the part played by the
leaders, for they commonly work in the shade. To grasp this clearly we
must study them in contemporary events. We shall then see how readily the
leader can provoke the most violent popular movements. We are not
thinking here of the strikes of the postmen or railway men, in which the
discontent of the employees might intervene, but of events in which the
crowd was not in the least interested. Such, for example, was the popular
rising provoked by a few Socialist leaders amidst the Parisian populace on
the morrow of the execution of Ferrer, in Spain. The French crowd had
never heard of Ferrer. In Spain his execution was almost unnoticed. In Paris
the incitements of a few leaders sufficed to hurl a regular popular army
upon the Spanish Embassy, with the intention of burning it. Part of the
garrison had to be employed to protect it. Energetically repulsed, the
assailants contented themselves with sacking a few shops and building
some barricades.
At the same time, the leaders gave another proof of their influence.
Finally understanding that the burning of a foreign embassy might be
extremely dangerous, they ordered a pacific demonstration for the
following day, and were as faithfully obeyed as if they had ordered the most
violent riot. No example could better show the importance of leaders and
the submission of the crowd
The historians who, from Michelet to M. Aulard, have represented the
revolutionary crowd as having acted on its own initiative, without leaders,
do not comprehend its psychology.
5. After having overthrown a dynasty and refused a crown he was buried like a king among kings.
Two years later his body was torn from the tomb, and his head, cut off by the executioner, was
exposed above the gate of the House of Parliament. A little while ago a statue was raised to him.
The old anarchist turned autocrat now figures in the gallery of demigods.
6. Among the numerous experiments made to prove this fact one of the most remarkable was
performed on the pupils of his class by Professor Glosson and published in the Revue
Scientifique for October 28, 1899.
"I prepared a bottle filled with distilled water carefully wrapped in cotton and packed in a
box. After several other experiments I stated that I wished to measure the rapidity with which an
odour would diffuse itself through the air, and asked those present to raise their hands the
moment they perceived the odour. . . . I took out the bottle and poured the water on the cotton,
turning my head away during the operation, then took up a stop-watch and awaited the result. . .
. I explained that I was absolutely sure that no one present had ever smelt the odour of the
chemical composition I had spilt. . . . At the end of fifteen seconds the majority of those in front
had held up their hands, and in forty seconds the odour had reached the back of the hall by fairly
regular waves. About three-quarters of those present declared that they perceived the odour. A
larger number would doubtless have succumbed to suggestion, if at the end of a minute I had not
been forced to stop the experiment, some of those in the front rows being unpleasantly affected
by the odour, and wishing to leave the hall."
Chapter V.
The Psychology of the Revolutionary Assemblies
Table of Contents
1. Psychological Characteristics of the great Revolutionary Assemblies.
A great political assembly, a parliament for example, is a crowd, but a
crowd which sometimes fails in effectual action on account of the contrary
sentiments of the hostile groups composing it.
The presence of these groups, actuated by different interests, must make
us consider an assembly as formed of superimposed and heterogeneous
crowds, each obeying its particular leaders. The law of the mental unity of
crowds is manifested only in each group, and it is only as a result of
exceptional circumstances that the different groups act with a single
intention.
Each group in an assembly represents a single being. The individuals
contributing to the formation of this being are no longer themselves, and
will unhesitatingly vote against their convictions and their wishes. On the
eve of the day when Louis XVI. was to be condemned Vergniaud protested
with indignation against the suggestion that he should vote for his death;
but he did so vote on the following day.
The action of a group consists chiefly in fortifying hesitating opinions.
All feeble individual convictions become confirmed upon becoming
collective.
Leaders of great repute or unusual violence can sometimes, by acting on
all the groups of an assembly, make them a single crowd. The majority of
the members of the Convention enacted measures entirely contrary to their
opinions under the influence of a very small number of such leaders.
Collectivities have always given way before active sectaries. The
history of the revolutionary Assemblies shows how pusillanimous they
were, despite the boldness of their language respecting kings, before the
leaders of the popular riots. The invasion of a band of energumens
commanded by an imperious leader was enough to make them vote then
and there the most absurd and contradictory measures.
An assembly, having the characteristics of a crowd, will, like a crowd,
be extreme in its sentiments. Excessive in its violence, it will be excessive
in its cowardice. In general it will be insolent to the weak and servile before
the strong.
We remember the fearful humility of the Parliament when the youthful
Louis XIV. entered, whip in hand, to pronounce his brief speech. We know
with what increasing impertinence the Constituent Assembly treated Louis
XVI. as it felt that he was becoming defenceless. Finally, we recall the
terror of the Convention under the reign of Robespierre.
This characteristic of assemblies being a general law, the convocation of
an assembly by a sovereign when his power is failing must be regarded as a
gross error in psychology. The assembling of the States General cost the life
of Louis XVI. It all but lost Henry III. his throne, when, obliged to leave
Paris, he had the unhappy idea of assembling the Estates at Blois.
Conscious of the weakness of the king, the Estates at once spoke as masters
of the situation, modifying taxes, dismissing officials, and claiming that
their decisions should have the force of law.
This progressive exaggeration of sentiments was plainly demonstrated
in all the assemblies of the Revolution. The Constituent Assembly, at first
extremely respectful toward the royal authority and its prerogatives, finally
proclaimed itself a sovereign Assembly, and treated Louis XVI as a mere
official. The Convention, after relatively moderate beginnings, ended with a
preliminary form of the Terror, when judgments were still surrounded by
certain legal guarantees: then, quickly increasing its powers, it enacted a
law depriving all accused persons of the right of defence, permitting their
condemnation upon the mere suspicion of being suspect. Yielding more and
more to its sanguinary frenzy, it finally decimated itself. Girondists,
Hebertists, Dantonists, and Robespierrists successively ended their careers
at the hands of the executioner.
This exaggeration of the sentiments of assemblies explains why they
were always so little able to control their own destinies and why they so
often arrived at conclusions exactly contrary to the ends proposed. Catholic
and royalist, the Constituent Assembly, instead of the constitutional
monarchy it wished to establish and the religion it wished to defend, rapidly
led France to a violent republic and the persecution of the clergy.
Political assemblies are composed, as we have seen, of heterogeneous
groups, but they have sometimes been formed of homogeneous groups, as,
for instance, certain of the clubs, which played so enormous a part during
the Revolution, and whose psychology deserves a special examination.
2. The Psychology of the Revolutionary Clubs.
Small assemblies of men possessing the same opinions, the same beliefs,
and the same interests, which eliminate all dissentient voices, differ from
the great assemblies by the unity of their sentiments and therefore their
wills. Such were the communes, the religious congregations, the
corporations, and the clubs during the Revolution, the secret societies
during the first half of the nineteenth century, and the Freemasons and
syndicalists of to-day.
The points of difference between a heterogeneous assembly and a
homogeneous club must be thoroughly grasped if we are to comprehend the
progress of the French Revolution. Until the Directory and especially
during the Convention the Revolution was directed by the clubs.
Despite the unity of will due to the absence of dissident parties the clubs
obey the laws of the psychology of crowds. They are consequently
subjugated by leaders. This we see especially in the Jacobin Club, which
was dominated by Robespierre.
The function of the leader of a club, a homogeneous crowd, is far more
difficult than that of a leader of a heterogeneous crowd. The latter may
easily be led by harping on a small number of strings, but in a homogeneous
group like a club, whose sentiments and interests are identical, the leader
must know how to humour them and is often himself led.
Part of the strength of homogeneous agglomerations resides in their
anonymity. We know that during the Commune of 1871 a few anonymous
orders sufficed to effect the burning of the finest monuments of Paris: the
Hotel de Ville, the Tuileries, the Cour des Comptes, the buildings of the
Legion of Honour, &c. A brief order from the anonymous committees,
"Burn Finances, burn Tuileries," &c., was immediately executed. An
unlooked-for chance only saved the Louvre and its collections. We know
too what religious attention is in our days accorded to the most absurd
injunctions of the anonymous leaders of the trades unions.
The clubs of Paris and the insurrectionary Commune were not less
scrupulously obeyed at the time of the Revolution. An order emanating
from these was sufficient to hurl upon the Assembly a popular army which
dictated its wishes.
Summing up the history of the Convention in another chapter, we shall
see how frequent were these irruptions, and with what servility the
Assembly, which according to the legends was so powerful bowed itself
before the most imperative injunctions of a handful of rioters. Instructed by
experience, the Directory closed the clubs and put an end to the invasion of
the populace by energetically shooting them down.
The Convention had early grasped the superiority of homogeneous
groups over heterogeneous assemblies in matters of government, which is
why it subdivided itself into committees composed each of a limited
number of individuals. These committees—of Public Safety, of Finance,
&c.—formed small sovereign assemblies in the midst of the larger
Assembly. Their power was held in check only by that of the clubs.
The preceding considerations show the power of groups over the wills
of the members composing them. If the group is homogeneous, this action
is considerable; if it is heterogeneous, it is less considerable but may still
become important, either because the more powerful groups of an assembly
will dominate those whose cohesion is weaker or because certain
contagious sentiments will often extend themselves to all the members of an
assembly.
A memorable example of this influence of groups occurred at the time
of the Revolution, when, on the night of the 4th of August, the nobles voted,
on the proposition of one of their members, the abandonment of feudal
privileges. Yet we know that the Revolution resulted in part from the refusal
of the clergy and the nobles to renounce their privileges. Why did they
refuse to renounce them at first? Simply because men in a crowd do not act
as the same men singly. Individually no member of the nobility would ever
have abandoned his rights.
Of this influence of assemblies upon their members Napoleon at St.
Helena cited some curious examples: "Nothing was more common than to
meet with men at this period quite unlike the reputation that their acts and
words would seem to justify. For instance, one might have supposed Monge
to be a terrible fellow; when war was decided upon he mounted the tribune
of the Jacobins and declared that he would give his two daughters to the
two first soldiers to be wounded by the enemy. He wanted the nobles to be
killed, &c. Now, Monge was the most gentle and feeble of men, and
wouldn't have had a chicken killed if he had had to do it with his own
hands, or even to have it done in his presence."
3. A Suggested Explanation of the Progressive Exaggeration of Sentiments
in Assemblies.
If collective sentiments were susceptible of exact quantitative measurement,
we might translate them by a curve which, after a first gradual ascent, runs
upward with extreme rapidity and then falls almost vertically. The equation
of this curve might be called the equation of the variations of collective
sentiments subjected to a constant excitation.
It is not always easy to explain the acceleration of certain sentiments
under the influence of a constant exciting cause. Perhaps, however, one may
say that if the laws of psychology are comparable to those of mechanics, a
cause of invariable dimensions acting in a continuous fashion will rapidly
increase the intensity of a sentiment. We know, for example, that a force
which is constant in dimension and direction, such as gravity acting upon a
mass, will cause an accelerated movement. The speed of a free object
falling in space under the influence of gravity will be about 32 feet during
the first second, 64 feet during the next, 96 feet during the next, &c. It
would be easy, were the moving body allowed to fall from a sufficient
height, to give it a velocity sufficient to perforate a plate of steel.
But although this explanation is applicable to the acceleration of a
sentiment subjected to a constant exciting cause, it does not tell us why the
effects of acceleration finally and suddenly cease. Such a fall is only
comprehensible if we bring in physiological factors—that is, if we
remember that pleasure, like pain, cannot exceed certain limits, and that all
sensations, when too violent, result in the paralysis of sensation. Our
organism can only support a certain maximum of joy, pain, or effort, and it
cannot support that maximum for long together. The hand which grasps a
dynamometer soon exhausts its effort, and is obliged suddenly to let go.
The study of the causes of the rapid disappearance of certain groups of
sentiments in assemblies will remind us of the fact that beside the party
which is predominant by means of its strength or prestige there are others
whose sentiments, restrained by this force or prestige, have not reached
their full development. Some chance circumstance may somewhat weaken
the prevailing party, when immediately the suppressed sentiments of the
adverse parties may become preponderant. The Mountain learned this
lesson after Thermidor.
All analogies that we may seek to establish between the laws of material
phenomena and those which condition the evolution of affective and mystic
factors are evidently extremely rough. They must be so until the mechanism
of the cerebral functions is better understood than it is to-day.
Part II.
The French Revolution
Table of Contents
Book I.
The Origins of the French Revolution
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
The Opinions of Historians Concerning the
French Revolution
Table of Contents
1. The Historians of the Revolution.
The most contradictory opinions have been expressed respecting the French
Revolution, and although only a century separates us from the period in
question it seems impossible as yet to judge it calmly. For de Maistre it was
"a satanic piece of work," and "never was the action of the spirit of darkness
so evidently manifested." For the modern Jacobins it has regenerated the
human race.
Foreigners who live in France still regard it as a subject to be avoided in
conversation.
"Everywhere," writes Barrett Wendell, "this memory and these
traditions are still endowed with such vitality that few persons are capable
of considering them dispassionately. They still excite both enthusiasm and
resentment; they are still regarded with a loyal and ardent spirit of
partisanship. The better you come to understand France the more clearly
you see that even to- day no study of the Revolution strikes any Frenchman
as having been impartial."
This observation is perfectly correct. To be interpretable with equity, the
events of the past must no longer be productive of results and must not
touch the religious or political beliefs whose inevitable intolerance I have
denoted.
We must not therefore be surprised that historians express very different
ideas respecting the Revolution. For a long time to come some will still see
in it one of the most sinister events of history, while to others it will remain
one of the most glorious.
All writers on the subject have believed that they have related its course
with impartiality, but in general they have merely supported contradictory
theories of peculiar simplicity. The documents being innumerable and
contradictory, their conscious or unconscious choice has readily enabled
them to justify their respective theories.
The older historians of the Revolution—Thiers, Quinet, and, despite his
talent, Michelet himself, are somewhat eclipsed to- day. Their doctrines
were by no means complicated; a historic fatalism prevails generally in
their work. Thiers regarded the Revolution as the result of several centuries
of absolute monarchy, and the Terror as the necessary consequence of
foreign invasion. Quinet described the excesses of 1793 as the result of a
long-continued despotism, but declared that the tyranny of the Convention
was unnecessary, and hampered the work of the Revolution. Michelet saw
in this last merely the work of the people, whom he blindly admired, and
commenced the glorification continued by other historians.
The former reputation of all these historians has been to a great extent
effaced by that of Taine. Although equally impassioned, he threw a brilliant
light upon the revolutionary period, and it will doubtless be long before his
work is superseded.
Work so important is bound to show faults. Taine is admirable in the
representation of facts and persons, but he attempts to judge by the standard
of rational logic events which were not dictated by reason, and which,
therefore, he cannot interpret. His psychology, excellent when it is merely
descriptive, is very weak as soon as it becomes explanatory. To affirm that
Robespierre was a pedantic "swotter" is not to reveal the causes of his
absolute power over the Convention, at a time when he had spent several
months in decimating it with perfect impunity. It has very justly been said
of Taine that he saw well and understood little.
Despite these restrictions his work is highly remarkable and has not
been equalled. We may judge of his immense influence by the exasperation
which he causes among the faithful defenders of Jacobin orthodoxy, of
which M. Aulard, professor at the Sorbonne, is to-day the high priest. The
latter has devoted two years to writing a pamphlet against Taine, every line
of which is steeped in passion. All this time spent in rectifying a few
material errors which are not really significant has only resulted in the
perpetration of the very same errors.
Reviewing his work, M. A. Cochin shows that M. Aulard has at least on
every other occasion been deceived by his quotations, whereas Taine erred
far more rarely. The same historian shows also that we must not trust M.
Aulard's sources.
"These sources—proceedings, pamphlets, journals, and the speeches
and writings of patriots—are precisely the authentic publications of
patriotism, edited by patriots, and edited, as a rule, for the benefit of the
public. He ought to have seen in all this simply the special pleading of the
defendant: he had, before his eyes, a ready-made history of the Revolution,
which presents, side by side with each of the acts of the `People,' from the
massacres of September to the law of Prairial, a ready- made explanation
according to the republican system of defence."
Perhaps the fairest criticism that one can make of the work of Taine is
that it was left incomplete. He studied more especially the role of the
populace and its leaders during the revolutionary period. This inspired him
with pages vibrating with an indignation which we can still admire, but
several important aspects of the Revolution escaped him.
Whatever one may think of the Revolution, an irreducible difference
will always exist between historians of the school of Taine and those of the
school of M. Aulard. The latter regards the sovereign people as admirable,
while the former shows us that when abandoned to its instincts and
liberated from all social restraint it relapses into primitive savagery. The
conception of M. Aulard, entirely contrary to the lessons of the psychology
of crowds, is none the less a religious dogma in the eyes of modern
Jacobins. They write of the Revolution according to the methods of
believers, and take for learned works the arguments of virtual theologians.
2. The Theory of Fatalism in respect of the Revolution.
Advocates and detractors of the Revolution often admit the fatality of
revolutionary events. This theory is well synthetised in the following
passage from the History of the Revolution, by Emile Olivier:—
"No man could oppose it. The blame belongs neither to those
who perished nor to those who survived; there was no
individual force capable of changing the elements and of
foreseeing the events which were born of the nature of things
and circumstances."
Taine himself inclines to this idea:—
"At the moment when the States General were opened the
course of ideas and events was not only determined but even
visible. Each generation unwittingly bears within itself its
future and its past; from the latter its destinies might have
been foretold long before the issue."
Other modern authors, who profess no more indulgence for the violence
of the revolutionaries than did Taine, are equally convinced of this fatality.
M. Sorel, after recalling the saying of Bossuet concerning the revolutions of
antiquity: "Everything is surprising if we only consider particular causes,
and yet everything goes forward in regular sequence," expresses an
intention which he very imperfectly realises: "to show in the Revolution,
which seems to some the subversion and to others the regeneration of the
old European world, the natural and necessary result of the history of
Europe, and to show, moreover, that this revolution had no result—not even
the most unexpected—that did not ensue from this history, and was not
explained by the precedents of the ancien regime."
Guizot also had formerly attempted to prove that our Revolution, which
he quite wrongly compared to that of England, was perfectly natural and
effected no innovations:—
"Far from having broken with the natural course of events in Europe,
neither the English revolution nor our own did, intended, or said
anything that had not been said, intended, and done a hundred years
before its outbreak.
" . . . Whether we regard the general doctrines of the two
revolutions or the application made of them—whether we deal with
the government of the State or with the civil legislation, with property
or with persons, with liberty or with power, we shall find nothing of
which the invention can be attributed to them, nothing that will not be
encountered elsewhere, or that was not at least originated in times
which we qualify as normal."
All these assertions merely recall the banal law that a phenomenon is
simply the consequence of previous phenomena. Such very general
propositions do not teach us much.
We must not try to explain too many events by the principle of fatality
adopted by so many historians. I have elsewhere discussed the significance
of such fatalities, and have shown that the whole effort of civilisation
consists in trying to escape therefrom. Certainly history is full of
necessities, but it is also full of contingent facts which were, and might not
have been. Napoleon himself, on St. Helena, enumerated six circumstances
which might have checked his prodigious career. He related, notably, that
on taking a bath at Auxonne, in 1786, he only escaped death by the
fortuitous presence of a sandbank. If Bonaparte had died, then we may
admit that another general would have arisen, and might have become
dictator. But what would have become of the Imperial epic and its
consequences without the man of genius who led our victorious armies into
all the capitals of Europe?
It is permissible to consider the Revolution as being partly a necessity,
but it was above all—which is what the fatalistic writers already cited do
not show us—a permanent struggle between theorists who were imbued
with a new ideal, and the economic, social, and political laws which ruled
mankind, and which they did not understand. Not understanding them, they
sought in vain to direct the course of events, were exasperated at their
failure, and finally committed every species of violence. They decreed that
the paper money known as assignats should be accepted as the equivalent of
gold, and all their threats could not prevent the fictitious value of such
money falling almost to nothing. They decreed the law of the maximum,
and it merely increased the evils it was intended to remedy. Robespierre
declared before the Convention "that all the sans- culottes will be paid at
the expense of the public treasury, which will be fed by the rich," and in
spite of requisitions and the guillotine the treasury remained empty.
Having broken all human restraints, the men of the Revolution finally
discovered that a society cannot live without them; but when they sought to
create them anew they saw that even the strongest society, though supported
by the fear of the guillotine, could not replace the discipline which the past
had slowly built up in the minds of men. As for understanding the evolution
of society, or judging men's hearts and minds, or foreseeing the
consequences of the laws they enacted, they scarcely attempted to do so.
The events of the Revolution did not ensue from irreducible necessities.
They were far more the consequence of Jacobin principles than of
circumstances, and might have been quite other than they were. Would the
Revolution have followed the same path if Louis XVI. had been better
advised, or if the Constituent Assembly had been less cowardly in times of
popular insurrection? The theory of revolutionary fatality is only useful to
justify violence by presenting it as inevitable.
Whether we are dealing with science or with history we must beware of
the ignorance which takes shelter under the shibboleth of fatalism Nature
was formerly full of a host of fatalities which science is slowly contriving to
avoid. The function of the superior man is, as I have shown elsewhere, to
avert such fatalities.
3. The Hesitations of recent Historians of the Revolution.
The historians whose ideas we have examined in the preceding chapter
were extremely positive in their special pleading. Confined within the limits
of belief, they did not attempt to penetrate the domain of knowledge. A
monarchical writer was violently hostile to the Revolution, and a liberal
writer was its violent apologist.
At the present time we can see the commencement of a movement
which will surely lead to the study of the Revolution as one of those
scientific phenomena into which the opinions and beliefs of a writer enter
so little that the reader does not even suspect them.
This period has not yet come into being; we are still in the period of
doubt. The liberal writers who used to be so positive are now so no longer.
One may judge of this new state of mind by the following extracts from
recent authors:—
M. Hanotaux, having vaunted the utility of the Revolution, asks
whether its results were not bought too dearly, and adds:—
"History hesitates, and will, for a long time yet, hesitate
to answer."
M. Madelin is equally dubious in the book he has recently published:
—
"I have never felt sufficient authority to form, even in
my inmost conscience, a categorical judgment on so
complex a phenomenon as the French Revolution. To-
day I find it even more difficult to form a brief
judgement. Causes, facts, and consequences seem to me
to be still extremely debatable subjects."
One may obtain a still better idea of the transformation of the old ideas
concerning the Revolution by perusing the latest writings of its official
defenders. While they professed formerly to justify every act of violence by
representing it as a simple act of defence, they now confine themselves to
pleading extenuating circumstances. I find a striking proof of this new
frame of mind in the history of France for the use of schools, published by
MM. Aulard and Debidour. Concerning the Terror we read the following
lines:—
"Blood flowed in waves; there were acts of injustice and
crimes which were useless from the point of view of national
defence, and odious. But men had lost their heads in the
tempest, and, harassed by a thousand dangers, the patriots
struck out in their rage."
We shall see in another part of this work that the first of the two authors
whom I have cited is, in spite of his uncompromising Jacobinism, by no
means indulgent toward the men formerly qualified as the "Giants of the
Convention."
The judgments of foreigners upon our Revolution are usually distinctly
severe, and we cannot be surprised when we remember how Europe
suffered during the twenty years of upheaval in France.
The Germans in particular have been most severe. Their opinion is
summed up in the following lines by M. Faguet:—
"Let us say it courageously and patriotically, for patriotism
consists above all in telling the truth to one's own country:
Germany sees in France, with regard to the past, a people
who, with the great words `liberty' and `fraternity' in its
mouth, oppressed, trampled, murdered, pillaged, and fleeced
her for fifteen years; and with regard to the present, a people
who, with the same words on its banners, is organising a
despotic, oppressive, mischievous, and ruinous democracy,
which none would seek to imitate. This is what Germany
may well see in France; and this, according to her books and
journals, is, we may assure ourselves, what she does see."
For the rest, whatever the worth of the verdicts pronounced upon the
French Revolution, we may be certain that the writers of the future will
consider it as an event as passionately interesting as it is instructive.
A Government bloodthirsty enough to guillotine old men of eighty
years, young girls, and little children: which covered France with ruins, and
yet succeeded in repulsing Europe in arms; an archduchess of Austria,
Queen of France, dying on the scaffold, and a few years later another
archduchess, her relative, replacing her on the same throne and marrying a
sub- lieutenant, turned Emperor—here are tragedies unique in human
history. The psychologists, above all, will derive lessons from a history
hitherto so little studied by them. No doubt they will finally discover that
psychology can make no progress until it renounces chimerical theories and
laboratory experiments in order to study the events and the men who
surround us.7
4. Impartiality in History.
Impartiality has always been considered as the most essential quality of the
historian. All historians since Tacitus have assured us that they are
impartial.
In reality the writer sees events as the painter sees a landscape—that is,
through his own temperament; through his character and the mind of the
race.
A number of artists, placed before the same landscape, would
necessarily interpret it in as many different fashions. Some would lay stress
upon details neglected by others. Each reproduction would thus be a
personal work—that is to say, would be interpreted by a certain form of
sensibility.
It is the same with the writer. We can no more speak of the impartiality
of the historian than we can speak of the impartiality of the painter.
Certainly the historian may confine himself to the reproduction of
documents, and this is the present tendency. But these documents, for
periods as near us as the Revolution, are so abundant that a man's whole life
would not suffice to go through them. Therefore the historian must make a
choice.
Consciously sometimes, but more often unconsciously, the author will
select the material which best corresponds with his political, moral, and
social opinions.
It is therefore impossible, unless he contents himself with simple
chronologies summing up each event with a few words and a date, to
produce a truly impartial volume of history. No author could be impartial;
and it is not to be regretted. The claim to impartiality, so common to-day,
results in those flat, gloomy, and prodigiously wearisome works which
render the comprehension of a period completely impossible.
Should the historian, under a pretext of impartiality, abstain from
judging men—that is, from speaking in tones of admiration or reprobation?
This question, I admit, allows of two very different solutions, each of
which is perfectly correct, according to the point of view assumed—that of
the moralist or that of the psychologist.
The moralist must think exclusively of the interest of society, and must
judge men only according to that interest. By the very fact that it exists and
wishes to continue to exist a society is obliged to admit a certain number of
rules, to have an indestructible standard of good and evil, and consequently
to create very definite distinctions between vice and virtue. It thus finally
creates average types, to which the man of the period approaches more or
less closely, and from which he cannot depart very widely without peril to
society.
It is by such similar types and the rules derived from social necessities
that the moralist must judge the men of the past. Praising those which were
useful and blaming the rest, he thus helps to form the moral types which are
indispensable to the progress of civilisation and which may serve others as
models. Poets such as Corneille, for example, create heroes superior to the
majority of men, and possibly inimitable; but they thereby help greatly to
stimulate our efforts. The example of heroes must always be set before a
people in order to ennoble its mind.
Such is the moralist's point of view. That of the psychologist would be
quite different. While a society has no right to be tolerant, because its first
duty is to live, the psychologist may remain indifferent. Considering things
as a scientist, he no longer asks their utilitarian value, but seeks merely to
explain them.
His situation is that of the observer before any phenomenon. It is
obviously difficult to read in cold blood that Carrier ordered his victims to
be buried up to the neck so that they might then be blinded and subjected to
horrible torments. Yet if we wish to comprehend such acts we must be no
more indignant than the naturalist before the spider slowly devouring a fly.
As soon as the reason is moved it is no longer reason, and can explain
nothing.
The functions of the historian and the psychologist are not, as we see,
identical, but of both we may demand the endeavour, by a wise
interpretation of the facts, to discover, under the visible evidences, the
invisible forces which determine them.
7. This advice is far from being banal. The psychologists of the day pay very little attention to the
world about them, and are even surprised that any one should study it. I have come across an
interesting proof of this indifferent frame of mind in a review of one of my books which
appeared in the Revue philosophique and was inspired by the editor of the review. The author
reproaches me with "exploring the world and the newspapers rather than books."
I most gladly accept this reproach. The manifold facts of the journals and the realities of the
world are far more instructive than philosophical lucubrations such as the Revue is stuffed with.
Philosophers are beginning to see the puerility of such reproaches. It was certainly of the
forty volumes of this fastidious publication that Mr. William James was thinking when he wrote
that all these dissertations simply represented "a string of facts clumsily observed and a few
quarrelsome discussions." Although he is the author of the best known treatise on psychology
extant, the eminent thinker realises "the fragility of a science that oozes metaphysical criticism
at every joint." For more than twenty years I have tried to interest psychologists in the study of
realities, but the stream of university metaphysics is hardly yet turned aside, although it has lost
its former force.
Chapter II.
The Psychological Foundations of the Ancien
Regime
Table of Contents
1. The Absolute Monarchy and the Bases of the Ancien Regime.
Many historians assure us that the Revolution was directed against the
autocracy of the monarchy. In reality the kings of France had ceased to be
absolute monarchs long before its outbreak.
Only very late in history—not until the reign of Louis XIV.—did they
finally obtain incontestable power. All the preceding sovereigns, even the
most powerful, such as Francis I., for example, had to sustain a constant
struggle either against the seigneurs, or the clergy, or the parliaments, and
they did not always win. Francis himself had not sufficient power to protect
his most intimate friends against the Sorbonne and the Parliament. His
friend and councillor Berquin, having offended the Sorbonne, was arrested
upon the order of the latter body. The king ordered his release, which was
refused. He was obliged to send archers to remove him from the
Conciergerie, and could find no other means of protecting him than that of
keeping him beside him in the Louvre. The Sorbonne by no means
considered itself beaten. Profiting by the king's absence, it arrested Berquin
again and had him tried by Parliament. Condemned at ten in the morning,
he was burned alive at noon.
Built up very gradually, the power of the kings of France was not
absolute until the time of Louis XIV. It then rapidly declined, and it would
be truly difficult to speak of the absolutism of Louis XVI.
This pretended master was the slave of his court, his ministers, the
clergy, and the nobles. He did what they forced him to do and rarely what
he wished. Perhaps no Frenchman was so little free as the king.
The great power of the monarchy resided originally in the Divine origin
which was attributed to it, and in the traditions which had accumulated
during the ages. These formed the real social framework of the country.
The true cause of the disappearance of the ancien regime was simply the
weakening of the traditions which served as its foundations. When after
repeated criticism it could find no more defenders, the ancien regime
crumbled like a building whose foundations have been destroyed.
2. The Inconveniences of the Ancien Regime
A long-established system of government will always finally seem
acceptable to the people governed. Habit masks its inconveniences, which
appear only when men begin to think. Then they ask how they could ever
have supported them. The truly unhappy man is the man who believes
himself miserable.
It was precisely this belief which was gaining ground at the time of the
Revolution, under the influence of the writers whose work we shall
presently study. Then the imperfections of the ancien regime stared all men
in the face. They were numerous; it is enough to mention a few.
Despite the apparent authority of the central power, the kingdom,
formed by the successive conquest of independent provinces, was divided
into territories each of which had its own laws and customs, and each of
which paid different imposts. Internal customs-houses separated them. The
unity of France was thus somewhat artificial. It represented an aggregate of
various countries which the repeated efforts of the kings, including Louis
XIV., had not succeeded in wholly unifying. The most useful effect of the
Revolution was this very unification.
To such material divisions were added social divisions constituted by
different classes—nobles, clergy, and the Third Estate, whose rigid barriers
could only with the utmost difficulty be crossed.
Regarding the division of the classes as one of its sources of power, the
ancien regime had rigorously maintained that division. This became the
principal cause of the hatreds which the system inspired. Much of the
violence of the triumphant bourgeoisie represented vengeance for a long
past of disdain and oppression. The wounds of self-love are the most
difficult of all to forget. The Third Estate had suffered many such wounds.
At a meeting of the States General in 1614, at which its representatives
were obliged to remain bareheaded on their knees, one member of the Third
Estate having dared to say that the three orders were like three brothers, the
spokesman of the nobles replied "that there was no fraternity between it and
the Third; that the nobles did not wish the children of cobblers and tanners
to call them their brothers."
Despite the march of enlightenment the nobles and the clergy
obstinately preserved their privileges and their demands, no longer
justifiable now that these classes had ceased to render services.
Kept from the exercise of public functions by the royal power, which
distrusted them, and progressively replaced by a bourgeoisie which was
more and more learned and capable, the social role of nobility and clergy
was only an empty show. This point has been luminously expounded by
Taine:—
"Since the nobility, having lost its special capacity, and the
Third Estate, having acquired general capacity, were now on
a level in respect of education and aptitudes, the inequality
which divided them had become hurtful and useless.
Instituted by custom, it was no longer ratified by the
consciousness, and the Third Estate was with reason angered
by privileges which nothing justified, neither the capacity of
the nobles nor the incapacity of the bourgeoisie."
By reason of the rigidity of castes established by a long past we cannot
see what could have persuaded the nobles and the clergy to renounce their
privileges. Certainly they did finally abandon them one memorable evening,
when events forced them to do so; but then it was too late, and the
Revolution, unchained, was pursuing its course.
It is certain that modern progress would successively have established
all that the Revolution effected—the equality of citizens before the law, the
suppression of the privileges of birth, &c. Despite the conservative spirit of
the Latins, these things would have been won, as they were by the majority
of the peoples. We might in this manner have been saved twenty years of
warfare and devastation; but we must have had a different mental
constitution, and, above all, different statesmen.
The profound hostility of the bourgeoisie against the classes maintained
above it by tradition was one of the great factors of the Revolution, and
perfectly explains why, after its triumph, the first class despoiled the
vanquished of their wealth. They behaved as conquerors—like William the
Conqueror, who, after the conquest of England, distributed the soil among
his soldiers.
But although the bourgeoisie detested the nobility they had no hatred for
royalty, and did not regard it as revocable. The maladdress of the king and
his appeals to foreign powers only very gradually made him unpopular.
The first Assembly never dreamed of founding a republic. Extremely
royalist, in fact, it thought simply to substitute a constitutional for an
absolute monarchy. Only the consciousness of its increasing power
exasperated it against the resistance of the king; but it dared not overthrow
him.
3. Life under the Ancien Regime.
It is difficult to form a very clear idea of life under the ancien regime, and,
above all, of the real situation of the peasants.
The writers who defend the Revolution as theologians defend religious
dogmas draw such gloomy pictures of the existence of the peasants under
the ancien regime that we ask ourselves how it was that all these unhappy
creatures had not died of hunger long before. A good example of this style
of writing may be found in a book by M. A. Rambaud, formerly professor at
the Sorbonne, published under the title History of the French Revolution.
One notices especially an engraving bearing the legend, Poverty of Peasants
under Louis XIV. In the foreground a man is fighting some dogs for some
bones, which for that matter are already quite fleshless. Beside him a
wretched fellow is twisting himself and compressing his stomach. Farther
back a woman lying on the ground is eating grass. At the back of the
landscape figures of which one cannot say whether they are corpses or
persons starving are also stretched on the soil. As an example of the
administration of the ancien regime the same author assures us that "a place
in the police cost 300 livres and brought in 400,000." Such figures surely
indicate a great disinterestedness on the part of those who sold such
productive employment! He also informs us "that it cost only 120 livres to
get people arrested," and that "under Louis XV. more than 150,000 lettres
de cachet were distributed."
The majority of books dealing with the Revolution are conceived with
as little impartiality and critical spirit, which is one reason why this period
is really so little known to us.
Certainly there is no lack of documents, but they are absolutely
contradictory. To the celebrated description of La Bruyere we may oppose
the enthusiastic picture drawn by the English traveller Young of the
prosperous condition of the peasants of some of the French provinces.
Were they really crushed by taxation, and did they, as has been stated,
pay four-fifths of their revenue instead of a fifth as to-day? Impossible to
say with certainty. One capital fact, however, seems to prove that under the
ancien regime the situation of the inhabitants of the rural districts could not
have been so very wretched, since it seems established that more than a
third of the soil had been bought by peasants.
We are better informed as to the financial system. It was very
oppressive and extremely complicated. The budgets usually showed
deficits, and the imposts of all kinds were raised by tyrannical farmers-
general. At the very moment of the Revolution this condition of the finances
became the cause of universal discontent, which is expressed in the cahiers
of the States General. Let us remark that these cahiers did not represent a
previous state of affairs, but an actual condition due to a crisis of poverty
produced by the bad harvest of 1788 and the hard winter of 1789. What
would these cahiers have told us had they been written ten years earlier?
Despite these unfavourable circumstances the cahiers contained no
revolutionary ideas. The most advanced merely asked that taxes should be
imposed only with the consent of the States General and paid by all alike.
The same cahiers sometimes expressed a wish that the power of the king
should be limited by a Constitution defining his rights and those of the
nation. If these wishes had been granted a constitutional monarchy could
very easily have been substituted for the absolute monarchy, and the
Revolution would probably have been avoided.
Unhappily, the nobility and the clergy were too strong and Louis XVI.
too weak for such a solution to be possible.
Moreover, it would have been rendered extremely difficult by the
demands of the bourgeoisie, who claimed to substitute themselves for the
nobles, and were the real authors of the Revolution. The movement started
by the middle classes rapidly exceeded their hopes, needs, and aspirations.
They had claimed equality for their own profit, but the people also
demanded equality. The Revolution thus finally became the popular
government which it was not and had no intention of becoming at the
outset.
4. Evolution of Monarchical Feeling during the Revolution.
Despite the slow evolution of the affective elements, it is certain that during
the Revolution the sentiments, not of the people only, but also of the
revolutionary Assemblies with regard to the monarchy, underwent a very
rapid change. Between the moment when the legislators of the first
Assembly surrounded Louis XVI. with respect and the moment when his
head was cut off a very few years had elapsed.
These changes, superficial rather than profound, were in reality a mere
transposition of sentiments of the same order. The love which the men of
this period professed for the king was transferred to the new Government
which had inherited his power. The mechanism of such a transfer may
easily be demonstrated.
Under the ancien regime, the sovereign, holding his power by Divine
right, was for this reason invested with a kind of supernatural power. His
people looked up to him from every corner of the country.
This mystic belief in the absolute power of royalty was shattered only
when repeated experience proved that the power attributed to the adored
being was fictitious. He then lost his prestige. Now, when prestige is lost
the crowd will not forgive the fallen idol for deluding them, and seek anew
the idol without which they cannot exist.
From the outset of the Revolution numerous facts, which were daily
repeated, revealed to the most fervent believers the fact that royalty no
longer possessed any power, and that there were other powers capable, not
only of contending with royalty, but possessed of superior force.
What, for instance, was thought of the royal power by the multitudes
who saw the king held in check by the Assembly, and incapable, in the heart
of Paris, of defending his strongest fortress against the attacks of armed
bands?
The royal weakness thus being obvious, the power of the Assembly was
increasing. Now, in the eyes of the crowd weakness has no prestige; it turns
always to force.
In the Assemblies feeling was very fluid, but did not evolve very
rapidly, for which reason the monarchical faith survived the taking of the
Bastille the flight of the king, and his understanding with foreign
sovereigns.
The royalist faith was still so powerful that the Parisian riots and the
events which led to the execution of Louis XVI. were not enough finally to
destroy, in the provinces, the species of secular piety which enveloped the
old monarchy.8
It persisted in a great part of France during the whole of the Revolution,
and was the origin of the royalist conspiracies and insurrections in various
departments which the Convention had such trouble to suppress. The
royalist faith had disappeared in Paris, where the weakness of the king was
too plainly visible; but in the provinces the royal power, representing God
on earth, still retained its prestige.
The royalist sentiments of the people must have been deeply rooted to
survive the guillotine. The royalist movements persisted, indeed, during the
whole of the Revolution, and were accentuated under the Directory, when
forty-nine departments sent royalist deputies to Paris, which provoked the
Directory to the coup d'etat of Fructidor.
This monarchical-feeling, with difficulty repressed by the Revolution,
contributed to the success of Bonaparte when he came to occupy the throne
of the ancient kings, and in great measure to re-establish the ancien regime.
8. As an instance of the depth of this hereditary love of the people for its kings, Michelet relates the
following fact, which occurred in the reign of Louis XV.: "When it was known in Paris that
Louis XV., who had left for the army, was detained ill at Metz, it was night. People got up and
ran tumultuously hither and thither without knowing where they were going; the churches were
opened in the middle of the night . . . people assembled at every cross-road, jostling and
questioning one another without knowing what they were after. In several churches the priest
who was reciting the prayer for the king's health was stopped by his tears, and the people replied
by sobs and cries. . . . The courier who brought the news of his convalescence was embraced
and almost stifled; people kissed his horse, and led him in triumph. . . . Every street resounded
with a cry of joy: 'The king is healed.' "
Chapter III.
Mental Anarchy at the Time of the Revolution and
the Influence Attributed to the Philosophers
Table of Contents
1. Origin and Propagation of Revolutionary Ideas.
The outward life of men in every age is moulded upon an inward life
consisting of a framework of traditions, sentiments, and moral influences
which direct their conduct and maintain certain fundamental notions which
they accept without discussion.
Let the resistance of this social framework weaken, and ideas which
could have had no force before will germinate and develop. Certain theories
whose success was enormous at the time of the Revolution would have
encountered an impregnable wall two centuries earlier.
The aim of these considerations is to recall to the reader the fact that the
outward events of revolutions are always a consequence of invisible
transformations which have slowly gone forward in men's minds. Any
profound study of a revolution necessitates a study of the mental soil upon
which the ideas that direct its course have to germinate.
Generally slow in the extreme, the evolution of ideas is often invisible
for a whole generation. Its extent can only be grasped by comparing the
mental condition of the same social classes at the two extremities of the
curve which the mind has followed. To realise the different conceptions of
royalty entertained by educated men under Louis XIV. and Louis XVI., we
must compare the political theories of Bossuet and Turgot.
Bossuet expressed the general conceptions of his time concerning the
absolute monarchy when he based the authority of a Government upon the
will of God, "sole judge of the actions of kings, always irresponsible before
men." Religious faith was then as strong as the monarchical faith from
which it seemed inseparable, and no philosopher could have shaken it.
The writings of the reforming ministers of Louis XVI., those of Turgot,
for instance, are animated by quite another spirit. Of the Divine right of
kings there is hardly a word, and the rights of the peoples begin to be
clearly defined.
Many events had contributed to prepare for such an evolution—
unfortunate wars, famines, imposts, general poverty at the end of the reign
of Louis XV., &c. Slowly destroyed, respect for monarchical authority was
replaced by a mental revolt which was ready to manifest itself as soon as
occasion should arise.
When once the mental framework commences to crumble the end
comes rapidly. This is why at the time of the Revolution ideas were so
quickly propagated which were by no means new, but which until then had
exerted no influence, as they had not fallen on fruitful ground.
Yet the ideas which were then so attractive and effectual had often been
expressed. For a long time they had inspired the politics of England. Two
thousand years earlier the Greek and Latin authors had written in defence of
liberty, had cursed tyrants, and proclaimed the rights of popular sovereignty.
The middle classes who effected the Revolution, although, like their
fathers, they had learned all these things in text-books, were not in any
degree moved by them, because the moment when such ideas could move
them had not arrived. How should the people have been impressed by them
at a time when all men were accustomed to regard all hierarchies as natural
necessities?
The actual influence of the philosophers in the genesis of the Revolution
was not that which was attributed to them. They revealed nothing new, but
they developed the critical spirit which no dogma can resist once the way is
prepared for its downfall.
Under the influence of this developing critical spirit things which were
no longer very greatly respected came to be respected less and less. When
tradition and prestige had disappeared the social edifice suddenly fell.
This progressive disaggregation finally descended to the people, but
was not commenced by the people. The people follows examples, but never
sets them.
The philosophers, who could not have exerted any influence over the
people, did exert a great influence over the enlightened portion of the
nation. The unemployed nobility, who had long been ousted from their old
functions, and who were consequently inclined to be censorious, followed
their leadership. Incapable of foresight, the nobles were the first to break
with the traditions that were their only raison d'etre. As steeped in
humanitarianism and rationalism as the bourgeoisie of to- day, they
continually sapped their own privileges by their criticisms. As to-day, the
most ardent reformers were found among the favourites of fortune. The
aristocracy encouraged dissertations on the social contract, the rights of
man, and the equality of citizens. At the theatre it applauded plays which
criticised privileges, the arbitrariness and the incapacity of men in high
places, and abuses of all kinds.
As soon as men lose confidence in the foundations of the mental
framework which guides their conduct they feel at first uneasy and then
discontented. All classes felt their old motives of action gradually
disappearing. Things that had seemed sacred for centuries were now sacred
no longer.
The censorious spirit of the nobility and of the writers of the day would
not have sufficed to move the heavy load of tradition, but that its action was
added to that of other powerful influences. We have already stated, in citing
Bossuet, that under the ancien regime the religious and civil governments,
widely separated in our days, were intimately connected. To injure one was
inevitably to injure the other. Now, even before the monarchical idea was
shaken the force of religious tradition was greatly diminished among
cultivated men. The constant progress of knowledge had sent an increasing
number of minds from theology to science by opposing the truth observed
to the truth revealed.
This mental evolution, although as yet very vague, was sufficient to
show that the traditions which for so many centuries had guided men had
not the value which had been attributed to them, and that it would soon be
necessary to replace them.
But where discover the new elements which might; take the place of
tradition? Where seek the magic ring which would raise a new social edifice
on the remains of that which no longer contented men?
Men were agreed in attributing to reason the power that tradition and
the gods seemed to have lost. How could its force be doubted? Its
discoveries having been innumerable, was it not legitimate to suppose that
by applying it to the construction of societies it would entirely transform
them? Its possible function increased very rapidly in the thoughts of the
more enlightened, in proportion as tradition seemed more and more to be
distrusted.
The sovereign power attributed to reason must be regarded as the
culminating idea which not only engendered the Revolution but governed it
throughout. During the whole Revolution men gave themselves up to the
most persevering efforts to break with the past, and to erect society upon a
new plan dictated by logic.
Slowly filtering downward, the rationalistic theories of the philosophers
meant to the people simply that all the things which had been regarded as
worthy of respect were now no longer worthy.
Men being declared equal, the old masters need no longer be obeyed.
The multitude easily succeeded in ceasing to respect what the upper
classes themselves no longer respected. When the barrier of respect was
down the Revolution was accomplished.
The first result of this new mentality was a general insubordination.
Mme. Vigee Lebrun relates that on the promenade at Longchamps men of
the people leaped on the footboards of the carriages, saying, "Next year you
will be behind and we shall be inside."
The populace was not alone in manifesting insubordination and
discontent. These sentiments were general on the eve of the Revolution.
"The lesser clergy," says Taine, "are hostile to the prelates; the provincial
gentry to the nobility of the court; the vassals to the seigneurs; the peasants
to the townsmen," &c.
This state of mind, which had been communicated from the nobles and
clergy to the people, also invaded the army. At the moment the States
General were opened Necker said: "We are not sure of the troops." The
officers were becoming humanitarian and philosophical. The soldiers,
recruited from the lowest class of the population, did not philosophise, but
they no longer obeyed.
In their feeble minds the ideas of equality meant simply the suppression
of all leaders and masters, and therefore of all obedience. In 1790 more than
twenty regiments threatened their officers, and sometimes, as at Nancy,
threw them into prison.
The mental anarchy which, after spreading through all the classes of
society, finally invaded the army was the principal cause of the
disappearance of the ancien regime. "It was the defection of the army
affected by the ideas of the Third Estate," wrote Rivarol, "that destroyed
royalty."
2. The supposed Influence of the Philosophers of the Eighteenth Century
upon the Genesis of the Revolution—Their dislike of Democracy.
Although the philosophers who have been supposed the inspirers of the
French Revolution did attack certain privileges and abuses, we must not for
that reason regard them as partisans of popular government. Democracy,
whose role in Greek history was familiar to them, was generally highly
antipathetic to them. They were not ignorant of the destruction and violence
which are its invariable accompaniments, and knew that in the time of
Aristotle it was already defined as "a State in which everything, even the
law, depends on the multitude set up as a tyrant and governed by a few
declamatory speakers."
Pierre Bayle, the true forerunner of Voltaire, recalled in the following
terms the consequences of popular government in Athens:—
"If one considers this history, which displays at great length
the tumult of the assemblies, the factions dividing the city,
the seditious disturbing it, the most illustrious subjects
persecuted, exiled, and punished by death at the will of a
violent windbag, one would conclude that this people, which
so prided itself on its liberty, was really the slave of a small
number of caballers, whom they called demagogues, and
who made it turn now in this direction, now in that, as their
passions changed, almost as the sea heaps the waves now
one way, now another, according to the winds which trouble
it. You will seek in vain in Macedonia, which was a
monarchy, for as many examples of tyranny as Athenian
history will afford."
Montesquieu had no greater admiration for the democracy. Having
described the three forms of government—republican, monarchical, and
despotic—he shows very clearly what popular government may lead to:—
"Men were free with laws; men would fain be free without them; what
was a maxim is called severity; what was order is called hindrance.
Formerly the welfare of individuals constituted the public wealth, but
now the public wealth becomes the patrimony of individuals. The
republic is spoil, and its strength is merely the power of a few citizens
and the licence of all."
". . . Little petty tyrants spring up who have all the vices of a single
tyrant. Very soon what is left of liberty becomes untenable; a single
tyrant arises, and the people loses all, even the advantages of
corruption.
"Democracy has therefore two extremes to avoid; the extreme of
the spirit of equality leads to the despotism of a single person, as the
despotism of a single person leads to conquest."
The ideal of Montesquieu was the English constitutional government,
which prevented the monarchy from degenerating into despotism.
Otherwise the influence of this philosopher at the moment of the Revolution
was very slight.
As for the Encyclopaedists, to whom such a considerable role is
attributed, they hardly dealt with politics, excepting d'Holbach, a liberal
monarchist like Voltaire and Diderot. They wrote chiefly in defence of
individual liberty, opposing the encroachments of the Church, at that time
extremely intolerant and inimical to philosophers. Being neither Socialists
nor democrats, the Revolution could not utilise any of their principles.
Voltaire himself was by no means a partisan of democracy.
"Democracy," he said, "seems only to suit a very small country, and
even then it must be fortunately situated. Little as it may be, it will make
many mistakes, because it will be composed of men. Discord will prevail
there as in a convent full of monks; but there will be no St. Bartholomew's
day, no Irish massacres, no Sicilian Vespers, no Inquisition, no
condemnation to the galleys for having taken water from the sea without
paying for it; unless we suppose this republic to be composed of devils in a
corner of hell."
All these men who are supposed to have inspired the Revolution had
opinions which were far from subversive, and it is really difficult to see that
they had any real influence on the development of the revolutionary
movement. Rousseau was one of the very few democratic philosophers of
his age, which is why his Contrat Social became the Bible of the men of the
Terror. It seemed to furnish the rational justification necessary to excuse the
acts deriving from unconscious mystic and affective impulses which no
philosophy had inspired.
To be quite truthful, the democratic instincts of Rousseau were by no
means above suspicion. He himself considered that his projects for social
reorganisation, based upon popular sovereignty, could be applied only to a
very small State; and when the Poles asked him for a draft democratic
Constitution he advised them to choose a hereditary monarch.
Among the theories of Rousseau that relating to the perfection of the
primitive social state had a great success. He asserted, together with various
writers of his time, that primitive mankind was perfect; it was corrupted
only by society. By modifying society by means of good laws one might
bring back the happiness of the early world. Ignorant of all psychology, he
believed that men were the same throughout time and space and that they
could all be ruled by the same laws and institutions. This was then the
general belief. "The vices and virtues of the people," wrote Helvetius, "are
always a necessary effect of its legislation. . . . How can we doubt that
virtue is in the case of all peoples the result of the wisdom, more or less
perfect, of the administration?"
There could be no greater mistake.
3. The Philosophical Ideas of the Bourgeoisie at the Time of the Revolution.
It is by no means easy to say just what were the social and political
conceptions of a Frenchman of the middle classes at the moment of the
Revolution. They might be reduced to a few formulae concerning fraternity,
equality, and popular government, summed up in the celebrated Declaration
of the Rights of Man, of which we shall have occasion to quote a few
passages.
The philosophers of the eighteenth century do not seem to have been
very highly rated by the men of the Revolution. Rarely are they quoted in
the speeches of the time. Hypnotised by their classical memories of Greece
and Rome, the new legislators re- read their Plato and their Plutarch. They
wished to revive the constitution of Sparta, with its manners, its frugal
habits, and its laws.
Lycurgus, Solon, Miltiades, Manlius Torquatus, Brutus, Mucius
Scaevola, even the fabulous Minos himself, became as familiar in the
tribune as in the theatre, and the public went crazy over them. The shades of
the heroes of antiquity hovered over the revolutionary assemblies. Posterity
alone has replaced them by the shades of the philosophers of the eighteenth
century.
We shall see that in reality the men of this period, generally represented
as bold innovators guided by subtle philosophers, professed to effect no
innovations whatever, but to return to a past long buried in the mists of
history, and which, moreover, they scarcely ever in the least understood.
The more reasonable, who did not go so far back for their models,
aimed merely at adopting the English constitutional system, of which
Montesquieu and Voltaire had sung the praises, and which all nations were
finally to imitate without violent crises.
Their ambitions were confined to a desire to perfect the existing
monarchy, not to overthrow it. But in time of revolution men often take a
very different path from that they propose to take. At the time of the
convocation of the States General no one would ever have supposed that a
revolution of peaceful bourgeoisie and men of letters would rapidly be
transformed into one of the most sanguinary dictatorships of history.
Chapter IV.
Psychological Illusions Respecting the French
Revolution
Table of Contents
1. Illusions respecting Primitive Man, the Return to a State of Nature, and
the Psychology of the People.
We have already repeated, and shall again repeat, that the errors of a
doctrine do not hinder its propagation, so that all we have to consider here
is its influence upon men's minds.
But although the criticism of erroneous doctrines is seldom of practical
utility, it is extremely interesting from a psychological point of view. The
philosopher who wishes to understand the working of men's minds should
always carefully consider the illusions which they live with. Never, perhaps,
in the course of history have these illusions appeared so profound and so
numerous as during the Revolution.
One of the most prominent was the singular conception of the nature of
our first ancestors and primitive societies. Anthropology not having as yet
revealed the conditions of our remoter forbears, men supposed, being
influenced by the legends of the Bible, that man had issued perfect from the
hands of the Creator. The first societies were models which were afterwards
ruined by civilisation, but to which mankind must return. The return to the
state of nature was very soon the general cry. "The fundamental principle of
all morality, of which I have treated in my writings," said Rousseau, "is that
man is a being naturally good, loving justice and order."
Modern science, by determining, from the surviving remnants, the
conditions of life of our first ancestors, has long ago shown the error of this
doctrine. Primitive man has become an ignorant and ferocious brute, as
ignorant as the modern savage of goodness, morality, and pity. Governed
only by his instinctive impulses, he throws himself on his prey when hunger
drives him from his cave, and falls upon his enemy the moment he is
aroused by hatred. Reason, not being born, could have no hold over his
instincts.
The aim of civilisation, contrary to all revolutionary beliefs, has been
not to return to the state of nature but to escape from it. It was precisely
because the Jacobins led mankind back to the primitive condition by
destroying all the social restraints without which no civilisation can exist
that they transformed a political society into a barbarian horde.
The ideas of these theorists concerning the nature of man were about as
valuable as those of a Roman general concerning the power of omens. Yet
their influence as motives of action was considerable. The Convention was
always inspired by such ideas.
The errors concerning our primitive ancestors were excusable enough,
since before modern discoveries had shown us the real conditions of their
existence these were absolutely unknown. But the absolute ignorance of
human psychology displayed by the men of the Revolution is far less easy
to understand.
It would really seem as though the philosophers and writers of the
eighteenth century must have been totally deficient in the smallest faculty
of observation. They lived amidst their contemporaries without seeing them
and without understanding them. Above all, they had not a suspicion of the
true nature of the popular mind. The man of the people always appeared to
them in the likeness of the chimerical model created by their dreams. As
ignorant of psychology as of the teachings of history, they considered the
plebeian man as naturally good, affectionate, grateful, and always ready to
listen to reason.
The speeches delivered by members of the Assembly show how
profound were these illusions. When the peasants began to burn the
chateaux they were greatly astonished, and addressed them in sentimental
harangues, praying them to cease, in order not to "give pain to their good
king," and adjured them "to surprise him by their virtues."
2. Illusions respecting the Possibility of separating Man from his Past and
the Power of Transformation attributed to the Law.
One of the principles which served as a foundation for the revolutionary
institutions was that man may readily be cut off from his past, and that a
society may be re-made in all its parts by means of institutions. Persuaded
in the light of reason that, except for the primitive ages which were to serve
as models, the past represented an inheritance of errors and superstitions,
the legislators of the day resolved to break entirely with that past.
The better to emphasise their intention, they founded a new era,
transformed the calendar, and changed the names of the months and
seasons.
Supposing all men to be alike, they thought they could legislate for the
human race. Condorcet imagined that he was expressing an evident truth
when he said: "A good law must be good for all men, just as a geometrical
proposition is true for all."
The theorists of the Revolution never perceived, behind the world of
visible things, the secret springs which moved them. A century of biological
progress was needed to show how grievous were their mistakes, and how
wholly a being of whatever species depends on its past.
With the influence of the past, the reformers of the Revolution were
always clashing, without ever understanding it. They wanted to annihilate
it, but were annihilated by it instead.
The faith of law-makers in the absolute power of laws and institutions,
rudely shaken by the end of the Revolution, was absolute at its outbreak.
Gregoire said from the tribune of the Constituent Assembly, without
provoking the least astonishment: "We could if we would change religion,
but we do not want to." We know that they did want to later, and we know
how miserably their attempt failed.
Yet the Jacobins had in their hands all the elements of success. Thanks
to the completest of tyrannies, all obstacles were removed, and the laws
which it pleased them to impose were always accepted. After ten years of
violence, of destruction and burning and pillage and massacre and general
upheaval, their impotence was revealed so startlingly that they fell into
universal reprobation. The dictator then invoked by the whole of France
was obliged to re-establish the greater part of that which had been
destroyed.
The attempt of the Jacobins to re-fashion society in the name of pure
reason constitutes an experiment of the highest interest. Probably mankind
will never have occasion to repeat it on so vast a scale.
Although the lesson was a terrible one, it does not seem to have been
sufficient for a considerable class of minds, since even in our days we hear
Socialists propose to rebuild society from top to bottom according to their
chimerical plans.
3. Illusions respecting the Theoretical Value of the great Revolutionary
Principles.
The fundamental principles on which the Revolution was based in order to
create a new dispensation are contained in the Declarations of Rights which
were formulated successively in 1789, 1793, and 1795. All three
Declarations agree in proclaiming that "the principle of sovereignty resides
in the nation."
For the rest, the three Declarations differ on several points, notably in
the matter of equality. That of 1789 simply states (Article 1): "Men are born
and remain free and having equal rights." That of 1793 goes farther, and
assures us (Article 3):
"All men are equal by nature." That of 1795 is more modest
and says (Article 3): "Equality consists in the law being the
same for all." Besides this, having mentioned rights, the third
Declaration considers it useful to speak of duties. Its
morality is simply that of the Gospel. Article 2 says: "All the
duties of a man and a citizen derive from these two
principles engraved on all hearts by nature: do not do unto
others that which you would not they should do unto you; do
constantly unto others the good you would wish to receive
from them."
The essential portions of these proclamations, the only portions which
have really survived, were those relating to equality and popular
sovereignty.
Despite the weakness of its rational meaning, the part played by the
Republican device, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, was considerable.
This magic formula, which is still left engraven on many of our walls
until it shall be engraven on our hearts, has really possessed the
supernatural power attributed to certain words by the old sorcerers.
Thanks to the new hopes excited by its promises, its power of expansion
was considerable. Thousands of men lost their lives for it. Even in our days,
when a revolution breaks out in any part of the world, the same formula is
always invoked.
Its choice was happy in the extreme. It belongs to the category of
indefinite dream-evoking sentences, which every one is free to interpret
according to his own desires, hatreds, and hopes. In matters of faith the real
sense of words matters very little; it is the meaning attached to them that
makes their importance.
Of the three principles of the revolutionary device, equality was most
fruitful of consequences. We shall see in another part of this book that it is
almost the only one which still survives, and is still productive of effects.
It was certainly not the Revolution that introduced the idea of equality
into the world. Without going back even to the Greek republics, we may
remark that the theory of equality was taught in the clearest fashion by
Christianity and Islamism. All men, subjects of the one God, were equal
before Him, and judged solely according to their merits. The dogma of the
equality of souls before God was an essential dogma with Mohammedans
as well as with Christians.
But to proclaim a principle is not enough to secure its observation. The
Christian Church soon renounced its theoretical equality, and the men of the
Revolution only remembered it in their speeches.
The sense of the term "equality" varies according to the persons using it.
It often conceals sentiments very contrary to its real sense, and then
represents the imperious need of having no one above one, joined to the no
less lively desire to feel above others. With the Jacobins of the Revolution,
as with those of our days, the word "equality" simply involves a jealous
hatred of all superiority. To efface superiority, such men pretend to unify
manners, customs, and situations. All despotisms but that exercised by
themselves seem odious.
Not being able to avoid the natural inequalities, they deny them.
The second Declaration of Rights, that of 1793, affirms, contrary to the
evidence, that "all men are equal by nature."
It would seem that in many of the men of the Revolution the ardent
desire for equality merely concealed an intense need of inequalities.
Napoleon was obliged to re-establish titles of nobility and decorations for
their benefit. Having shown that it was among the most rabid revolutionists
that he found the most docile instruments of domination, Taine continues:—
"Suddenly, through all their preaching of liberty and
equality, appeared their authoritative instincts, their need of
commanding, even as subordinates, and also, in most cases,
an appetite for money or for pleasure. Between the delegate
of the Committee of Public Safety and the minister, prefect,
or subprefect of the Empire the difference is small: it is the
same man under the two costumes, first en carmagnole, then
in the braided coat."
The dogma of equality had as its first consequence the proclamation of
popular sovereignty by the bourgeoisie. This sovereignty remained
otherwise highly theoretical during the whole Revolution.
The principle of authority was the lasting legacy of the Revolution. The
two terms "liberty" and "fraternity" which accompany it in the republican
device had never much influence. We may even say that they had none
during the Revolution and the Empire, but merely served to decorate men's
speeches.
Their influence was hardly more considerable later. Fraternity was
never practised and the peoples have never cared much for liberty. To-day
our working-men have completely surrendered it to their unions.
To sum up: although the Republican motto has been little applied it has
exerted a very great influence. Of the French Revolution practically nothing
has remained in the popular mind but the three celebrated words which sum
up its gospel, and which its armies spread over Europe.
Book II.
The Rational, Affective, Mystic, and Collective
Influences Active During the Revolution
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
The Psychology of the Constituent Assembly
Table of Contents
1. Psychological Influences active during the French Revolution.
The genesis of the French Revolution, as well as its duration, was
conditioned by elements of a rational, affective, mystic, and collective
nature, each category of which was ruled by a different logic. It is, as I have
said, because they have not been able to dissociate the respective influences
of these factors that so many historians have interpreted this period so
indifferently
The rational element usually invoked as an explanation exerted in
reality but a very slight influence. It prepared the way for the Revolution,
but maintained it only at the outset, while it was still exclusively middle-
class. Its action was manifested by many measures of the time, such as the
proposals to reform the taxes, the suppression of the privileges of a useless
nobility, &c.
As soon as the Revolution reached the people, the influence of the
rational elements speedily vanished before that of the affective and
collective elements. As for the mystic elements, the foundation of the
revolutionary faith, they made the army fanatical and propagated the new
belief throughout the world.
We shall see these various elements as they appeared in events and in
the psychology of individuals. Perhaps the most important was the mystic
element. The Revolution cannot be clearly comprehended—we cannot
repeat it too often—unless it is considered as the formation of a religious
belief. What I have said elsewhere of all beliefs applies equally to the
Revolution. Referring, for instance, to the chapter on the Reformation, the
reader will see that it presents more than one analogy with the Revolution.
Having wasted so much time in demonstrating the slight rational value
of beliefs, the philosophers are to-day beginning to understand their
function better. They have been forced to admit that these are the only
factors which possess an influence sufficient to transform all the elements
of a civilisation.
They impose themselves on men apart from reason and have the power
to polarise men's thoughts and feelings in one direction. Pure reason had
never such a power, for men were never impassioned by reason.
The religious form rapidly assumed by the Revolution explains its
power of expansion and the prestige which it possessed and has retained.
Few historians have understood that this great monument ought to be
regarded as the foundation of a new religion. The penetrating mind of
Tocqueville, I believe, was the first to perceive as much.
"The French Revolution," he wrote, "was a political revolution which
operated in the manner of and assumed something of the aspect of a
religious revolution. See by what regular and characteristic traits it finally
resembled the latter: not only did it spread itself far and wide like a
religious revolution, but, like the latter, it spread itself by means of
preaching and propaganda. A political revolution which inspires proselytes,
which is preached as passionately to foreigners as it is accomplished at
home: consider what a novel spectacle was this."
The religious side of the Revolution being granted, the accompanying
fury and devastation are easily explained. History shows us that such are
always the accompaniments of the birth of religions. The Revolution was
therefore certain to provoke the violence and intolerance the triumphant
deities demand from their adepts. It overturned all Europe for twenty years,
ruined France, caused the death of millions of men, and cost the country
several invasions: but it is as a rule only at the cost of such catastrophes that
a people can change its beliefs.
Although the mystic element is always the foundation of beliefs, certain
affective and rational elements are quickly added thereto. A belief thus
serves to group sentiments and passions and interests which belong to the
affective domain. Reason then envelops the whole, seeking to justify events
in which, however, it played no part whatever.
At the moment of the Revolution every one, according to his
aspirations, dressed the new belief in a different rational vesture. The
peoples saw in it only the suppression of the religious and political
despotisms and hierarchies under which they had so often suffered. Writers
like Goethe and thinkers like Kant imagined that they saw in it the triumph
of reason. Foreigners like Humboldt came to France "to breathe the air of
liberty and to assist at the obsequies of despotism."
These intellectual illusions did not last long. The evolution of the drama
soon revealed the true foundations of the dream.
2. Dissolution of the Ancien Regime. The assembling of the States General.
Before they are realised in action, revolutions are sketched out in men's
thoughts. Prepared by the causes already studied, the French Revolution
commenced in reality with the reign of Louis XVI. More discontented and
censorious every day, the middle classes added claim to claim. Everybody
was calling for reform.
Louis XVI. thoroughly understood the utility of reform, but he was too
weak to impose it on the clergy and the nobility. He could not even retain
his reforming ministers, Malesherbes and Turgot. What with famines and
increased taxation, the poverty of all classes increased, and the huge
pensions drawn by the Court formed a shocking contrast to the general
distress.
The notables convoked to attempt to remedy the financial situation
refused a system of equal taxation, and granted only insignificant reforms
which the Parliament did not even consent to register. It had to be dissolved.
The provincial Parliaments made common cause with that of Paris, and
were also dissolved. But they led opinion, and in all parts of France
promoted the demand for a meeting of the States General, which had not
been convoked for nearly two hundred years.
The decision was taken: 5,000,000 Frenchmen, of whom 100,000 were
ecclesiastics and 150,000 nobles, sent their representatives. There were in
all 1,200 deputies, of whom 578 were of the Third Estate, consisting chiefly
of magistrates, advocates, and physicians. Of the 300 deputies of the clergy,
200, of plebeian origin, threw in their lot with the Third Estate against the
nobility and clergy.
From the first sessions a psychological conflict broke out between the
deputies of different social conditions and (therefore) different mentalities.
The magnificent costumes of the privileged deputies contrasted in a
humiliating fashion with the sombre fashions of the Third Estate.
At the first session the members of the nobility and the clergy were
covered, according to the prerogatives of their class, before the king. Those
of the Third Estate wished to imitate them, but the privileged members
protested. On the following day more protests of wounded self-love were
heard. The deputies of the Third Estate invited those of the nobility and the
clergy who were sitting in separate halls to join them for the verification of
their powers. The nobles refused. The negotiations lasted more than a
month. Finally, the deputies of the Third Estate, on the proposition of the
Abbe Sieyes, considering that they represented 95 per cent. of the nation,
declared themselves constituted as a National Assembly. From that moment
the Revolution pursued its course.
3. The Constituent Assembly.
The power of a political assembly resides, above all, in the weakness of its
adversaries. Astonished by the slight resistance encountered, and carried
away by the ascendancy of a handful of orators, the Constituent Assembly,
from its earliest sessions, spoke and acted as a sovereign body. Notably it
arrogated to itself the power of decreeing imposts, a serious encroachment
upon the prerogatives of the royal power.
The resistance of Louis XVI. was feeble enough. He simply had the hall
in which the States assembled closed. The deputies then met in the hall of
the tennis-court, and took the oath that they would not separate until the
Constitution of the kingdom was an established fact.
The majority of the deputies of the clergy went with them. The king
revoked the decision of the Assembly, and ordered the deputies to retire.
The Marquis de Dreux-Breze, the Grand Master of Ceremonies, having
invited them to obey the order of the sovereign, the President of the
Assembly declared "that the nation assembled cannot receive orders," and
Mirabeau replied to the envoy of the sovereign that, being united by the will
of the people, the Assembly would only withdraw at the point of the
bayonet. Again the king gave way.
On the 9th of June the meeting of deputies took the title of the
Constituent Assembly. For the first time in centuries the king was forced to
recognise the existence of a new power, formerly ignored—that of the
people, represented by its elected representatives. The absolute monarchy
was no more.
Feeling himself more and more seriously threatened, Louis XVI.
summoned to Versailles a number of regiments composed of foreign
mercenaries. The Assembly demanded the withdrawal of the troops.
The king refused, and dismissed Necker, replacing him by the Marshal
de Broglie, reputed to be an extremely authoritative person.
But the Assembly had able supporters. Camille Desmoulins and others
harangued the crowd in all directions, calling it to the defence of liberty.
They sounded the tocsin, organised a militia of 12,000 men, took muskets
and cannon from the Invalides, and on the 14th of July the armed bands
marched upon the Bastille. The fortress, barely defended, capitulated in a
few hours. Seven prisoners were found within it, of whom one was an idiot
and four were accused of forgery.
The Bastille, the prison of many victims of arbitrary power, symbolised
the royal power to many minds; but the people who demolished it had not
suffered by it. Scarcely any but members of the nobility were imprisoned
there.
The influence exercised by the taking of this fortress has continued to
our days. Serious historians like M. Rambaud assure us that "the taking of
the Bastille is a culminating fact in the history, not of France only but of all
Europe, and inaugurates a new epoch in the history of the world."
Such credulity is a little excessive. The importance of the event lay
simply in the psychological fact that for the first time the people received an
obvious proof of the weakness of an authority which had lately been
formidable.
When the principle of authority is injured in the public mind it dissolves
very rapidly. What might not one demand of a king who could not defend
his principal fortress against popular attacks? The master regarded as all-
powerful had ceased to be so.
The taking of the Bastille was the beginning of one of those phenomena
of mental contagion which abound in the history of the Revolution. The
foreign mercenary troops, although they could scarcely be interested in the
movement, began to show symptoms of mutiny. Louis XVI. was reduced to
accepting their disbandment. He recalled Necker, went to the Hotel de Ville,
sanctioned by his presence the accomplished facts, and accepted from La
Fayette, commandant of the National Guard, the new cockade of red, white,
and blue which allied the colours of Paris to those of the king.
Although the riot which ended in the taking of the Bastille can by no
means be regarded as "a culminating fact in history," it does mark the
precise moment of the commencement of popular government. The armed
people thenceforth intervened daily in the deliberations of the revolutionary
Assemblies, and seriously influenced their conduct.
This intervention of the people in conformity with the dogma of its
sovereignty has provoked the respectful admiration of many historians of
the Revolution. Even a superficial study of the psychology of crowds would
speedily have shown them that the mystic entity which they call the people
was merely translating the will of a few leaders. It is not correct to say that
the people took the Bastille, attacked the Tuileries, invaded the Convention,
&c., but that certain leaders—generally by means of the clubs—united
armed bands of the populace, which they led against the Bastille, the
Tuileries, &c. During the Revolution the same crowds attacked or defended
the most contrary parties, according to the leaders who happened to be at
their heads. A crowd never has any opinion but that of its leaders.
Example constituting one of the most potent forms of suggestion, the
taking of the Bastille was inevitably followed by the destruction of other
fortresses. Many chateaux were regarded as so many little Bastilles, and in
order to imitate the Parisians who had destroyed theirs the peasants began
to burn them. They did so with the greater fury because the seigneurial
homes contained the titles of feudal dues. It was a species of Jacquerie.
The Constituent Assembly, so proud and haughty towards the king, was,
like all the revolutionary assemblies which followed it, extremely
pusillanimous before the people.
Hoping to put an end to the disorders of the night of August 4th, it
voted, on the proposition of a member of the nobility, the Comte de
Noailles, the abolition of seigneurial rights. Although this measure
suppressed at one stroke the privileges of the nobles, it was voted with tears
and embracings. Such accesses of sentimental enthusiasm are readily
explained when we recall how contagious emotion is in a crowd, above all
in an assembly oppressed by fear.
If the renunciation of their rights had been effected by the nobility a few
years earlier, the Revolution would doubtless have been avoided, but it was
now too late. To give way only when one is forced to do so merely
increases the demands of those to whom one yields. In politics one should
always look ahead and give way long before one is forced to do so.
Louis XVI. hesitated for two months to ratify the decisions voted by the
Assembly on the night of the 4th of August. He had retired to Versailles.
The leaders sent thither a band of 7,000 or 8,000 men and women of the
people, assuring them that the royal residence contained great stores of
bread. The railings of the palace were forced, some of the bodyguard were
killed, and the king and all his family were led back to Paris in the midst of
a shrieking crowd, many of whom bore on the ends of their pikes the heads
of the soldiers massacred. The dreadful journey lasted six hours. These
events constituted what are known as the "days" of October.
The popular power increased, and in reality the king, like the whole
assembly, was henceforth in the hands of the people—that is, at the mercy
of the clubs and their leaders. This popular power was to prevail for nearly
ten years, and the Revolution was to be almost entirely its work.
While proclaiming that the people constituted the only sovereign, the
Assembly was greatly embarrassed by riots which went far beyond its
theoretical expectations. It had supposed that order would be restored while
it fabricated a Constitution destined to assure the eternal happiness of
mankind.
We know that during the whole duration of the Revolution one of the
chief occupations of the assemblies was to make, unmake, and remake
Constitutions. The theorists attributed to them then, as they do to-day, the
power of transforming society; the Assembly, therefore, could not neglect
its task. In the meantime it published a solemn Declaration of the Rights of
Man which summarised its principles.
The Constitution, proclamations, declarations, and speeches had not the
slightest effect on the popular movements, nor on the dissentients who daily
increased in number in the heart of the Assembly. The latter became more
and more subjected to the ascendancy of the advanced party, which was
supported by the clubs. Danton, Camille Desmoulins, and later Marat and
Hebert, violently excited the populace by their harangues and their journals.
The Assembly was rapidly going down the slope that leads to extremes.
During all these disorders the finances of the country were not
improving. Finally convinced that philanthropic speeches would not alter
their lamentable condition, and seeing that bankruptcy threatened, the
Assembly decreed, on the 2nd of November, 1789, the confiscation of the
goods of the Church. Their revenues, consisting of the tithes collected from
the faithful, amounted to some L8,000,000, and their value was estimated at
about L120,000,000. They were divided among some hundreds of prelates,
Court abbes, &c., who owned a quarter of all France. These goods,
henceforth entitled is "national domains," formed the guarantee of the
assignats, the first issue of which was for 400,000,000 francs (L16,000,000
sterling). The public accepted them at the outset, but they multiplied so
under the Directory and the Convention, which issued 45,000,000,000
francs in this form (L1,800,000,000 sterling), that an assignat of 100 livres
was finally worth only a few halfpence.
Stimulated by his advisers, the feeble Louis attempted in vain to
struggle against the decrees of the Assembly by refusing to sanction them.
Under the influence of the daily suggestions of the leaders and the
power of mental contagion the revolutionary movement was spreading
everywhere independently of the Assembly and often even against it.
In the towns and villages revolutionary municipalities were instituted,
protected by the local National Guards. Those of neighbouring towns
commenced to make mutual arrangements to defend themselves should
need arise. Thus federations were formed, which were soon rolled into one;
this sent 14,000 National Guards to Paris, who assembled on the Champ-de-
Mars on the 14th of July, 1790. There the king swore to maintain the
Constitution decreed by the National Assembly.
Despite this vain oath it became more evident every day that no
agreement was possible between the hereditary principles of the monarchy
and those proclaimed by the Assembly.
Feeling himself completely powerless, the king thought only of flight.
Arrested at Varennes and brought back a prisoner to Paris, he was shut up in
the Tuileries. The Assembly, although still extremely royalist, suspended
him from power, and decided to assume the sole charge of the government.
Never did sovereign find himself in a position so difficult as that of
Louis at the time of his flight. The genius of a Richelieu would hardly have
extricated him. The only element of defence on which he could have relied
had from the beginning absolutely failed him.
During the whole duration of the Constituent Assembly the immense
majority of Frenchmen and of the Assembly remained royalist, so that had
the sovereign accepted a liberal monarchy he could perhaps have remained
in power. It would seem that Louis had little to promise in order to come to
an agreement with the Assembly.
Little, perhaps, but with his structure of mind that little was strictly
impossible. All the shades of his forbears would have risen up in front of
him had he consented to modify the mechanism of the monarchy inherited
from so many ancestors. And even had he attempted to do so, the opposition
of his family, the clergy, the nobles, and the Court could never have been
surmounted. The ancient castes on which the monarchy rested, the nobility
and the clergy, were then almost as powerful as the monarch himself. Every
time it seemed as though he might yield to the injunctions of the Assembly
it was because he was constrained to do so by force, and to attempt to gain
time. His appeals to alien Powers represented the resolution of a desperate
man who had seen all his natural defences fail him.
He, and especially the queen, entertained the strangest illusions as to the
possible assistance of Austria, for centuries the rival of France. If Austria
indolently consented to come to his aid, it was only in the hope of receiving
a great reward. Mercy gave him to understand that the payment expected
consisted of Alsace, the Alps, and Navarre.
The leaders of the clubs, finding the Assembly too royalist, sent the
people against it. A petition was signed, inviting the Assembly to convoke a
new constituent power to proceed to the trial of Louis XVI.
Monarchical in spite of all, and finding that the Revolution was
assuming a character far too demagogic, the Assembly resolved to defend
itself against the actions of the people. A battalion of the National Guard,
commanded by La Fayette, was sent to the Champ-de-Mars, where the
crowd was assembled, to disperse it. Fifty of those present were killed.
The Assembly did not long persist in its feeble resistance. Extremely
fearful of the people, it increased its arrogance towards the king, depriving
him every day of some part of his prerogatives and authority. He was now
scarcely more than a mere official obliged to execute the wishes of others.
The Assembly had imagined that it would be able to exercise the
authority of which it had deprived the king, but such a task was infinitely
above its resources. A power so divided is always weak. "I know nothing
more terrible," said Mirabeau, "than the sovereign authority of six hundred
persons."
Having flattered itself that it could combine in itself all the powers of
the State, and exercise them as Louis XVI. had done, the Assembly very
soon exercised none whatever.
As its authority failed anarchy increased. The popular leaders
continually stirred up the people. Riot and insurrection became the sole
power. Every day the Assembly was invaded by rowdy and imperious
delegations which operated by means of threats and demands.
All these popular movements, which the Assembly, under the stress of
fear, invariably obeyed, had nothing spontaneous about them. They simply
represented the manifestations of new powers—the clubs and the Commune
—which had been set up beside the Assembly.
The most powerful of these clubs was the Jacobin, which had quickly
created more than five hundred branches in the country, all of which were
under the orders of the central body. Its influence remained preponderant
during the whole duration of the Revolution. It was the master of the
Assembly, and then of France, its only rival the insurrectionary Commune,
whose power was exercised only in Paris.
The weakness of the national Assembly and all its failures had made it
extremely unpopular. It became conscious of this, and, feeling that it was
every day more powerless, decided to hasten the creation of the new
Constitution in order that it might dissolve. Its last action, which was
tactless enough, was to decree that no member of the Constituent Assembly
should be elected to the Legislative Assembly. The members of the latter
were thus deprived of the experience acquired by their predecessors.
The Constitution was completed on the 3rd of September, 1791, and
accepted on the 13th by the king, to whom the Assembly had restored his
powers.
This Constitution organised a representative Government, delegating the
legislative power to deputies elected by the people, and the executive power
to the king, whose right of veto over the decrees of the Assembly was
recognised. New departmental divisions were substituted for the old
provinces. The imposts were abolished, and replaced by direct and indirect
taxes, which are still in force.
The Assembly, which had just altered the territorial divisions and
overthrown all the old social organisation, thought itself powerful enough to
transform the religious organisation of the country also. It claimed notably
that the members of the clergy should be elected by the people, and should
be thus withdrawn from the influence of their supreme head, the Pope.
This civil constitution of the clergy was the origin of religious struggles
and persecutions which lasted until the days of the Consulate. Two-thirds of
the priests refused the oath demanded of them.
During the three years which represented the life of the Constituent
Assembly the Revolution had produced considerable results. The principal
result was perhaps the beginning of the transference to the Third Estate of
the riches of the privileged classes. In this way while interests were created
to be defended fervent adherents were raised up to the new regime. A
Revolution supported by the gratification of acquired appetites is bound to
be powerful. The Third Estate, which had supplanted the nobles, and the
peasants, who had bought the national domains, would readily understand
that the restoration of the ancien regime would despoil them of all their
advantages. The energetic defence of the Revolution was merely the
defence of their own fortunes.
This is why we see, during part of the Revolution, nearly half the
departments vainly rising against the despotism that crushed them. The
Republicans triumphed over all opposition. They were extremely powerful
in that they had to defend, not only a new ideal, but new material interests.
We shall see that the influence of these two factors lasted during the whole
of the Revolution, and contributed powerfully to the establishment of the
Empire.
Chapter II.
The Psychology of the Legislative Assembly
Table of Contents
1. Political Events during the Life of the Legislative Assembly.
Before examining the mental characteristics of the Legislative Assembly let
us briefly sum up the considerable political events which marked its short
year's life. They naturally played an important part in respect of its
psychological manifestations.
Extremely monarchical, the Legislative Assembly had no more idea
than its predecessor of destroying the monarchy. The king appeared to it to
be slightly suspect, but it still hoped to be able to retain him on the throne.
Unhappily for him, Louis was incessantly begging for intervention from
abroad. Shut up in the Tuileries, defended only by his Swiss Guards, the
timid sovereign was drifting among contrary influences. He subsidised
journals intended to modify public opinion, but the obscure "penny-a-
liners" who edited them knew nothing of acting on the mind of the crowd.
Their only means of persuasion was to menace with the gallows all the
partisans of the Revolution, and to predict the invasion of France by an
army which would rescue the king.
Royalty no longer counted on anything but the foreign Courts. The
nobles were emigrating. Prussia, Austria, and Russia were threatening
France with a war of invasion. The Court favoured their lead. To the
coalition of the three kings against France the Jacobin Club proposed to
oppose a league of peoples. The Girondists were then, with the Jacobins, at
the head of the revolutionary movement. They incited the masses to arm
themselves—600,000 volunteers were equipped. The Court accepted a
Girondist minister. Dominated by him, Louis XVI. was obliged to propose
to the Assembly a war against Austria. It was immediately agreed to.
In declaring war the king was not sincere. The queen revealed the
French plans of campaign and the secret deliberations of the Council to the
Austrians.
The beginnings of the struggle were disastrous. Several columns of
troops, attacked by panic, disbanded. Stimulated by the clubs, and
persuaded—justly, for that matter—that the king was conspiring with the
enemies of France, the population of the faubourgs rose in insurrection. Its
leaders, the Jacobins, and above all Danton, sent to the Tuileries on the 20th
of June a petition threatening the king with revocation. It then invaded the
Tuileries, heaping invectives on the sovereign.
Fatality impelled Louis toward his tragic destiny. While the threats of
the Jacobins against royalty had roused many of the departments to
indignation, it was learned that a Prussian army had arrived on the frontiers
of Lorraine.
The hope of the king and queen respecting the help to be obtained from
abroad was highly chimerical. Marie-Antoinette suffered from an absolute
illusion as to the psychology of the Austrian and the French peoples. Seeing
France terrorised by a few energumens, she supposed that it would be
equally easy to terrify the Parisians, and by means of threats to lead them
back under the king's authority. Inspired by her, Fersen undertook to publish
the manifesto of the Duke of Brunswick, threatening Paris with "total
subversion if the royal family were molested."
The effect produced was diametrically opposite to that intended. The
manifesto aroused indignation against the monarch, who was regarded as an
accomplice, and increased his unpopularity. From that day he was marked
for the scaffold.
Carried away by Danton, the delegates of the sections installed
themselves at the Hotel de Ville as an insurrectionary Commune, which
arrested the commandant of the National Guard, who was devoted to the
king, sounded the tocsin, equipped the National Guard, and on the 10th of
August hurled them, with the populace, against the Tuileries. The regiments
called in by Louis disbanded themselves. Soon none were left to defend him
but his Swiss and a few gentlemen. Nearly all were killed. Left alone, the
king took refuge with the Assembly. The crowds demanded his
denouncement. The Legislative Assembly decreed his suspension and left a
future Assembly, the Convention, to decide upon his fate.
2. Mental Characteristics of the Legislative Assembly.
The Legislative Assembly, formed of new men, presented quite a special
interest from the psychological point of view. Few assemblies have offered
in such a degree the characteristics of the political collectivity.
It comprised seven hundred and fifty deputies, divided into pure
royalists, constitutional royalists, republicans, Girondists, and Montagnards.
Advocates and men of letters formed the majority. It also contained, but in
smaller numbers, superior officers, priests, and a very few scientists.
The philosophical conceptions of the members of this Assembly seem
rudimentary enough. Many were imbued with Rousseau's idea of a return to
a state of nature. But all, like their predecessors, were dominated more
especially by recollections of Greek and Latin antiquity. Cato, Brutus,
Gracchus, Plutarch, Marcus Aurelius, and Plato, continually evoked,
furnished the images of their speech. When the orator wished to insult
Louis XVI. he called him Caligula.
In hoping to destroy tradition they were revolutionaries, but in claiming
to return to a remote past they showed themselves extremely reactionary.
For the rest, all these theories had very little influence on their conduct.
Reason was continually figuring in their speeches, but never in their
actions. These were always dominated by those affective and mystic
elements whose potency we have so often demonstrated.
The psychological characteristics of the Legislative Assembly were
those of the Constituent Assembly, but were greatly accentuated. They may
be summed up in four words: impressionability, mobility, timidity, and
weakness.
This mobility and impressionability are revealed in the constant
variability of their conduct. One day they exchange noisy invective and
blows. On the following day we see them "throwing themselves into one
another's arms with torrents of tears." They eagerly applaud an address
demanding the punishment of those who have petitioned for the king's
dethronement, and the same day accord the honours of the session to a
delegation which has come to demand his downfall.
The pusillanimity and weakness of the Assembly in the face of threats
was extreme. Although royalist it voted the suspension of the king, and on
the demand of the Commune delivered him, with his family, to be
imprisoned in the Temple.
Thanks to its weakness, it was as incapable as the Constituent Assembly
of exercising any power, and allowed itself to be dominated by the
Commune and the clubs, which were directed by such influential leaders as
Hebert, Tallien, Rossignol, Marat, Robespierre, &c.
Until Thermidor, 1794, the insurrectionary Commune constituted the
chief power in the State, and behaved precisely as if it had been charged
with the government of Paris.
It was the Commune that demanded the imprisonment of Louis XVI. in
the tower of the Temple, when the Assembly wished to imprison him in the
palace of the Luxembourg. It was the Commune again that filled the prisons
with suspects, and then ordered them to be killed.
We know with what refinements of cruelty a handful of some 150
bandits, paid at the rate of 24 livres a day, and directed by a few members of
the Commune, exterminated some 1,200 persons in four days. This crime
was known as the massacre of September. The mayor of Paris, Petion,
received the band of assassins with respect, and gave them drink. A few
Girondists protested somewhat, but the Jacobins were silent.
The terrorised Assembly affected at first to ignore the massacres, which
were encouraged by several of its more influential deputies, notably
Couthon and Billaud-Varenne. When at last it decided to condemn them it
was without attempting to prevent their continuation.
Conscious of its impotence, the Legislative Assembly dissolved itself a
fortnight later in order to give way to the Convention.
Its work was obviously disastrous, not in intention but in fact. Royalist,
it abandoned the monarchy; humanitarian, it allowed the massacres of
September; pacific, it pushed France into a formidable war, thus showing
that a weak Government always ends by bringing ruin upon its country.
The history of the two previous revolutionary Assemblies proves once
more to what point events carry within them their inevitable consequences.
They constitute a train of necessities of which we can sometimes choose the
first, but which then evolve without consulting us. We are free to make a
decision, but powerless to avert its consequences.
The first measures of the Constituent Assembly were rational and
voluntary, but the results which followed were beyond all will or reason or
foresight.
Which of the men of 1789 would have ventured to desire or predict the
death of Louis XVI., the wars of La Vendee, the Terror, the permanent
guillotine and the final anarchy, or the ensuing return to tradition and order,
guided by the iron hand of a soldier?
In the development of events which ensued from the early actions of the
revolutionary Assemblies the most striking, perhaps, was the rise and
development of the government of the crowd—of mob rule.
Behind the facts which we have been considering—the taking of the
Bastille, the invasion of Versailles, the massacres of September, the attack
on the Tuileries, the murder of the Swiss Guards, and the downfall and
imprisonment of the king—we can readily perceive the laws affecting the
psychology of crowds and their leaders.
We shall now see that the power of the multitude will progressively
increase, overcome all other powers, and finally replace them.
Chapter III.
The Psychology of the Convention
Table of Contents
1. The Legend of the Convention.
The history of the Convention is not merely fertile in psychological
documents. It also shows how powerless the witnesses of any period and
even their immediate successors are to form an exact idea of the events
which they have witnessed, and the men who have surrounded them.
More than a century has elapsed since the Revolution, and men are only
just beginning to form judgments concerning this period which, if still often
doubtful enough, are slightly more accurate than of old.
This happens, not only because new documents are being drawn from
the archives, but because the legends which enveloped that sanguinary
period in a magical cloud are gradually vanishing with the passage of time.
Perhaps the most tenacious legend of all was that which until formerly
used to surround the personages to whom our fathers applied the glorious
epithet, "the Giants of the Convention."
The struggles of the Convention against France in insurrection and
Europe in arms produced such an impression that the heroes of this
formidable struggle seemed to belong to a race of supermen or Titans.
The epithet "giant" seemed justified so long as the events of the period
were confused and massed together. Regarded as connected when it was
simply simultaneous, the work of the armies was confounded with that of
the Convention. The glory of the first recoiled upon the second, and served
as an excuse for the hecatombs of the Terror, the ferocity of the civil war,
and the devastation of France.
Under the penetrating scrutiny of modern criticism, the heterogeneous
mass of events has been slowly disentangled. The armies of the Republic
have retained their old prestige, but we have been forced to recognise that
the men of the Convention, absorbed entirely by their intestine conflicts,
had very little to do with their victories. At the most two or three members
of the committees of the Assembly were concerned with the armies, and the
fact that they were victorious was due, apart from their numbers and the
talents of their young generals, to the enthusiasm with which a new faith
had inspired them.
In a later chapter, devoted to the revolutionary armies, we shall see how
they conquered Europe in arms. They set out inspired by the ideas of liberty
and equality which constituted the new gospel, and once on the frontiers,
which were to keep them so long, they retained a special mentality, very
different from that of the Government, which they first knew nothing of and
afterwards despised.
Having no part whatever in their victories, the men of the Convention
contented themselves with legislating at hazard according to the injunctions
of the leaders who directed them, and who claimed to be regenerating
France by means of the guillotine.
But it was thanks to these valiant armies that the history of the
Convention was transformed into an apotheosis which affected several
generations with a religious respect which even to-day is hardly extinct.
Studying in detail the psychology of the "Giants" of the Convention, we
find their magnitude shrink very rapidly. They were in general extremely
mediocre. Their most fervent defenders, such as M. Aulard, are obliged to
admit as much.
This is how M. Aulard puts it in his History of the French Revolution:—
"It has been said that the generation which from 1789 to 1799 did such
great and terrible things was a generation of giants, or, to put it more
plainly, that it was a generation more distinguished than that which
preceded it or that which followed.
This is a retrospective illusion. The citizens who formed the
municipal and Jacobin or nationalist groups by which the Revolution
was effected do not seem to have been superior, either in
enlightenment or in talents, to the Frenchmen of the time of Louis XV.
or of Louis Philippe. Were those exceptionally gifted whose names
history has retained because they appeared on the stage of Paris, or
because they were the most brilliant orators of the various
revolutionary Assemblies? Mirabeau, up to a certain point, deserved
the title of genius; but as to the rest— Robespierre, Danton, Vergniaud
—had they truly more talent, for example, than our modern orators? In
1793, in the time of the supposed 'giants,' Mme. Roland wrote in her
memoirs: 'France was as though drained of men; their dearth during
this revolution is truly surprising; there have scarcely been any but
pigmies.' "
If after considering the men of the Convention individually we consider
them in a body, we may say that they did not shine either by intelligence or
by virtue or by courage. Never did a body of men manifest such
pusillanimity. They had no courage save in their speeches or in respect of
remote dangers. This Assembly, so proud and threatening in its speech
when addressing royalty, was perhaps the most timid and docile political
collectivity that the world has ever known. We see it slavishly obedient to
the orders of the clubs and the Commune, trembling before the popular
delegations which invaded it daily, and obeying the injunctions of the
rioters to the point of handing over to them its most brilliant members. The
Convention affords the world a melancholy spectacle, voting, at the popular
behest, laws so absurd that it is obliged to annul them as soon as the rioters
have quitted the hall.
Few Assemblies have given proof of such weakness. When we wish to
show how low a popular Government can fall we have only to point to the
Convention.
2. Results of the Triumph of the Jacobin Religion
Among the causes that gave the Convention its special physiognomy, one of
the most important was the definite establishment of a revolutionary
religion. A dogma which was at first in process of formation was at last
finally erected.
This dogma was composed of an aggregate of somewhat inconsistent
elements. Nature, the rights of man, liberty, equality, the social contract,
hatred of tyrants, and popular sovereignty formed the articles of a gospel
which, to its disciples, was above discussion. The new truths had found
apostles who were certain of their power, and who finally, like believers all
the world over, sought to impose them by force. No heed should be taken of
the opinion of unbelievers; they all deserved to be exterminated.
The hatred of heretics having been always, as we have seen, in respect
of the Reformation, an irreducible characteristic of great beliefs, we can
readily comprehend the intolerance of the Jacobin religion.
The history of the Reformation proves also that the conflict between
two allied beliefs is very bitter. We must not, therefore, be astonished that in
the Convention the Jacobins fought furiously against the other republicans,
whose faith hardly differed from their own.
The propaganda of the new apostles was very energetic. To convert the
provinces they sent thither zealous disciples escorted by guillotines. The
inquisitors of the new faith would have no paltering with error. As
Robespierre said, "The republic is the destruction of everything that is
opposed to it." What matter that the country refused to be regenerated? It
should be regenerated despite itself. "We will make a cemetery of France,"
said Carrier, "rather than fail to regenerate it in our own way."
The Jacobin policy derived from the new faith was very simple. It
consisted in a sort of equalitarian Socialism, directed by a dictatorship
which would brook no opposition.
Of practical ideas consistent with the economic necessities and the true
nature of man, the theorists who ruled France would have nothing to say.
Speech and the guillotine sufficed them. Their speeches were childish.
"Never a fact," says Taine, "nothing but abstractions, strings of sentences
about Nature, reason, the people, tyrants, liberty: like so many puffed-out
balloons uselessly jostling in space. If we did not know that it all ended in
practical and dreadful results, we should think they were games of logic,
school exercises, academical demonstrations, ideological combinations."
The theories of the Jacobins amounted practically to an absolute
tyranny. To them it seemed evident that a sovereign State must be obeyed
without discussion by citizens rendered equal as to conditions and fortune.
The power with which they invested themselves was far greater than
that of the monarchs who had preceded them. They fixed the prices of
merchandise and arrogated the right to dispose of the life and property of
citizens.
Their confidence in the regenerative virtues of the revolutionary faith
was such that after having declared war upon kings they declared war upon
the gods. A calendar was established from which the saints were banished.
They created a new divinity, Reason, whose worship was celebrated in
Notre-Dame, with ceremonies which were in many ways identical with
those of the Catholic faith, upon the altar of the "late Holy Virgin." This cult
lasted until Robespierre substituted a personal religion of which he
constituted himself the high priest.
The sole masters of France, the Jacobins and their disciples were able to
plunder the country with impunity, although they were never in the majority
anywhere.
Their numbers are not easy to determine exactly. We know only that
they were very small. Taine valued them at 5,000 in Paris, among 700,000
inhabitants; in Besancon 300 among 300,000; and in all France about
300,000.
"A small feudality of brigands, set over a conquered France," according
to the words of the same author, they were able, in spite of their small
numbers, to dominate the country, and this for several reasons. In the first
place, their faith gave them a considerable strength. Then, because they
represented the Government, and for centuries the French had obeyed those
who were in command. Finally, because it was believed that to overthrow
them would be to bring back the ancien regime, which was greatly dreaded
by the numerous purchasers of the national domains. Their tyranny must
have grown frightful indeed to force so many departments to rise against
them.
The first factor of their power was very important. In the conflict
between powerful faiths and weak faiths victory never falls to the latter. A
powerful faith creates strong wills, which will always overpower weak
wills. That the Jacobins themselves did finally perish was because their
accumulated violence had bound together thousands of weak wills whose
united weight overbalanced their own strong wills.
It is true that the Girondists, whom the Jacobins persecuted with so
much hatred, had also well-established beliefs, but in the struggle which
ensued their education told against them, together with their respect for
certain traditions and the rights of others, scruples which did not in the least
trouble their adversaries.
"The majority of the sentiments of the Girondists," writes Emile
Ollivier, "were delicate and generous; those of the Jacobin mob were low,
gross, and brutal. The name of Vergniaud, compared with that of the 'divine'
Marat, measures a gulf which nothing could span."
Dominating the Convention at the outset by the superiority of their
talents and their eloquence, the Girondists soon fell under the domination of
the Montagnards—worthless energumens, who carried little weight, but
were always active, and who knew how to excite the passions of the
populace. It was violence and not talent that impressed the Assemblies.
3. Mental Characteristics of the Convention.
Beside the characteristics common to all assemblies there are some created
by influences of environment and circumstances, which give any particular
assembly of men a special physiognomy. Most of the characteristics
observable in the Constituent and Legislative Assemblies reappeared, in an
exaggerated form, in the Convention.
This Assembly comprised about seven hundred and fifty deputies, of
whom rather more than a third had sat in the Constituent or the Legislative
Assembly. By terrorising the population the Jacobins contrived to triumph
at the elections. The majority of the electors, six millions out of seven,
preferred to abstain from voting.
As to the professions, the Assembly contained a large number of
lawyers, advocates, notaries, bailiffs, ex-magistrates, and a few literary
men.
The mentality of the Convention was not homogeneous. Now, an
assembly composed of individuals of widely different characters soon splits
up into a number of groups. The Convention very early contained three—
the Gironde, the Mountain, and the Plain. The constitutional monarchists
had almost disappeared.
The Gironde and the Mountain, extreme parties, consisted of about a
hundred members apiece, who successively became leaders. In the
Mountain were the most advanced members: Couthon, Herault de
Sechelles, Danton, Camille Desmoulins, Marat, Collot d'Herbois, Billaud-
Varennes, Barras, Saint-Just, Fouche, Tallien, Carrier, Robespierre, &c. In
the Gironde were Brissot, Petion, Condorcet, Vergniaud, &c.
The five hundred other members of the Assembly—that is, the great
majority—constituted what was known as the Plain.
This latter formed a floating mass, silent, undecided, and timid; ready to
follow every impulse and to be carried away by the excitement of the
moment. It gave ear indifferently to the stronger of the two preceding
groups. After obeying the Gironde for some time it allowed itself to be led
away by the Mountain, when the latter triumphed over its enemy. This was
a natural consequence of the law already stated, by which the weak
invariably fall under the dominion of the stronger wills.
The influence of great manipulators of men was displayed in a high
degree during the Convention. It was constantly led by a violent minority of
narrow minds, whose intense convictions lent them great strength.
A brutal and audacious minority will always lead a fearful and irresolute
majority. This explains the constant tendency toward extremes to be
observed in all revolutionary assemblies. The history of the Convention
verifies once more the law of acceleration studied in another chapter.
The men of the Convention were thus bound to pass from moderation to
greater and greater violence. Finally they decimated themselves. Of the 180
Girondists who at the outset led the Convention 140 were killed or fled, and
finally the most fanatical of the Terrorists, Robespierre, reigned alone over
a terrified crowd of servile representatives.
Yet it was among the five hundred members of the majority, uncertain
and floating as it was, that the intelligence and experience were to be found.
The technical committees to whom the useful work of the Convention was
due were recruited from the Plain.
More or less indifferent to politics, the members of the Plain were
chiefly anxious that no one should pay particular attention to them. Shut up
in their committees, they showed themselves as little as possible in the
Assembly, which explains why the sessions of the Convention contained
barely a third of the deputies.
Unhappily, as often happens, these intelligent and honest men were
completely devoid of character, and the fear which always dominated them
made them vote for the worst of the measures introduced by their dreaded
masters.
The men of the Plain voted for everything they were ordered to vote for
—the creation of the Revolutionary Tribunal, the Terror, &c. It was with
their assistance that the Mountain crushed the Gironde, and Robespierre
destroyed the Hebertists and Dantonists. Like all weak people, they
followed the strong. The gentle philanthropists who composed the Plain,
and constituted the majority of the Assembly, contributed, by their
pusillanimity, to bring about the frightful excesses of the Convention.
The psychological note always prevailing in the Convention was a
horrible fear. It was more especially through fear that men cut off one
another's heads, in the doubtful hope of keeping their own on their
shoulders.
Such a fear was, of course, very comprehensible. The unhappy deputies
deliberated amid the hootings and vociferations of the tribunes. At every
moment veritable savages, armed with pikes, invaded the Assembly, and the
majority of the members no longer dared to attend the sessions. When by
chance they did go it was only to vote in silence according to the orders of
the Mountain, which was only a third as numerous.
The fear which dominated the latter, although less visible, was just as
profound. Men destroyed their enemies, not only because they were shallow
fanatics, but because they were convinced that their own existence was
threatened. The judges of the revolutionary Tribunals trembled no less.
They would have willingly acquitted Danton, and the widow of Camille
Desmoulins, and many others. They dared not.
But it was above all when Robespierre became the sole master that the
phantom of fear oppressed the Assembly. It has truly been said that a glance
from the master made his colleagues shrink with fear. On their faces one
read "the pallor of fear and the abandon of despair."
All feared Robespierre and Robespierre feared all. It was because he
feared conspiracies against him that he cut off men's heads, and it was also
through fear that others allowed him to do so.
The memoirs of members of the Convention show plainly what a
horrible memory they retained of this gloomy period. Questioned twenty
years later, says Taine, on the true aim and the intimate thoughts of the
Committee of Public Safety, Barrere replied:—
"We had only one feeling, that of self-preservation; only one
desire, that of preserving our lives, which each of us
believed to be threatened. You had your neighbour's head cut
off so that your neighbour should not have you yourself
guillotined."
The history of the Convention constitutes one of the most striking
examples that could be given of the influence of leaders and of fear upon an
assembly.
Chapter IV.
The Government of the Convention
Table of Contents
1. The activity of the Clubs and the Commune during the Convention.
During the whole of its existence the Convention was governed by the
leaders of the clubs and of the Commune.
We have already seen what was their influence on the preceding
Assemblies. It became overwhelming during the Convention. The history of
this latter is in reality that of the clubs and the Commune which dominated
it. They enslaved, not only the Convention, but also all France. Numerous
little provincial clubs, directed by that of the capital, supervised magistrates,
denounced suspects, and undertook the execution of all the revolutionary
orders.
When the clubs or the Commune had decided upon certain measures
they had them voted by the Assembly then and there. If the Assembly
resisted, they sent their armed delegations thither— that is, armed bands
recruited from the scum of the populace. They conveyed injunctions which
were always slavishly obeyed. The Commune was so sure of its strength
that it even demanded of the Convention the immediate expulsion of
deputies who displeased it.
While the Convention was composed generally of educated men, the
members of the Commune and the clubs comprised a majority of small
shopkeepers, labourers, and artisans, incapable of personal opinions, and
always guided by their leaders—Danton, Camille Desmoulins, Robespierre,
&c.
Of the two powers, clubs and insurrectionary Commune, the latter
exercised the greater influence in Paris, because it had made for itself a
revolutionary army. It held under its orders forty- eight committees of
National Guards, who asked nothing more than to kill, sack, and, above all,
plunder.
The tyranny with which the Commune crushed Paris was frightful. For
example, it delegated to a certain cobbler, Chalandon by name, the right of
surveillance over a portion of the capital—a right implying the power to
send to the Revolutionary Tribunal, and therefore to the guillotine, all those
whom he suspected. Certain streets were thus almost depopulated by him.
The Convention struggled feebly against the Commune at the outset, but
did not prolong its resistance. The culminating point of the conflict occurred
when the Convention wished to arrest Hebert, the friend of the Commune,
and the latter sent armed bands who threatened the Assembly and demanded
the expulsion of the Girondists who had provoked the measure. Upon the
Convention refusing the Commune besieged it on June 2, 1798, by means
of its revolutionary army, which was under the orders of Hanriot. Terrified,
the Assembly gave up twenty-seven of its members. The Commune
immediately sent a delegation ironically to felicitate it upon its obedience.
After the fall of the Girondists the Convention submitted itself
completely to the injunctions of the omnipotent Commune. The latter
decreed the levy of a revolutionary army, to be accompanied by a tribunal
and a guillotine, which was to traverse the whole of France in order to
execute suspects.
Only towards the end of its existence, after the fall of Robespierre, did
the Convention contrive to escape from the yoke of the Jacobins and the
Commune. It closed the Jacobin club and guillotined its leading members.
Despite such sanctions the leaders still continued to excite the populace
and hurl it against the Convention. In Germinal and Prairial it underwent
regular sieges. Armed delegations even succeeded in forcing the
Convention to vote the re-establishment of the Commune and the
convocation of a new Assembly, a measure which the Convention hastened
to annul the moment the insurgents had withdrawn. Ashamed of its fear, it
sent for regiments which disarmed the faubourgs and made nearly ten
thousand arrests. Twenty-six leaders of the movement were put to death,
and six deputies who were concerned in the riot were guillotined.
But the Convention did not resist to any purpose. When it was no longer
led by the clubs and the Commune it obeyed the Committee of Public
Safety and voted its decrees without discussion.
"The Convention," writes H. Williams, "which spoke of nothing less
than having all the princes and kings of Europe brought to its feet loaded
with chains, was made prisoner in its own sanctuary by a handful of
mercenaries."
2. The Government of France during the Convention—The Terror.
As soon as it assembled in 1792 the Convention began by decreeing the
abolition of royalty, and in spite of the hesitation of a great number of its
members, who knew that the provinces were royalist, it proclaimed the
Republic.
Intimately persuaded that such a proclamation would transform the
civilised world, it instituted a new era and a new calendar. The year I. of
this era marked the dawn of a world in which reason alone was to reign. It
was inaugurated by the trial of Louis XVI., a measure which was ordered
by the Commune, but which the majority of the Convention did not desire.
At its outset, in fact, the Convention was governed by its relatively
moderate elements, the Girondists. The president and the secretaries had
been chosen among the best known of this party. Robespierre, who was
later to become the absolute master of the Convention, possessed so little
influence at this time that he obtained only six votes for the presidency,
while Petion received two hundred and thirty-five.
The Montagnards had at first only a very slight influence. Their power
was of later growth. When they were in power there was no longer room in
the Convention for moderate members.
Despite their minority the Montagnards found a way to force the
Assembly to bring Louis to trial. This was at once a victory over the
Girondists, the condemnation of all kings, and a final divorce between the
old order and the new.
To bring about the trial they manoeuvred very skilfully, bombarding the
Convention with petitions from the provinces, and sending a deputation
from the insurrectional Commune of Paris, which demanded a trial.
According to a characteristic common to the Assemblies of the
Revolution, that of yielding to threats and always doing the contrary of
what they wished, the men of the Convention dared not resist. The trial was
decided upon.
The Girondists, who individually would not have wished for the death
of the king, voted for it out of fear once they were assembled. Hoping to
save his own head, the Duc d'Orleans, Louis' cousin, voted with them. If, on
mounting the scaffold on January 21, 1793, Louis had had that vision of the
future which we attribute to the gods, he would have seen following him,
one by one, the greater number of the Girondists whose weakness had been
unable to defend him.
Regarded only from the purely utilitarian point of view, the execution of
the king was one of the mistakes of the Revolution. It engendered civil war
and armed Europe against France. In the Convention itself his death gave
rise to intestine struggles, which finally led to the triumph of the
Montagnards and the expulsion of the Girondists.
The measures passed under the influence of the Montagnards finally
became so despotic that sixty departments, comprising the West and the
South, revolted. The insurrection, which was headed by many of the
expelled deputies, would perhaps have succeeded had not the
compromising assistance of the royalists caused men to fear the return of
the ancien regime. At Toulon, in fact, the insurgents acclaimed Louis XVII.
The civil war thus begun lasted during the greater part of the life of the
Revolution. It was fought with the utmost savagery. Old men, women,
children, all were massacred, and villages and crops were burned. In the
Vendee alone the number of the killed was reckoned at something between
half a million and a million.
Civil war was soon followed by foreign war. The Jacobins thought to
remedy all these ills by creating a new Constitution. It was always a
tradition with all the revolutionary assemblies to believe in the magic
virtues of formula. In France this conviction has never been affected by the
failure of experiments.
"A robust faith," writes one of the great admirers of the Revolution, M.
Rambaud, "sustained the Convention in this labour; it believed firmly that
when it had formulated in a law the principles of the Revolution its enemies
would be confounded, or, still better, converted, and that the advent of
justice would disarm the insurgents."
During its lifetime the Convention drafted two Constitutions— that of
1793, or the year I., and that of 1795, or the year III. The first was never
applied, an absolute dictatorship very soon replacing it; the second created
the Directory.
The Convention contained a large number of lawyers and men of
affairs, who promptly comprehended the impossibility of government by
means of a large Assembly. They soon divided the Convention into small
committees, each of which had an independent existence—business
committees, committees of legislation, finance, agriculture, arts, &c. These
committees prepared the laws which the Assembly usually voted with its
eyes closed.
Thanks to them, the work of the Convention was not purely destructive.
They drafted many very useful measures, creating important colleges,
establishing the metric system, &c. The majority of the members of the
Assembly, as we have already seen, took refuge in these committees in
order to evade the political conflict which would have endangered their
heads.
Above the business committees, which had nothing to do with politics,
was the Committee of Public Safety, instituted in April, 1793, and
composed of nine members. Directed at first by Danton, and in the July of
the same year by Robespierre, it gradually absorbed all the powers of
government, including that of giving orders to ministers and generals.
Carnot directed the operations of the war, Cambon the finances, and Saint-
Just and Collot-d'Herbois the general policy.
Although the laws voted by the technical committees were often very
wise, and constituted the lasting work of the Convention, those which the
Assembly voted in a body under the threats of the delegations which
invaded it were manifestly ridiculous.
Among these laws, which were not greatly in the interests of the public
or of the Convention itself, were the law of the maximum, voted in
September, 1793, which pretended to fix the price of provisions, and which
merely established a continual dearth; the destruction of the royal tombs at
Saint-Denis; the trial of the queen, the systematic devastation of the Vendee
by fire, the establishment of the Revolutionary Tribunal, &c.
The Terror was the chief means of government during the Convention.
Commencing in September, 1793, it reigned for six months—that is, until
the death of Robespierre. Vainly did certain Jacobins— Danton, Camille
Desmoulins, Herault de Sechelles, &c.—propose that clemency should be
given a trial. The only result of this proposition was that its authors were
sent to the scaffold. It was merely the lassitude of the public that finally put
an end to this shameful period.
The successive struggles of the various parties in the Convention and its
tendency towards extremes eliminated one by one the men of importance
who had once played their part therein. Finally it fell under the exclusive
domination of Robespierre. While the Convention was disorganising and
ravaging France, the armies were winning brilliant victories. They had
seized the left bank of the Rhine, Belgium, and Holland. The treaty of Basle
ratified these conquests.
We have already mentioned, and we shall return to the matter again, that
the work of the armies must be considered absolutely apart from that of the
Convention. Contemporaries understood this perfectly, but to-day it is often
forgotten.
When the Convention was dissolved, in 1795, after lasting for three
years, it was regarded with universal distrust. The perpetual plaything of
popular caprice, it had not succeeded in pacifying France, but had plunged
her into anarchy. The general opinion respecting the Convention is well
summed up in a letter written in July, 1799, by the Swedish charge
d'affaires, Baron Drinkmann: "I venture to hope that no people will ever be
governed by the will of more cruel and imbecile scoundrels than those that
have ruled France since the beginning of her new liberty."
3. The End of the Convention. The Beginnings of the Directory.
At the end of its existence, the Convention, always trusting to the power of
formulae, drafted a new Constitution, that of the year III., intended to
replace that of 1793, which had never been put into execution. The
legislative power was to be shared by a so-called Council of Ancients
composed of 150 members, and a council of deputies numbering 500. The
executive power was confided to a Directory of five members, who were
appointed by the Ancients upon nomination by the Five Hundred, and
renewed every year by the election of one of their number. It was specified
that two-thirds of the members of the new Assembly should be chosen from
among the deputies of the Convention. This prudent measure was not very
efficacious, as only ten departments remained faithful to the Jacobins.
To avoid the election of royalists, the Convention had decided to banish
all emigres in perpetuity.
The announcement of this Constitution did not produce the anticipated
effect upon the public. It had no effect upon the popular riots, which
continued. One of the most important was that which threatened the
Convention on the 5th of October, 1795.
The leaders hurled a veritable army upon the Assembly. Before such
provocation, the Convention finally decided to defend itself, and sent for
troops, entrusting the command to Barras.
Bonaparte, who was then beginning to emerge from obscurity, was
entrusted with the task of repression. With such a leader action was swift
and energetic. Vigorously pounded with ball near the church at St. Roch, the
insurgents fled, leaving some hundreds of dead on the spot.
This action, which displayed a firmness to which the Convention was
little habituated, was only due to the celerity of the military operations, for
while these were being carried out the insurgents had sent delegates to the
Assembly, which, as usual, showed itself quite ready to yield to them.
The repression of this riot constituted the last important act of the
Convention. On the 26th of October, 1795, it declared its mission
terminated, and gave way to the Directory.
We have already laid stress upon some of the psychological lessons
furnished by the government of the Convention. One of the most striking of
these is the impotence of violence to dominate men's minds in permanence.
Never did any Government possess such formidable means of action,
yet in spite of the permanent guillotine, despite the delegates sent with the
guillotine into the provinces, despite its Draconian laws, the Convention
had to struggle perpetually against riots, insurrections, and conspiracies.
The cities, the departments, and the faubourgs of Paris were continually
rising in revolt, although heads were falling by the thousand.
This Assembly, which thought itself sovereign, fought against the
invincible forces which were fixed in men's minds, and which material
constraint was powerless to overcome. Of these hidden motive forces it
never understood the power, and it struggled against them in vain. In the
end the invisible forces triumphed.
Chapter V.
Instances of Revolutionary Violence
Table of Contents
1. Psychological Causes of Revolutionary Violence.
We have shown in the course of the preceding chapters that the
revolutionary theories constituted a new faith.
Humanitarian and sentimental, they exalted liberty and fraternity. But,
as in many religions, we can observe a complete contradiction between
doctrine and action. In practice no liberty was tolerated, and fraternity was
quickly replaced by frenzied massacres.
This opposition between principles and conduct results from the
intolerance which accompanies all beliefs. A religion may be steeped in
humanitarianism and forbearance, but its sectaries will always want to
impose it on others by force, so that violence is the inevitable result.
The cruelties of the Revolution were thus the inherent results of the
propagation of the new dogmas. The Inquisition, the religious wars of
France, St. Bartholomew's Day, the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, the
"Dragonnades," the persecution of the Jansenists, &c., belonged to the same
family as the Terror and derived from the same psychological sources.
Louis XIV. was not a cruel king, yet under the impulse of his faith he
drove hundreds of thousands of Protestants out of France, after first
shooting down a considerable number and sending others to the galleys.
The methods of persuasion adopted by all believers are by no means a
consequence of their fear of the dissentient opposition. Protestants and
Jansenists were anything but dangerous under Louis XIV. Intolerance arises
above all from the indignation experienced by a mind which is convinced
that it possesses the most dazzling verities against the men who deny those
truths, and who are surely not acting in good faith. How can one support
error when one has the necessary strength to wipe it out?
Thus have reasoned the believers of all ages. Thus reasoned Louis XIV.
and the men of the Terror. These latter also were convinced that they were
in possession of absolute truths, which they believed to be obvious, and
whose triumph was certain to regenerate humanity. Could they be more
tolerant toward their adversaries than the Church and the kings of France
had been toward heretics?
We are forced to believe that terror is a method which all believers
regard as a necessity, since from the beginning of the ages religious codes
have always been based upon terror. To force men to observe their
prescriptions, believers have sought to terrify them with threats of an
eternal hell of torments.
The apostles of the Jacobin belief behaved as their fathers had done, and
employed the same methods. If similar events occurred again we should see
identical actions repeated. If a new belief—Socialism, for example—were
to triumph to-morrow, it would be led to employ methods of propaganda
like those of the Inquisition and the Terror.
But were we to regard the Jacobin Terror solely as the result of a
religious movement, we should not completely apprehend it. Around a
triumphant religious belief, as we saw in the case of the Reformation,
gather a host of individual interests which are dependent on that belief. The
Terror was directed by a few fanatical apostles, but beside this small
number of ardent proselytes, whose narrow minds dreamed of regenerating
the world, were great numbers of men who lived only to enrich themselves.
They rallied readily around the first victorious leader who promised to
enable them to enjoy the results of their pillage.
"The Terrorists of the Revolution," writes Albert Sorel, "resorted to the
Terror because they wished to remain in power, and were incapable of
doing so by other means. They employed it for their own salvation, and
after the event they stated that their motive was the salvation of the State.
Before it became a system it was a means of government, and the system
was only invented to justify the means."
We may thus fully agree with the following verdict on the Terror,
written by Emile Ollivier in his work on the Revolution: "The Terror was
above all a Jacquerie, a regularised pillage, the vastest enterprise of theft
that any association of criminals has ever organised."
2. The Revolutionary Tribunals.
The Revolutionary Tribunals constituted the principal means of action of
the Terror. Besides that of Paris, created at the instigation of Danton, and
which a year afterwards sent its founder to the guillotine, France was
covered with such tribunals.
"One hundred and seventy-eight tribunals," says Taine, "of which 40
were perambulant, pronounced death sentences in all parts of the country,
which were carried out instantly on the spot. Between the 16th of April,
1793, and the 9th of Thermidor in the year II. that of Paris guillotined 2,625
persons, and the provincial judges worked as hard as those of Paris. In the
little town of Orange alone 331 persons were guillotined. In the city of
Arras 299 men and 93 women were guillotined. . . . In the city of Lyons
alone the revolutionary commissioner admitted to 1,684 executions. . . . The
total number of these murders has been put at 17,000, among whom were
1,200 women, of whom a number were octogenarians."
Although the Revolutionary Tribunal of Paris claimed only 2,625
victims, it must not be forgotten that all the suspects had already been
summarily massacred during the "days" of September.
The Revolutionary Tribunal of Paris, a mere instrument of the
Committee of Public Safety, limited itself in reality, as Fouquier-Tinville
justly remarked during his trial, to executing its orders. It surrounded itself
at first with a few legal forms which did not long survive. Interrogatory,
defence, witnesses— all were finally suppressed. Moral proof—that is,
mere suspicion—sufficed to procure condemnation. The president usually
contented himself with putting a vague question to the accused. To work
more rapidly still, Fouquier-Tinville proposed to have the guillotine
installed on the same premises as the Tribunal.
This Tribunal sent indiscriminately to the scaffold all the accused
persons arrested by reason of party hatred, and very soon, in the hands of
Robespierre, it constituted an instrument of the bloodiest tyranny. When
Danton, one of its founders, became its victim, he justly asked pardon of
God and men, before mounting the scaffold for having assisted to create
such a Tribunal.
Nothing found mercy before it: neither the genius of Lavoisier, nor the
gentleness of Lucile Desmoulins, nor the merit of Malesherbes. "So much
talent," said Benjamin Constant, "massacred by the most cowardly and
brutish of men!"
To find any excuse for the Revolutionary Tribunal, we must return to
our conception of the religious mentality of the Jacobins, who founded and
directed it. It was a piece of work comparable in its spirit and its aim to the
Inquisition. The men who furnished its victims—Robespierre, Saint-Just,
and Couthon—believed themselves the benefactors of the human race in
suppressing all infidels, the enemies of the faith that was to regenerate the
earth.
The executions during the Terror did not affect the members of the
aristocracy only, since 4,000 peasants and 3,000 working-men were
guillotined.
Given the emotion produced in Paris in our days by a capital execution,
one might suppose that the execution of so many persons at one time would
produce a very great emotion. But habit had so dulled sensibility that people
paid but little attention to the matter at last. Mothers would take their
children to see people guillotined as to-day they take them to the marionette
theatre.
The daily spectacle of executions made the men of the time very
indifferent to death. All mounted the scaffold with perfect tranquillity, the
Girondists singing the Marseillaise as they climbed the steps.
This resignation resulted from the law of habitude, which very rapidly
dulls emotion. To judge by the fact that royalist risings were taking place
daily, the prospect of the guillotine no longer terrified men. Things
happened as though the Terror terrorised no one. Terror is an efficacious
psychological process so long as it does not last. The real terror resides far
more in threats than in their realisation.
3. The Terror in the Provinces.
The executions of the Revolutionary Tribunals in the provinces represented
only a portion of the massacres effected in the departments during the
Terror. The revolutionary army, composed of vagabonds and brigands,
marched through France killing and pillaging. Its method of procedure is
well indicated by the following passage from Taine:—
"At Bedouin, a town of 2,000 inhabitants, where unknown
hands had cut down the tree of liberty, 433 houses were
demolished or fired, 16 persons were guillotined, and 47 shot
down; all the other inhabitants were expelled and reduced to
living as vagabonds in the mountains, and to taking shelter in
caverns which they hollowed out of the earth."
The fate of the wretches sent before the Revolutionary Tribunals was no
better. The first mockery of trial was quickly suppressed. At Nantes, Carrier
drowned and shot down according to his fancy nearly 5,000 persons—men,
women, and children.
The details of these massacres figured in the Moniteur after the reaction
of Thermidor. I cite a few lines:—
"I saw," says Thomas, "after the taking of Noirmoutier, men
and women and old people burned alive . . . women violated,
girls of fourteen and fifteen, and massacred afterward, and
tender babes thrown from bayonet to bayonet; children who
were taken from beside their mothers stretched out on the
ground."
In the same number we read a deposition by one Julien, relating how
Carrier forced his victims to dig their graves and to allow themselves to be
buried alive. The issue of October 15, 1794, contained a report by Merlin de
Thionville proving that the captain of the vessel le Destin had received
orders to embark forty-one victims to be drowned—"among them a blind
man of 78, twelve women, twelve girls, and fourteen children, of whom ten
were from 10 to 6 and five at the breast."
In the course of Carrier's trial (Moniteur, December 30, 1794) it was
proved that he "had given orders to drown and shoot women and children,
and had ordered General Haxo to exterminate all the inhabitants of La
Vendee and to burn down their dwellings."
Carrier, like all wholesale murderers, took an intense joy in seeing his
victims suffer. "In the department in which I hunted the priests," he said, "I
have never laughed so much or experienced such pleasure as in watching
their dying grimaces" (Moniteur, December 22, 1794).
Carrier was tried to satisfy the reaction of Thermidor. But the massacres
of Nantes were repeated in many other towns. Fouche slew more than 2,000
persons at Lyons, and so many were killed at Toulon that the population fell
from 29,000 to 7,000 in a few months.
We must say in defence of Carrier, Freron, Fouche and all these sinister
persons, that they were incessantly stimulated by the Committee of Public
Safety. Carrier gave proof of this during his trial.
"I admit," said he (Moniteur, December 24, 1794), "that 150 or 200
prisoners were shot every day, but it was by order of the commission. I
informed the Convention that the brigands were being shot down by
hundreds, and it applauded this letter, and ordered its insertion in the
Bulletin. What were these deputies doing then who are so furious against
me now? They were applauding. Why did they still keep me `on mission'?
Because I was then the saviour of the country, and now I am a bloodthirsty
man."
Unhappily for him, Carrier did not know, as he remarked in the same
speech, that only seven or eight persons led the Convention.
But the terrorised Assembly approved of all that these seven or eight
ordered, so that they could say nothing in reply to Carrier's argument. He
certainly deserved to be guillotined, but the whole Convention deserved to
be guillotined with him, since it had approved of the massacres.
The defence of Carrier, justified by the letters of the Committee, by
which the representatives "on mission" were incessantly stimulated, shows
that the violence of the Terror resulted from a system, and not, as has
sometimes been claimed, from the initiative of a few individuals.
The thirst for destruction during the Terror was by no means assuaged
by the destruction of human beings only; there was an even greater
destruction of inanimate things. The true believer is always an iconoclast.
Once in power, he destroys with equal zeal the enemies of his faith and the
images, temples, and symbols which recall the faith attacked.
We know that the first action of the Emperor Theodosius when
converted to the Christian religion was to break down the majority of the
temples which for six thousand years had been built beside the Nile. We
must not, therefore, be surprised to see the leaders of the Revolution
attacking the monuments and works of art which for them were the vestiges
of an abhorred past.
Statues, manuscripts, stained glass windows, and plate were frenziedly
broken. When Fouche, the future Duke of Otranto under Napoleon, and
minister under Louis XVIII., was sent as commissary of the Convention to
the Nievre, he ordered the demolition of all the towers of the chateaux and
the belfries of the churches "because they wounded equality."
Revolutionary vandalism expended itself even on the tomb. Following a
report read by Barrere to the Convention, the magnificent royal tombs at
Saint-Denis, among which was the admirable mausoleum of Henri II., by
Germain Pilon, were smashed to pieces, the coffins emptied, and the body
of Turenne sent to the Museum as a curiosity, after one of the keepers had
extracted the teeth in order to sell them as curiosities. The moustache and
beard of Henri IV. were also torn out.
It is impossible to witness such comparatively enlightened men
consenting to the destruction of the artistic patriotism of France without a
feeling of sadness. To excuse them, we must remember that intense beliefs
give rise to the worst excesses, and also that the Convention, almost daily
invaded by rioters, always yielded to the popular will.
This glowing record of devastation proves, not only the power of
fanaticism: it shows us what becomes of men who are liberated from all
social restraints, and of the country which falls into their hands.
Chapter VI.
The Armies of the Revolution
Table of Contents
1. The Revolutionary Assemblies and the Armies.
If nothing were known of the revolutionary Assemblies, and notably of the
Convention, beyond their internal dissensions, their weakness, and their
acts of violence, their memory would indeed be a gloomy one.
But even for its enemies this bloodstained epoch must always retain an
undeniable glory, thanks to the success of its armies. When the Convention
dissolved France was already the greater by Belgium and the territories on
the left bank of the Rhine.
Regarding the Convention as a whole, it seems equitable to credit it
with the victories of the armies of France, but if we analyse this whole in
order to study each of its elements separately their independence will at
once be obvious. It is at once apparent that the Convention had a very small
share in the military events of the time. The armies on the frontier and the
revolutionary Assemblies in Paris formed two separate worlds, which had
very little influence over one another, and which regarded matters in a very
different light.
We have seen that the Convention was a weak Government, which
changed its ideas daily, according to popular impulse; it was really an
example of the profoundest anarchy. It directed nothing, but was itself
continually directed; how, then, could it have commanded armies?
Completely absorbed in its intestine quarrels, the Assembly had
abandoned all military questions to a special committee, which was directed
almost single-handed by Carnot, and whose real function was to furnish the
troops with provisions and ammunition. The merit of Carnot consisted in
the fact that besides directing over 752,000 men at the disposal of France,
upon points which were strategically valuable, he also advised the generals
of the armies to take the offensive, and to preserve a strict discipline.
The sole share of the Assembly in the defence of the country was the
decree of the general levy. In the face of the numerous enemies then
threatening France, no Government could have avoided such a measure. For
some little time, too, the Assembly had sent representatives to the armies
instructed to decapitate certain generals, but this policy was soon
abandoned.
As a matter of fact the military activities of the Assembly were always
extremely slight. The armies, thanks to their numbers, their enthusiasm, and
the tactics devised by their youthful generals, achieved their victories
unaided. They fought and conquered independently of the Convention.
2. The Struggle of Europe against the Revolution.
Before enumerating the various psychological factors which contributed to
the successes of the revolutionary armies, it will be useful briefly to recall
the origin and the development of the war against Europe.
At the commencement of the Revolution the foreign sovereigns
regarded with satisfaction the difficulties of the French monarchy, which
they had long regarded as a rival power. The King of Prussia, believing
France to be greatly enfeebled, thought to enrich himself at her expense, so
he proposed to the Emperor of Austria to help Louis on condition of
receiving Flanders and Alsace as an indemnity. The two sovereigns signed
an alliance against France in February, 1792. The French anticipated attack
by declaring war upon Austria, under the influence of the Girondists. The
French army was at the outset subjected to several checks. The allies
penetrated into Champagne, and came within 130 miles of Paris.
Dumouriez' victory at Valmy forced them to retire.
Although 300 French and 200 Prussians only were killed in this battle, it
had very significant results. The fact that an army reputed invincible had
been forced to retreat gave boldness to the young revolutionary troops, and
everywhere they took the offensive. In a few weeks the soldiers of Valmy
had chased the Austrians out of Belgium, where they were welcomed as
liberators.
But it was under the Convention that the war assumed such importance.
At the beginning of 1793 the Assembly declared that Belgium was united to
France. From this resulted a conflict with England which lasted for twenty-
two years.
Assembled at Antwerp in April, 1793, the representatives of England,
Prussia, and Austria resolved to dismember France. The Prussians were to
seize Alsace and Lorraine; the Austrians, Flanders and Artois; the English,
Dunkirk. The Austrian ambassador proposed to crush the Revolution by
terror, "by exterminating practically the whole of the party directing the
nation." In the face of such declarations France had perforce to conquer or
to perish.
During this first coalition, between 1793 and 1797, France had to fight
on all her frontiers, from the Pyrenees to the north.
At the outset she lost her former conquests, and suffered several
reverses. The Spaniards took Perpignan and Bayonne; the English, Toulon;
and the Austrians, Valenciennes. It was then that the Convention, towards
the end of 1793, ordered a general levy of all Frenchmen between the ages
of eighteen and forty, and succeeded in sending to the frontiers a total of
some 750,000 men. The old regiments of the royal army were combined
with battalions of volunteers and conscripts.
The allies were repulsed, and Maubeuge was relieved after the victory
of Wattigny, which was gained by Jourdan. Hoche rescued Lorraine. France
took the offensive, reconquering Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine.
Jourdan defeated the Austrians at Fleurus, drove them back upon the Rhine,
and occupied Cologne and Coblentz. Holland was invaded. The allied
sovereigns resigned themselves to suing for peace, and recognised the
French conquests.
The successes of the French were favoured by the fact that the enemy
never put their whole heart into the affair, as they were preoccupied by the
partition of Poland, which they effected in 1793-5. Each Power wished to
be on the spot in order to obtain more territory. This motive had already
caused the King of Prussia to retire after the battle of Valmy in 1792.
The hesitations of the allies and their mutual distrust were extremely
advantageous to the French. Had the Austrians marched upon Paris in the
summer of 1793, "we should," said General Thiebault, "have lost a hundred
times for one. They alone saved us, by giving us time to make soldiers,
officers, and generals."
After the treaty of Basle, France had no important adversaries on the
Continent, save the Austrians. It was then that the Directory attacked
Austria in Italy. Bonaparte was entrusted with the charge of this campaign.
After a year of fighting, from April, 1796, to April, 1797, he forced the last
enemies of France to demand peace.
3. Psychological and Military Factors which determined the Success of the
Revolutionary Armies.
To realise the causes of the success of the revolutionary armies we must
remember the prodigious enthusiasm, endurance, and abnegation of these
ragged and often barefoot troops. Thoroughly steeped in revolutionary
principles, they felt that they were the apostles of a new religion, which was
destined to regenerate the world.
The history of the armies of the Revolution recalls that of the nomads of
Arabia, who, excited to fanaticism by the ideals of Mohammed, were
transformed into formidable armies which rapidly conquered a portion of
the old Roman world. An analogous faith endowed the Republican soldiers
with a heroism and intrepidity which never failed them, and which no
reverse could shake When the Convention gave place to the Directory they
had liberated the country, and had carried a war of invasion into the enemy's
territory. At this period the soldiers were the only true Republicans left in
France.
Faith is contagious, and the Revolution was regarded as a new era, so
that several of the nations invaded, oppressed by the absolutism of their
monarchs, welcomed the invaders as liberators. The inhabitants of Savoy
ran out to meet the troops.
At Mayence the crowd welcomed them with enthusiasm planted trees of
liberty, and formed a Convention in imitation of that of Paris.
So long as the armies of the Revolution had to deal with peoples bent
under the yoke of absolute monarchy, and having no personal ideal to
defend, their success was relatively easy. But when they entered into
conflict with peoples who had an ideal as strong as their own victory
became far more difficult.
The new ideal of liberty and equality was capable of seducing peoples
who had no precise convictions, and were suffering from the despotism of
their masters, but it was naturally powerless against those who possessed a
potent ideal of their own which had been long established in their minds.
For this reason Bretons and Vendeeans, whose religious and monarchical
sentiments were extremely powerful, successfully struggled for years
against the armies of the Republic.
In March, 1793, the insurrections of the Vendee and Brittany had spread
to ten departments. The Vendeeans in Poitou and the Chouans in Brittany
put 80,000 men in the field.
The conflicts between contrary ideals—that is, between beliefs in which
reason can play no part—are always pitiless, and the struggle with the
Vendee immediately assumed the ferocious savagery always observable in
religious wars. It lasted until the end of 1795, when Hoche finally
"pacified" the country. This pacification was the simple result of the
practical extermination of its defenders.
"After two years of civil war," writes Molinari, "the Vendee was no
more than a hideous heap of ruins. About 900,000 individuals—men,
women, children, and aged people—had perished, and the small number of
those who had escaped massacre could scarcely find food or shelter. The
fields were devastated, the hedges and walls destroyed, and the houses
burned."
Besides their faith, which so often rendered them invincible, the soldiers
of the Revolution had usually the advantage of being led by remarkable
generals, full of ardour and formed on the battle- field.
The majority of the former leaders of the army, being nobles, had
emigrated so that a new body of officers had to be organised. The result was
that those gifted with innate military aptitudes had a chance of showing
them, and passed through all the grades of rank in a few months. Hoche, for
instance, a corporal in 1789, was a general of division and commander of an
army at the age of twenty-five. The extreme youth of these leaders resulted
in a spirit of aggression to which the armies opposed to them were not
accustomed. Selected only according to merit, and hampered by no
traditions, no routine, they quickly succeeded in working out a tactics suited
to the new necessities.
Of soldiers without experience opposed to seasoned professional troops,
drilled and trained according to the methods in use everywhere since the
Seven Years' War, one could not expect complicated manoeuvres.
Attacks were delivered simply by great masses of troops. Thanks to the
numbers of the men at the disposal of their generals, the considerable gaps
provoked by this efficacious but barbarous procedure could be rapidly
filled.
Deep masses of men attacked the enemy with the bayonet, and quickly
routed men accustomed to methods which were more careful of the lives of
soldiers. The slow rate of fire in those days rendered the French tactics
relatively easy of employment. It triumphed, but at the cost of enormous
losses. It has been calculated that between 1792 and 1800 the French army
left more than a third of its effective force on the battle-field (700,000 men
out of 2,000,000).
Examining events from a psychological point of view, we shall continue
to elicit the consequences from the facts on which they are consequent.
A study of the revolutionary crowds in Paris and in the armies presents
very different but readily interpreted pictures.
We have proved that crowds, unable to reason, obey simply their
impulses, which are always changing, but we have also seen that they are
readily capable of heroism, that their altruism is often highly developed,
and that it is easy to find thousands of men ready to give their lives for a
belief.
Psychological characteristics so diverse must naturally, according to the
circumstances, lead to dissimilar and even absolutely contradictory actions.
The history of the Convention and its armies proves as much. It shows us
crowds composed of similar elements acting so differently in Paris and on
the frontiers that one can hardly believe the same people can be in question.
In Paris the crowds were disorderly, violent, murderous, and so
changeable in their demands as to make all government impossible.
In the armies the picture was entirely different. The same multitudes of
unaccustomed men, restrained by the orderly elements of a laborious
peasant population, standardised by military discipline, and inspired by
contagious enthusiasm, heroically supported privations, disdained perils,
and contributed to form that fabulous strain which triumphed over the most
redoubtable troops in Europe.
These facts are among those which should always be invoked to show
the force of discipline. It transforms men. Liberated from its influence,
peoples and armies become barbarian hordes.
This truth is daily and increasingly forgotten. Ignoring the fundamental
laws of collective logic, we give way more and more to shifting popular
impulses, instead of learning to direct them.
The multitude must be shown the road to follow; it is not for them to
choose it.
Chapter VII.
Psychology of the Leaders of the Revolution
Table of Contents
1. Mentality of the Men of the Revolution. The respective Influence of
Violent and Feeble Characters.
Men judge with their intelligence, and are guided by their characters. To
understand a man fully one must separate these two elements.
During the great periods of activity—and the revolutionary movements
naturally belong to such periods—character always takes the first rank.
Having in several chapters described the various mentalities which
predominate in times of disturbance, we need not return to the subject now.
They constitute general types which are naturally modified by each man's
inherited and acquired personality.
We have seen what an important part was played by the mystic element
in the Jacobin mentality, and the ferocious fanaticism to which it led the
sectaries of the new faith.
We have also seen that all the members of the Assemblies were not
fanatics. These latter were even in the minority, since in the most
sanguinary of the revolutionary assemblies the great majority was
composed of timid and moderate men of neutral character. Before
Thermidor the members of this group voted from fear with the violent and
after Thermidor with the moderate deputies.
In time of revolution, as at other times, these neutral characters, obeying
the most contrary impulses, are always the most numerous. They are also as
dangerous in reality as the violent characters. The force of the latter is
supported by the weakness of the former.
In all revolutions, and in particularly in the French Revolution, we
observe a small minority of narrow but decided minds which imperiously
dominate an immense majority of men who are often very intelligent but
are lacking in character
Besides the fanatical apostles and the feeble characters, a revolution
always produces individuals who merely think how to profit thereby. These
were numerous during the French Revolution. Their aim was simply to
utilise circumstances so as to enrich themselves. Such were Barras, Tallien,
Fouche, Barrere, and many more. Their politics consisted simply in serving
the strong against the weak.
From the outset of the Revolution these "arrivists," as one would call
them to-day, were numerous. Camille Desmoulins wrote in 1792: "Our
Revolution has its roots only in the egotism and self-love of each
individual, of the combination of which the general interest is composed."
If we add to these indications the observations contained in another
chapter concerning the various forms of mentality to be observed in times
of political upheaval, we shall obtain a general idea of the character of the
men of the Revolution. We shall now apply the principles already
expounded to the most remarkable personages of the revolutionary period.
2. Psychology of the Commissaries or Representatives "on Mission."
In Paris the conduct of the members of the Convention was always directed,
restrained, or excited by the action of their colleagues, and that of their
environment.
To judge them properly we should observe them when left to
themselves and uncontrolled, when they possessed full liberty. Such were
the representatives who were sent "on mission" into the departments by the
Convention.
The power of these delegates was absolute. No censure embarrassed
them. Functionaries and magistrates had perforce to obey them.
A representative "on mission" "requisitions," sequestrates, or
confiscates as seems good to him; taxes, imprisons, deports, or decapitates
as he thinks fit, and in his own district he is a "pasha."
Regarding themselves as "pashas," they displayed themselves "drawn in
carriages with six horses, surrounded by guards; sitting at sumptuous tables
with thirty covers, eating to the sound of music, with a following of players,
courtezans, and mercenaries. . . ." At Lyons "the solemn appearance of
Collot d'Herbois is like that of the Grand Turk. No one can come into his
presence without three repeated requests; a string of apartments precedes
his reception-room, and no one approaches nearer than fifteen paces."
One can picture the immense vanity of these dictators as they solemnly
entered the towns, surrounded by guards, men whose gesture was enough to
cause heads to fall.
Petty lawyers without clients, doctors without patients, unfrocked
clergymen, obscure attorneys, who had formerly known the most colourless
of lives, were suddenly made the equals of the most powerful tyrants of
history. Guillotining, drowning, shooting without mercy, at the hazard of
their fancy, they were raised from their former humble condition to the level
of the most celebrated potentates.
Never did Nero or Heliogabalus surpass in tyranny the representatives
of the Convention. Laws and customs always restrained the former to a
certain extent. Nothing restrained the commissaries.
"Fouche," writes Taine, "lorgnette in hand, watched the butchery of 210
inhabitants of Lyons from his window. Collot, Laporte, and Fouche feasted
on days of execution (fusillades), and at the sound of each discharge sprang
up with cries of joy, waving their hats."
Among the representatives "on mission" who exhibit this murderous
mentality we may cite as a type the ex-cure Lebon, who, having become
possessed of supreme power, ravaged Arras and Cambrai. His example,
with that of Carrier, contributes to show what man can become when he
escapes from the yoke of law and tradition. The cruelty of the ferocious
commissary was complicated by Sadism; the scaffold was raised under his
windows, so that he, his wife, and his helpers could rejoice in the carnage.
At the foot of the guillotine a drinking-booth was established where the
sans-culottes could come to drink. To amuse them the executioner would
group on the pavement, in ridiculous attitudes, the naked bodies of the
decapitated.
"The reading of the two volumes of his trial, printed at Amiens in 1795,
may be counted as a nightmare. During twenty sessions the survivors of the
hecatombs of Arras and Cambrai passed through the ancient hall of the
bailiwick at Amiens, where the ex-member of the Convention was tried.
What these phantoms in mourning related is unheard of. Entire streets
dispeopled; nonagenarians and girls of sixteen decapitated after a mockery
of a trial; death buffeted, insulted, adorned, rejoiced in; executions to music;
battalions of children recruited to guard the scaffold; the debauchery, the
cynicism, the refinements of an insane satrap; a romance by Sade turned
epic; it seems, as we watch the unpacking of these horrors, that a whole
country, long terrorised, is at last disgorging its terror and revenging itself
for its cowardice by overwhelming the wretch there, the scapegoat of an
abhorred and vanished system."
The only defence of the ex-clergyman was that he had obeyed orders.
The facts with which he was reproached had long been known, and the
Convention had in no wise blamed him for them.
I have already spoken of the vanity of the deputies "on mission," who
were suddenly endowed with a power greater than that of the most powerful
despots; but this vanity is not enough to explain their ferocity.
That arose from other sources. Apostles of a severe faith, the delegates
of the Convention, like the inquisitors of the Holy Office, could feel, can
have felt, no pity for their victims. Freed, moreover, from all the bonds of
tradition and law, they could give rein to the most savage instincts that
primitive animality has left in us.
Civilisation restrains these instincts, but they never die. The need to kill
which makes the hunter is a permanent proof of this.
M. Cunisset-Carnot has expressed in the following lines the grip of this
hereditary tendency, which, in the pursuit of the most harmless game, re-
awakens the barbarian in every hunter:—
"The pleasure of killing for killing's sake is, one may say,
universal; it is the basis of the hunting instinct, for it must be
admitted that at present, in civilised countries, the need to
live no longer counts for anything in its propagation. In
reality we are continuing an action which was imperiously
imposed upon our savage ancestors by the harsh necessities
of existence, during which they had either to kill or die of
hunger, while to- day there is no longer any legitimate
excuse for it. But so it is, and we can do nothing; probably
we shall never break the chains of a slavery which has bound
us for so long. We cannot prevent ourselves from feeling an
intense, often passionate, pleasure in shedding the blood of
animals towards whom, when the love of the chase possesses
us, we lose all feeling of pity. The gentlest and prettiest
creatures, the song-birds, the charm of our springtime, fall to
our guns or are choked in our snares, and not a shudder of
pity troubles our pleasure at seeing them terrified, bleeding,
writhing in the horrible suffering we inflict on them, seeking
to flee on their poor broken paws or desperately beating their
wings, which can no longer support them. . . . The excuse is
the impulse of that imperious atavism which the best of us
have not the strength to resist."
At ordinary times this singular atavism, restrained by fear of the laws,
can only be exercised on animals. When codes are no longer operative it
immediately applies itself to man, which is why so many terrorists took an
intense pleasure in killing. Carrier's remark concerning the joy he felt in
contemplating the faces of his victims during their torment is very typical.
In many civilised men ferocity is a restrained instinct, but it is by no means
eliminated.
3. Danton and Robespierre.
Danton and Robespierre represented the two principal personages of the
Revolution. I shall say little of the former: his psychology, besides being
simple, is familiar. A club orator firstly, impulsive and violent, he showed
himself always ready to excite the people. Cruel only in his speeches, he
often regretted their effects. From the outset he shone in the first rank, while
his future rival, Robespierre, was vegetating almost in the lowest.
At one given moment Danton became the soul of the Revolution, but he
was deficient in tenacity and fixity of conduct. Moreover, he was needy,
while Robespierre was not. The continuous fanaticism of the latter defeated
the intermittent efforts of the former. Nevertheless, it was an amazing
spectacle to see so powerful a tribune sent to the scaffold by his pale,
venemous enemy and mediocre rival.
Robespierre, the most influential man of the Revolution and the most
frequently studied, is yet the least explicable. It is difficult to understand the
prodigious influence which gave him the power of life and death, not only
over the enemies of the Revolution but also over colleagues who could not
have been considered as enemies of the existing Government.
We certainly cannot explain the matter by saying with Taine that
Robespierre was a pedant lost in abstractions, nor by asserting with the
Michelet that he succeeded on account of his principles, nor by repeating
with his contemporary Williams that "one of the secrets of his government
was to take men marked by opprobrium or soiled with crime as stepping-
stones to his ambition."
It is impossible to regard his eloquence as the cause of his success. His
eyes protected by goggles, he painfully read his speeches, which were
composed of cold and indefinite abstractions. The Assembly contained
orators who possessed an immensely superior talent, such as Danton and
the Girondists; yet it was Robespierre who destroyed them.
We have really no acceptable explanation of the ascendancy which the
dictator finally obtained. Without influence in the National Assembly, he
gradually became the master of the Convention and of the Jacobins. "When
he reached the Committee of Public Safety he was already," said Billaud-
Varennes, "the most important person in France."
"His history," writes Michelet, "is prodigious, far more marvellous than
that of Bonaparte. The threads, the wheels, the preparation of forces, are far
less visible. It is an honest man, an austere but pious figure, of middling
talents, that shoots up one morning, borne upward by I know not what
cataclysm. There is nothing like it in the Arabian Nights. And in a moment
he goes higher than the throne. He is set upon the altar. Astonishing story!"
Certainly circumstances helped him considerably. People turned to him
as to the master of whom all felt the need. But then he was already there,
and what we wish to discover is the cause of his rapid ascent. I would
willingly suppose in him the existence of a species of personal fascination
which escapes us to-day. His successes with women might be quoted in
support of this theory. On the days when he speaks "the passages are
choked with women . . . there are seven or eight hundred in the tribunes,
and with what transports they applaud! At the Jacobins, when he speaks
there are sobs and cries of emotion, and men stamp as though they would
bring the hall down." A young widow, Mme. de Chalabre, possessed of
sixteen hundred pounds a year, sends him burning love-letters and is eager
to marry him.
We cannot seek in his character for the causes of his popularity. A
hypochondriac by temperament, of mediocre intelligence, incapable of
grasping realities, confined to abstractions, crafty and dissimulating, his
prevailing note was an excessive pride which increased until his last day.
High priest of a new faith, he believed himself sent on earth by God to
establish the reign of virtue. He received writings stating "that he was the
Messiah whom the Eternal Being had promised to reform the world."
Full of literary pretensions, he laboriously polished his speeches. His
profound jealousy of other orators or men of letters, such as Camille
Desmoulins, caused their death.
"Those who were particularly the objects of the tyrant's rage," writes the
author already cited, "were the men of letters. With regard to them the
jealousy of a colleague was mingled with the fury of the oppressor; for the
hatred with which he persecuted them was caused less by their resistance to
his despotism than by their talents, which eclipsed his."
The contempt of the dictator for his colleagues was immense and almost
unconcealed. Giving audience to Barras at the hour of his toilet, he finished
shaving, spitting in the direction of his colleague as though he did not exist,
and disdaining to reply to his questions.
He regarded the bourgeoisie and the deputies with the same hateful
disdain. Only the multitude found grace in his eyes. "When the sovereign
people exercises its power," he said, "we can only bow before it. In all it
does all is virtue and truth, and no excess, error, or crime is possible."
Robespierre suffered from the persecution mania. That he had others'
heads cut off was not only because he had a mission as an apostle, but
because he believed himself hemmed in by enemies and conspirators.
"Great as was the cowardice of his colleagues where he was concerned,"
writes M. Sorel, "the fear he had of them was still greater."
His dictatorship, absolute during five months, is a striking example of
the power of certain leaders. We can understand that a tyrant backed by an
army can easily destroy whom he pleases, but that a single man should
succeed in sending to death a large number of his equals is a thing that is
not easily explained.
The power of Robespierre was so absolute that he was able to send to
the Tribunal, and therefore to the scaffold, the most eminent deputies:
Desmoulins, Hebert, Danton, and many another. The brilliant Girondists
melted away before him. He attacked even the terrible Commune,
guillotined its leaders, and replaced it by a new Commune obedient to his
orders.
In order to rid himself more quickly of the men who displeased him he
induced the Convention to enact the law of Prairial, which permitted the
execution of mere suspects, and by means of which he had 1,373 heads cut
off in Paris in forty-nine days. His colleagues, the victims of an insane
terror, no longer slept at home; scarcely a hundred deputies were present at
sessions. David said: "I do not believe twenty of us members of the
Mountain will be left."
It was his very excess of confidence in his own powers and in the
cowardice of the Convention that lost Robespierre his life. Having
attempted to make them vote a measure which would permit deputies to be
sent before the Revolutionary Tribunal, which meant the scaffold, without
the authorisation of the Assembly, on an order from the governing
Committee, several Montagnards conspired with some members of the
Plain to overthrow him. Tallien, knowing himself marked down for early
execution, and having therefore nothing to lose, accused him loudly of
tyranny. Robespierre wished to defend himself by reading a speech which
he had long had in hand, but he learned to his cost that although it is
possible to destroy men in the name of logic it is not possible to lead an
assembly by means of logic. The shouts of the conspirators drowned his
voice; the cry "Down with the tyrant!" quickly repeated, thanks to mental
contagion, by many of the members present, was enough to complete his
downfall. Without losing a moment the Assembly decreed his accusation.
The Commune having wished to save him, the Assembly outlawed him.
Struck by this magic formula, he was definitely lost.
"This cry of outlawry," writes Williams, "at this period produced the
same effect on a Frenchman as the cry of pestilence; the outlaw became
civilly excommunicated, and it was as though men believed that they would
be contaminated passing through the air which he had breathed. Such was
the effect it produced upon the gunners who had trained their cannon
against the Convention. Without receiving further orders, merely on hearing
that the Commune was `outside the law,' they immediately turned their
batteries about."
Robespierre and all his band—Saint-Just, the president of the
Revolutionary Tribunal, the mayor of the Commune, &c.,—were
guillotined on the 10th of Thermidor to the number of twenty-one.
Their execution was followed on the morrow by a fresh batch of
seventy Jacobins, and on the next day by thirteen. The Terror, which had
lasted ten months, was at an end.
The downfall of the Jacobin edifice in Thermidor is one of the most
curious psychological events of the revolutionary period. None of the
Montagnards who had worked for the downfall of Robespierre had for a
moment dreamed that it would mark the end of the Terror.
Tallien, Barras, Fouche, &c., overthrew Robespierre as he had
overthrown Hebert, Danton, the Girondists, and many others. But when the
acclamations of the crowd told them that the death of Robespierre was
regarded as having put an end to the Terror they acted as though such had
been their intention. They were the more obliged to do so in that the Plain—
that is, the great majority of the Assembly—which had allowed itself to be
decimated by Robespierre, now rebelled furiously against the system it had
so long acclaimed even while it abhorred it. Nothing is more terrible than a
body of men who have been afraid and are afraid no longer. The Plain
revenged itself for being terrorised by the Mountain, and terrorised that
body in turn.
The servility of the colleagues of Robespierre in the Convention was by
no means based upon any feeling of sympathy for him. The dictator filled
them with an unspeakable alarm, but beneath the marks of admiration and
enthusiasm which they lavished on him out of fear was concealed an
intense hatred. We can gather as much by reading the reports of various
deputies inserted in the Moniteur of August 11, 15, and 29, 1794, and
notably that on "the conspiracy of the triumvirs, Robespierre, Couthon, and
Saint-Just." Never did slaves heap such invectives on a fallen master.
We learn that "these monsters had for some time been renewing the
most horrible prescriptions of Marius and Sulla." Robespierre is represented
as a most frightful scoundrel; we are assured that "like Caligula, he would
soon have asked the French people to worship his horse . . . He sought
security in the execution of all who aroused his slightest suspicion."
These reports forget to add that the power of Robespierre obtained no
support, as did that of the Marius and Sulla to whom they allude, from a
powerful army, but merely from the repeated adhesion of the members of
the Convention. Without their extreme timidity the power of the dictator
could not have lasted a single day.
Robespierre was one of the most odious tyrants of history, but he is
distinguished from all others in that he made himself a tyrant without
soldiers.
We may sum up his doctrines by saying that he was the most perfect
incarnation, save perhaps Saint-Just, of the Jacobin faith, in all its narrow
logic, its intense mysticism, and its inflexible rigidity. He has admirers even
to-day. M. Hamel describes him as "the martyr of Thermidor." There has
been some talk of erecting a monument to him. I would willingly subscribe
to such a purpose, feeling that it is useful to preserve proofs of the blindness
of the crowd, and of the extraordinary docility of which an assembly is
capable when the leader knows how to handle it. His statue would recall the
passionate cries of admiration and enthusiasm with which the Convention
acclaimed the most threatening measures of the dictator, on the very eve of
the day when it was about to cast him down.
4. Fouquier-Tinville, Marat, Billaud-Varenne, &c.
I shall devote a paragraph to certain revolutionists who were famous for the
development of their most sanguinary instincts. Their ferocity was
complicated by other sentiments, by fear and hatred, which could but fortify
it.
Fouquier-Tinville, the public prosecutor of the Revolutionary Tribunal,
was one of those who have left the most sinister memories. This magistrate,
formerly reputed for his kindness, and who became the bloodthirsty
creature whose memory evokes such repulsion, has already served me as an
example in other works, when I have wished to show the transformation of
certain natures in time of revolution.
Needy in the extreme at the moment of the fall of the monarchy, he had
everything to hope from a social upheaval and nothing to lose. He was one
of those men whom a period of disorder will always find ready to sustain it.
The Convention abandoned its powers to him. He had to pronounce
upon the fate of nearly two thousand accused, among whom were Marie-
Antoinette, the Girondists, Danton, Hebert, &c. He had all the suspects
brought before him executed, and did not scruple to betray his former
protectors. As soon as one of them fell into his power—Camille
Desmoulins, Danton, or another—he would plead against him.
Fouquier-Tinville had a very inferior mind, which the Revolution
brought to the top. Under normal conditions, hedged about by professional
rules, his destiny would have been that of a peaceable and obscure
magistrate. This was precisely the lot of his deputy, or substitute, at the
Tribunal, Gilbert-Liendon. "He should," writes M. Durel, "have inspired the
same horror as his colleague, yet he completed his career in the upper ranks
of the Imperial magistracy."
One of the great benefits of an organised society is that it does restrain
these dangerous characters, whom nothing but social restraints can hold.
Fouquier-Tinville died without understanding why he was condemned,
and from the revolutionary point of view his condemnation was not
justifiable. Had he not merely zealously executed the orders of his
superiors? It is impossible to class him with the representatives who were
sent into the provinces, who could not be supervised. The delegates of the
Convention examined all his sentences and approved of them up to the last.
If his cruelty and his summary fashion of trying the prisoners before him
had not been encouraged by his chiefs, he could not have remained in
power. In condemning Fouquier-Tinville, the Convention condemned its
own frightful system of government. It understood this fact, and sent to the
scaffold a number of Terrorists whom Fouquier-Tinville had merely served
as a faithful agent.
Beside Fouquier-Tinville we may set Dumas, who presided over the
Revolutionary Tribunal, and who also displayed an excessive cruelty, which
was whetted by an intense fear. He never went out without two loaded
pistols, barricaded himself in his house, and only spoke to visitors through a
wicket. His distrust of everybody, including his own wife, was absolute. He
even imprisoned the latter, and was about to have her executed when
Thermidor arrived.
Among the men whom the Convention brought to light, Billaud-
Varenne was one of the wildest and, most brutal. He may be regarded as a
perfect type of bestial ferocity.
"In these hours of fruitful anger and heroic anguish he remained calm,
acquitting himself methodically of his task—and it was a frightful task: he
appeared officially at the massacres of the Abbaye, congratulated the
assassins, and promised them money; upon which he went home as if he
had merely been taking a walk. We see him as president of the Jacobin
Club, president of the Convention, and member of the Committee of Public
Safety; he drags the Girondists to the scaffold: he drags the queen thither,
and his former patron, Danton, said of him, `Billaud has a dagger under his
tongue.' He approves of the cannonades at Lyons, the drownings at Nantes,
the massacres at Arras; he organises the pitiless commission of Orange; he
is concerned in the laws of Prairial; he eggs on Fouquier-Tinville; on all
decrees of death is his name, often the first; he signs before his colleagues;
he is without pity, without emotion, without enthusiasm; when others are
frightened, hesitate, and draw back, he goes his way, speaking in turgid
sentences, `shaking his lion's mane'—for to make his cold and impassive
face more in harmony with the exuberance that surrounds him he now
decks himself in a yellow wig which would make one laugh were it on any
but the sinister head of Billaud-Varenne. When Robespierre, Saint-Just, and
Couthon are threatened in turn, he deserts them and goes over to the enemy,
and pushes them under the knife. . . . Why? What is his aim? No one
knows; he is not in any way ambitious; he desires neither power nor
money."
I do not think it would be difficult to answer why. The thirst for blood,
of which we have already spoken, and which is very common among
certain criminals, perfectly explains the conduct of Billaud-Varennes.
Bandits of this type kill for the sake of killing, as sportsmen shoot game—
for the very pleasure of exercising their taste for destruction. In ordinary
times men endowed with these homicidal tendencies refrain, generally from
fear of the policeman and the scaffold. When they are able to give them free
vent nothing can stop them. Such was the case with Billaud-Varenne and
many others.
The psychology of Marat is rather more complicated, not only because
his craving for murder was combined with other elements— wounded self-
love, ambition, mystic beliefs, &c.—but also because we must regard him
as a semi-lunatic, affected by megalomania, and haunted by fixed ideas.
Before the Revolution he had advanced great scientific pretensions, but
no one attached much importance to his maunderings. Dreaming of place
and honour, he had only obtained a very subordinate situation in the
household of a great noble. The Revolution opened up an unhoped-for
future. Swollen with hatred of the old social system which had not
recognised his merits, he put himself at the head of the most violent section
of the people. Having publicly glorified the massacres of September, he
founded a journal which denounced everybody and clamoured incessantly
for executions.
Speaking continually of the interests of the people, Marat became their
idol. The majority of his colleagues heartily despised him. Had he escaped
the knife of Charlotte Corday, he certainly would not have escaped that of
the guillotine.
5. The Destiny of those Members of the Convention who survived the
Revolution.
Beside the members of the Convention whose psychology presents
particular characteristics there were others—Barras, Fouche, Tallien, Merlin
de Thionville, &c.—completely devoid of principles or belief, who only
sought to enrich themselves.
They sought to build up enormous fortunes out of the public misery. In
ordinary times they would have been qualified as simple scoundrels, but in
periods of revolution all standards of vice and virtue seem to disappear.
Although a few Jacobins remained fanatics, the majority renounced
their convictions as soon as they had obtained riches, and became the
faithful courtiers of Napoleon. Cambaceres, who, on addressing Louis XVI.
in prison, called him Louis Capet, under the Empire required his friends to
call him "Highness" in public and "Monseigneur" in private, thus displaying
the envious feeling which accompanied the craving for equality in many of
the Jacobins.
"The majority of the Jacobins," writes M. Madelin "were greatly
enriched, and like Chabot, Bazire, Merlin, Barras, Boursault, Tallien,
Barrere, &c., possessed chateaux and estates. Those who were not wealthy
as yet were soon to become so. . . In the Committee of the year III. alone
the staff of the Thermidorian party comprised a future prince, 13 future
counts, 5 future barons, 7 future senators of the Empire, and 6 future
Councillors of State, and beside them in the Convention there were,
between the future Duke of Otranto to the future Count Regnault, no less
than 50 democrats who fifteen years later possessed titles, coats of arms,
plumes, carriages, endowments, entailed estates, hotels, and chateaux.
Fouche died worth L600,000."
The privileges of the ancien regime which had been so bitterly decried
were thus very soon re-established for the benefit of the bourgeoisie. To
arrive at this result it was necessary to ruin France, to burn entire provinces,
to multiply suffering, to plunge innumerable families into despair, to
overturn Europe, and to destroy men by the hundred thousand on the field
of battle.
In closing this chapter we will recall what we have already said
concerning the possibility of judging the men of this period.
Although the moralist is forced to deal severely with certain individuals,
because he judges them by the types which society must respect if it is to
succeed in maintaining itself, the psychologist is not in the same case. His
aim is to understand, and criticism vanishes before a complete
comprehension.
The human mind is a very fragile mechanism, and the marionettes
which dance upon the stage of history are rarely able to resist the imperious
forces which impel them. Heredity, environment, and circumstances are
imperious masters. No one can say with certainty what would have been his
conduct in the place of the men whose actions he endeavours to interpret.
Book III.
The Conflict Between Ancestral Influences and
Revolutionary Principles
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
The Last Convulsions of Anarchy—The Directory
Table of Contents
1. The Psychology of the Directory.
As the various revolutionary assemblies were composed in part of the same
men, one might suppose that their psychology would be very similar.
At ordinary periods this would have been so, for a constant environment
means constancy of character. But when circumstances change as rapidly as
they did under the Revolution, character must perforce transform itself to
adapt itself thereto. Such was the case with the Directory.
The Directory comprised several distinct assemblies: two large
chambers, consisting of different categories of deputies, and one very small
chamber, which consisted of the five Directors.
The two larger Assemblies remind one strongly of the Convention by
their weakness. They were no longer forced to obey popular riots, as these
were energetically prevented by the Directors, but they yielded without
discussion to the dictatorial injunctions of the latter.
The first deputies to be elected were mostly moderates. Everyone was
weary of the Jacobin tyranny. The new Assembly dreamed of rebuilding the
ruins with which France was covered, and establishing a liberal government
without violence.
But by one of those fatalities which were a law of the Revolution, and
which prove that the course of events is often superior to men's wills, these
deputies, like their predecessors, may be said always to have done the
contrary of what they wished to do. They hoped to be moderate, and they
were violent; they wanted to eliminate the influence of the Jacobins, and
they allowed themselves to be led by them; they thought to repair the ruins
of the country and they succeeded only in adding others to them; they
aspired to religious peace, and they finally persecuted and massacred the
priests with greater rigour than during the Terror.
The psychology of the little assembly formed by the five Directors was
very different from that of the Chamber of Deputies. Encountering fresh
difficulties daily, the directors were forced to resolve them, while the large
Assemblies, without contact with realities, had only their aspirations.
The prevailing thought of the Directors was very simple. Highly
indifferent to principles, they wished above all to remain the masters of
France. To attain that result they did not shrink from resorting to the most
illegitimate measures, even annulling the elections of a great number of the
departments when these embarrassed them.
Feeling themselves incapable of reorganising France, they left her to
herself. By their despotism they contrived to dominate her, but they never
governed her. Now, what France needed more than anything at this juncture
was to be governed.
The convention has left behind it the reputation of a strong Government,
and the Directory that of a weak Government. The contrary is true: it was
the Directory that was the strong Government.
Psychologically we may readily explain the difference between the
Government of the Directory and that of the preceding Assemblies by
recalling the fact that a gathering of six hundred to seven hundred persons
may well suffer from waves of contagious enthusiasm, as on the night of the
4th of August, or even impulses of energetic will-power, such as that which
launched defiance against the kings of Europe. But such impulses are too
ephemeral to possess any great force. A committee of five members, easily
dominated by the will of one, is far more susceptible of continuous
resolution—that is, of perseverance in a settled line of conduct.
The Government of the Directory proved to be always incapable of
governing, but it never lacked a strong will. Nothing restraining it, neither
respect for law nor consideration for the citizens, nor love of the public
welfare, it was able to impose upon France a despotism more crushing than
that of any Government since the beginning of the Revolution, not
excepting the Terror.
Although it utilised methods analogous to those of the Convention, and
ruled France in the most tyrannical manner, the Directory, no more than the
Convention, was never the master of France.
This fact, which I have already noted, proves once more the impotence
of material constraint to dominate moral forces. It cannot be too often
repeated that the true guide of mankind is the moral scaffolding erected by
his ancestors.
Accustomed to live in an organised society, supported by codes and
respected traditions, we can with difficulty represent to ourselves the
condition of a nation deprived of such a basis. As a general thing we only
see the irksome side of our environment, too readily forgetting that society
can exist only on condition of imposing certain restraints, and that laws,
manners, and custom constitute a check upon the natural instincts of
barbarism which never entirely perishes.
The history of the Convention and the Directory which followed it
shows plainly to what degree disorder may overcome a nation deprived of
its ancient structure, and having for guide only the artificial combinations of
an insufficient reason.
2. Despotic Government of the Directory. Recrudescence of the Terror.
With the object of diverting attention, occupying the army, and obtaining
resources by the pillage of neighbouring countries, the Directors decided to
resume the wars of conquest which had succeeded under the Convention.
These continued during the life time of the Directory. The armies won a
rich booty, especially in Italy.
Some of the invaded populations were so simple as to suppose that
these invasions were undertaken in their interest. They were not long in
discovering that all military operations were accompanied by crushing taxes
and the pillage of churches, public treasuries, &c.
The final consequence of this policy of conquest was the formation of a
new coalition against France, which lasted until 1801.
Indifferent to the state of the country and incapable of reorganising it,
the Directors were principally concerned in struggling against an incessant
series of conspiracies in order to keep in power.
This task was enough to occupy their leisure, for the political parties
had not disarmed. Anarchy had reached such a point that all were calling for
a hand powerful enough to restore order. Everyone felt, the Directors
included, that the republican system could not last much longer.
Some dreamed of re-establishing royalty, others the Terrorist system,
while others waited for a general. Only the purchasers of the national
property feared a change of Government.
The unpopularity of the Directory increased daily, and when in May,
1797, the third part of the Assembly had to be renewed, the majority of
those elected were hostile to the system.
The Directors were not embarrassed by a little thing like that. They
annulled the elections in 49 departments; 154 of the new deputies were
invalidated and expelled, 53 condemned to deportation. Among these latter
figured the most illustrious names of the Revolution: Portalis, Carnot,
Tronson du Coudray, &c.
To intimidate the electors, military commissions condemned to death,
rather at random, 160 persons, and sent to Guiana 330, of whom half
speedily died. The emigres and priests who had returned to France were
violently expelled. This was known as the coup d'etat of Fructidor.
This coup, which struck more especially at the moderates, was not the
only one of its kind; another quickly followed. The Directors, finding the
Jacobin deputies too numerous, annulled the elections of sixty of them.
The preceding facts displayed the tyrannical temper of the Directors, but
this appeared even more plainly in the details of their measures. The new
masters of France also proved to be as bloodthirsty as the most ferocious
deputies of the Terror.
The guillotine was not re-established as a permanency, but replaced by
deportation under conditions which left the victims little chance of survival.
Sent to Rochefort in cages of iron bars, exposed to all the severities of the
weather, they were then packed into boats.
"Between the decks of the Decade and the Bayonnaise," says Taine, "the
miserable prisoners, suffocated by the lack of air and the torrid heat, bullied
and fleeced, died of hunger or asphyxia, and Guiana completed the work of
the voyage: of 193 taken thither by the Decade 39 were left alive at the end
of twenty-two months; of 120 taken by the Bayonnaise 1 remained.
Observing everywhere a Catholic renascence, and imagining that the
clergy were conspiring against them, the Directors deported or sent to the
galleys in one year 1,448 priests, to say nothing of a large number who were
summarily executed. The Terror was in reality completely re-established.
The autocratic despotism of the Directory was exercised in all the
branches of the administration, notably the finances. Thus, having need of
six hundred million francs, it forced the deputies, always docile, to vote a
progressive impost, which yielded, however, only twelve millions. Being
presently in the same condition, it decreed a forced loan of a hundred
millions, which resulted in the closing of workshops, the stoppage of
business, and the dismissal of domestics. It was only at the price of absolute
ruin that forty millions could be obtained.
To assure itself of domination in the provinces the Directory caused a
so-called law of hostages to be passed, according to which a list of
hostages, responsible for all offences, was drawn up in each commune.
It is easy to understand what hatred such a system provoked. At the end
of 1799 fourteen departments were in revolt and forty-six were ready to
rise. If the Directory had lasted the dissolution of society would have been
complete.
For that matter, this dissolution was far advanced. Finances,
administration, everything was crumbling. The receipts of the Treasury,
consisting of depreciated assignats fallen to a hundredth part of their
original value, were negligible. Holders of Government stock and officers
could no longer obtain payment.
France at this time gave travellers the impression of a country ravaged
by war and abandoned by its inhabitants. The broken bridges and dykes and
ruined buildings made all traffic impossible. The roads, long deserted, were
infested by brigands.
Certain departments could only be crossed at the price of buying a safe-
conduct from the leaders of these bands. Industry and commerce were
annihilated. In Lyons 13,000 workshops and mills out of 15,000 had been
forced to close. Lille, Havre, Bordeaux, Lyons, Marseilles, &c., were like
dead cities. Poverty and famine were general.
The moral disorganisation was no less terrible. Luxury and the craving
for pleasure, costly dinners, jewels, and extravagant households were the
appanage of a new society composed entirely of stock-jobbers, army
contractors, and shady financiers enriched by pillage. They gave Paris that
superficial aspect of luxury and gaiety which has deluded so many
historians of this period, because the insolent prodigality displayed covered
the general misery.
The chronicles of the Directory as told in books help to show us of what
lies the web of history is woven. The theatre has lately got hold of this
period, of which the fashions are still imitated. It has left the memory of a
joyous period of re-birth after the gloomy drama of the Terror. In reality the
drama of the Directory was hardly an improvement on the Terror and was
quite as sanguinary. Finally, it inspired such loathing that the Directors,
feeling that it could not last, sought themselves for the dictator capable of
replacing it and also of protecting them.
3. The Advent of Bonaparte.
We have seen that at the end of the Directory the anarchy and
disorganisation were such that every one was desperately calling for the
man of energy capable of re-establishing order. As early as 1795 a number
of deputies had thought for a moment of re- establishing royalty. Louis
XVIII., having been tactless enough to declare that he would restore the
ancien regime in its entirety, return all property to its original owners, and
punish the men of the Revolution, was immediately thrown over. The
senseless expedition of Quiberon finally alienated the supporters of the
future sovereign. The royalists gave a proof during the whole of the
Revolution of an incapacity and a narrowness of mind which justified most
of the measures taken against them.
The monarchy being impossible, it was necessary to find a general.
Only one existed whose name carried weight—Bonaparte. The campaign in
Italy had just made him famous. Having crossed the Alps, he had marched
from victory to victory, penetrated to Milan and Venice, and everywhere
obtained important war contributions. He then made towards Vienna, and
was only twenty- five leagues from its gates when the Emperor of Austria
decided to sue for peace.
But great as was his renown, the young general did not consider it
sufficient. To increase it he persuaded the Directory that the power of
England could be shaken by an invasion of Egypt, and in May, 1798, he
embarked at Toulon.
This need of increasing his prestige arose from a very sound
psychological conception which he clearly expounded at St. Helena:—
"The most influential and enlightened generals had long
been pressing the general of Italy to take steps to place
himself at the head of the Republic. He refused; he was not
yet strong enough to walk quite alone. He had ideas upon the
art of governing and upon what was necessary to a great
nation which were so different from those of the men of the
Revolution and the assemblies that, not being able to act
alone, he feared to compromise his character. He determined
to set out for Egypt, but resolved to reappear if
circumstances should arise to render his presence useful or
necessary."
Bonaparte did not stay long in Egypt. Recalled by his friends, he landed
at Frejus, and the announcement of his return provoked universal
enthusiasm. There were illuminations everywhere. France collaborated in
advance in the coup d'etat prepared by two Directors and the principal
ministers. The plot was organised in three weeks. Its execution on the 18th
of Brumaire was accomplished with the greatest ease.
All parties experienced the greatest delight at being rid of the sinister
gangs who had so long oppressed and exploited the country. The French
were doubtless about to enter upon a despotic system of government, but it
could not be so intolerable as that which had been endured for so many
years.
The history of the coup d'etat of Brumaire justifies all that we have
already said of the impossibility of forming exact judgments of events
which apparently are fully understood and attested by no matter how many
witnesses.
We know what ideas people had thirty years ago concerning the coup of
Brumaire. It was regarded as a crime committed by the ambition of a man
who was supported by his army. As a matter of fact the army played no part
whatever in the affair. The little body of men who expelled the few
recalcitrant deputies were not soldiers even, but the gendarmes of the
Assembly itself. The true author of the coup d'etat was the Government
itself, with the complicity of all France.
4. Causes of the Duration of the Revolution.
If we limit the Revolution to the time necessary for the conquest of its
fundamental principles—equality before the law, free access to public
functions, popular sovereignty, control of expenditures, &c.—we may say
that it lasted only a few months. Towards the middle of 1789 all this was
accomplished, and during the years that followed nothing was added to it,
yet the Revolution lasted much longer.
Confining the duration to the dates admitted by the official historians,
we see it persisting until the advent of Bonaparte, a space of some ten years.
Why did this period of disorganisation and violence follow the
establishment of the new principles? We need not seek the cause in the
foreign war, which might on several occasions have been terminated, thanks
to the divisions of the allies and the constant victories of the French; neither
must we look for it in the sympathy of Frenchmen for the revolutionary
Government. Never was rule more cordially hated and despised than that of
the Assemblies. By its revolts as well as by its repeated votes a great part of
the nation displayed the horror with which it regarded the system.
This last point, the aversion of France for the revolutionary regime, so
long misunderstood, has been well displayed by recent historians. The
author of the last book published on the Revolution, M. Madelin, has well
summarised their opinion in the following words:—
"As early as 1793 a party by no means numerous had seized
upon France, the Revolution, and the Republic. Now, three-
quarters of France longed for the Revolution to be checked,
or rather delivered from its odious exploiters; but these held
the unhappy country by a thousand means. . . . As the Terror
was essential to them if they were to rule, they struck at
whomsoever seemed at any given moment to be opposed to
the Terror, were they the best servants of the Revolution."
Up to the end of the Directory the government was exercised by
Jacobins, who merely desired to retain, along with the supreme power, the
riches they had accumulated by murder and pillage, and were ready to
surrender France to any one who would guarantee them free possession of
these. That they negotiated the coup d'etat of Brumaire with Napoleon was
simply to the fact that they had not been able to realise their wishes with
regard to Louis XVIII.
But how explain the fact that a Government so tyrannical and so
dishonoured was able to survive for so many years?
It was not merely because the revolutionary religion still survived in
men's minds, nor because it was forced on them by means of persecution
and bloodshed, but especially, as I have already stated, on account of the
great interest which a large portion of the population had in maintaining it.
This point is fundamental. If the Revolution had remained a theoretical
religion, it would probably have been of short duration. But the belief
which had just been founded very quickly emerged from the domain of pure
theory.
The Revolution did not confine itself to despoiling the monarchy, the
nobility, and the clergy of their powers of government. In throwing into the
hands of the bourgeoisie and the large numbers of peasantry the wealth and
the employments of the old privileged classes it had at the same stroke
turned them into obstinate supporters of the revolutionary system. All those
who had acquired the property of which the nobles and clergy had been
despoiled had obtained lands and chateaux at low prices, and were terrified
lest the restoration of the monarchy should force them to make general
restitution.
It was largely for these reasons that a Government which, at any normal
period, would never have been endured, was able to survive until a master
should re-establish order, while promising to maintain not only the moral
but also the material conquests of the Revolution. Bonaparte realised these
anxieties, and was promptly and enthusiastically welcomed. Material
conquests which were still contestable and theoretical principles which
were still fragile were by him incorporated in institutions and the laws. It is
an error to say that the Revolution terminated with his advent. Far from
destroying it, he ratified and consolidated it.
Chapter II.
The Restoration of Order. The Consular Republic
Table of Contents
1. How the Work of the Revolution was Confirmed by the Consulate.
The history of the Consulate is as rich as the preceding period in
psychological material. In the first place it shows us that the work of a
powerful individual is superior to that of a collectivity. Bonaparte
immediately replaced the bloody anarchy in which the Republic had for ten
years been writhing by a period of order. That which none of the four
Assemblies of the Revolution had been able to realise, despite the most
violent oppression, a single man accomplished in a very short space of time.
His authority immediately put an end to all the Parisian insurrections
and the attempts at monarchical resistance, and re- established the moral
unity of France, so profoundly divided by intense hatreds. Bonaparte
replaced an unorganised collective despotism by a perfectly organised
individual despotism. Everyone gained thereby, for his tyranny was
infinitely less heavy than that which had been endured for ten long years.
We must suppose, moreover, that it was unwelcome to very few, as it was
very soon accepted with immense enthusiasm.
We know better to-day than to repeat with the old historians that
Bonaparte overthrew the Republic. On the contrary, he retained of it all that
could be retained, and never would have been retained without him, by
establishing all the practicable work of the Revolution—the abolition of
privileges, equality before the law, &c.—in institutions and codes of law.
The Consular Government continued, moreover, to call itself the Republic.
It is infinitely probable that without the Consulate a monarchical
restoration would have terminated the Directory, and would have wiped out
the greater part of the work of the Revolution. Let us suppose Bonaparte
erased from history. No one, I think, will imagine that the Directory could
have survived the universal weariness of its rule. It would certainly have
been overturned by the royalist conspiracies which were breaking out daily,
and Louis XVIII. would probably have ascended the throne. Certainly he
was to mount it sixteen years later, but during this interval Bonaparte gave
such force to the principles of the Revolution, by establishing them in laws
and customs, that the restored sovereign dared not touch them, nor restore
the property of the returned emigres.
Matters would have been very different had Louis XVIII. immediately
followed the Directory. He would have brought with him all the absolutism
of the ancien regime, and fresh revolutions would have been necessary to
abolish it. We know that a mere attempt to return to the past overthrew
Charles X.
It would be a little ingenuous to complain of the tyranny of Bonaparte.
Under the ancien regime Frenchmen had supported every species of
tyranny, and the Republic had created a despotism even heavier than that of
the monarchy. Despotism was then a normal condition, which aroused no
protest save when it was accompanied by disorder.
A constant law of the psychology of crowds shows them as creating
anarchy, and then seeking the master who will enable them to emerge
therefrom. Bonaparte was this master.
2. The Reorganisation of France by the Consulate.
Upon assuming power Bonaparte undertook a colossal task. All was in
ruins; all was to be rebuilt. On the morrow of the coup of Brumaire he
drafted, almost single-handed, the Constitution destined to give him the
absolute power which was to enable him to reorganise the country and to
prevail over the factions. In a month it was completed.
This Constitution, known as that of the year VIII., survived, with slight
modifications, until the end of his reign. The executive power was the
attribute of three Consuls, two of whom possessed a consultative voice
only. The first Consul, Bonaparte, was therefore sole master of France. He
appointed ministers, councillors of state, ambassadors, magistrates, and
other officials, and decided upon peace or war. The legislative power was
his also, since only he could initiate the laws, which were subsequently
submitted to three Assemblies—the Council of State, the Tribunate, and the
Legislative Corps. A fourth Assembly, the Senate, acted effectually as the
guardian of the Constitution.
Despotic as he was and became, Bonaparte always called the other
Consuls about him before proceeding with the most trivial measure. The
Legislative Corps did not exercise much influence during his reign, but he
signed no decrees of any kind without first discussing them with the
Council of State. This Council, composed of the most enlightened and
learned men of France, prepared laws, which were then presented to the
Legislative Corps, which could criticise them very freely, since voting was
secret. Presided over by Bonaparte, the Council of State was a kind of
sovereign tribunal, judging even the actions of ministers.9
The new master had great confidence in this Council, as it was
composed more particularly of eminent jurists, each of whom dealt with his
own speciality. He was too good a psychologist not to entertain the greatest
suspicion of large and incompetent assemblies of popular origin, whose
disastrous results had been obvious to him during the whole of the
Revolution.
Wishing to govern for the people, but never with its assistance,
Bonaparte accorded it no part in the government, reserving to it only the
right of voting, once for all, for or against the adoption of the new
Constitution. He only in rare instances had recourse to universal suffrage.
The members of the Legislative Corps recruited themselves, and were not
elected by the people.
In creating a Constitution intended solely to fortify his own power, the
First Consul had no illusion that it would serve to restore the country.
Consequently, while he was drafting it he also undertook the enormous task
of the administrative, judicial, and financial reorganisation of France. The
various powers were centralised in Paris. Each department was directed by
a prefect, assisted by a consul-general; the arrondissement by a sub- prefect,
assisted by a council; the commune by a mayor, assisted by a municipal
council. All were appointed by the ministers, and not by election, as under
the Republic.
This system, which created the omnipotent State and a powerful
centralisation, was retained by all subsequent Governments and is preserved
to-day. Centralisation being, in spite of its drawbacks, the only means of
avoiding local tyrannies in a country profoundly divided within itself, has
always been maintained.
This organisation, based on a profound knowledge of the soul of the
French people, immediately restored that tranquillity and order which had
for so long been unknown.
To complete the mental pacification of the country, the political exiles
were recalled and the churches restored to the faithful.
Continuing to rebuild the social edifice, Bonaparte busied himself also
with the drafting of a code, the greater part of which consisted of customs
borrowed from the ancien regime. It was, as has been said, a sort of
transition or compromise between the old law and the new.
Considering the enormous task accomplished by the First Consul in so
short a time, we realise that he had need, before all, of a Constitution
according him absolute power. If all the measures by which he restored
France had been submitted to assemblies of attorneys, he could never have
extricated the country from the disorder into which it had fallen.
The Constitution of the year VIII. obviously transformed the Republic
into a monarchy at least as absolute as the "Divine right" monarchy of
Louis XIV. Being the only Constitution adapted to the needs of the moment,
it represented a psychological necessity.
3. Psychological Elements which determined the Success of the Work of the
Consulate.
All the external forces which act upon men—economic, historical,
geographical, &c.—may be finally translated into psychological forces.
These psychological forces a ruler must understand in order to govern. The
Revolutionary Assemblies were completely ignorant of them; Bonaparte
knew how to employ them.
The various Assemblies, the Convention notably, were composed of
conflicting parties. Napoleon understood that to dominate them he must not
belong to any one of these parties. Very well aware that the value of a
country is disseminated among the superior intelligences of the various
parties, he tried to utilise them all. His agents of government—ministers,
priests, magistrates, &c.—were taken indifferently from among the
Liberals, Royalists, Jacobites, &c., having regard only to their capacities.
While accepting the assistance of men of the ancien regime, Bonaparte
took care to make it understood that he intended to maintain the
fundamental principles of the Revolution. Nevertheless many Royalists
rallied round the new Government.
One of the most remarkable feats of the Consulate, from the
psychological point of view, was the restoration of religious peace. France
was far more divided by religious disagreement than by political
differences. The systematic destruction of a portion of the Vendee had
almost completely terminated the struggle by force of arms, but without
pacifying men's minds. As only one man, and he the head of Christianity,
could assist in this pacification, Bonaparte did not hesitate to treat with him.
His concordat was the work of a real psychologist, who knew that moral
forces do not use violence, and the great danger of persecuting such. While
conciliating the clergy he contrived to place them under his own
domination. The bishops were to be appointed and remunerated by the
State, so that he would still be master.
The religious policy of Napoleon had a bearing which escapes our
modern Jacobins. Blinded by their narrow fanaticism, they do not
understand that to detach the Church from the Government is to create a
state within the State, so that they are liable to find themselves opposed by a
formidable caste, directed by a master outside France, and necessarily
hostile to France. To give one's enemies a liberty they did not possess is
extremely dangerous. Never would Napoleon, nor any of the sovereigns
who preceded him, have consented to make the clergy independent of the
State, as they have become to-day.
The difficulties of Bonaparte the First Consul were far greater than
those he had to surmount after his coronation. Only a profound knowledge
of men enabled him to triumph over them. The future master was far from
being the master as yet. Many departments were still in insurrection.
Brigandage persisted, and the Midi was ravaged by the struggles of
partisans. Bonaparte, as Consul, had to conciliate and handle Talleyrand,
Fouche, and a number of generals who thought themselves his equal. Even
his brothers conspired against his power. Napoleon, as Emperor, had no
hostile party to face, but as Consul he had to combat all the parties and to
hold the balance equal among them. This must indeed have been a difficult
task, since during the last century very few Governments have succeeded in
accomplishing it.
The success of such an undertaking demanded an extremely subtle
mixture of finesse, firmness, and diplomacy. Not feeling himself powerful
enough as yet, Bonaparte the Consul made a rule, according to his own
expression, "of governing men as the greater number wish to be governed."
As Emperor he often managed to govern them according to his own ideal.
We have travelled a long way since the time when historians, in their
singular blindness, and great poets, who possessed more talent than
psychology, would hold forth in indignant accents against the coup d'etat of
Brumaire. What profound illusions underlay the assertion that "France lay
fair in Messidor's great sun"! And other illusions no less profound underlay
such verdicts as that of Victor Hugo concerning this period. We have seen
that the "Crime of Brumaire" had as an enthusiastic accomplice, not only
the Government itself but the whole of France, which it delivered from
anarchy.
One may wonder how intelligent men could so misjudge a period of
history which is nevertheless so clear. It was doubtless because they saw
events through their own convictions, and we know what transformations
the truth may suffer for the man who is imprisoned in the valleys of belief.
The most luminous facts are obscured, and the history of events is the
history of his dreams.
The psychologist who desires to understand the period which we have
so briefly sketched can only do so if, being attached to no party, he stands
clear of the passions which are the soul of parties. He will never dream of
recriminating a past which was dictated by such imperious necessities.
Certainly Napoleon has cost France dear: his epic was terminated by two
invasions, and there was yet to be a third, whose consequences are felt even
to-day, when the prestige which he exerted even from the tomb set upon the
throne the inheritor of his name.
All these events are narrowly connected in their origin. They represent
the price of that capital phenomenon in the evolution of a people, a change
of ideal. Man can never make the attempt to break suddenly with his
ancestors without profoundly affecting the course of his own history.
9. Napoleon naturally often overruled the Council of State, but by no means always did so. In one
instance, reported in the Memorial de Sainte-Helene, he was the only one of his own opinion,
and accepted that of the majority in the following terms: "Gentlemen, matters are decided here
by majority, and being alone, I must give way; but I declare that in my conscience I yield only to
form. You have reduced me to silence, but in no way convinced me."
Another day the Emperor, interrupted three times in the expression of his opinion, addressed
himself to the speaker who had just interrupted him: "Sir, I have not yet finished; I beg you to
allow me to continue. After all, it seems to me that every one has a perfect right to express his
opinion here."
"The Emperor, contrary to the accepted opinion, was so far from absolute, and so easy with
his Council of State, that he often resumed a discussion, or even annulled a decision, because
one of the members of the Council had since, in private, given him fresh reasons, or had urged
that the Emperor's personal opinion had influenced the majority."
Chapter III.
Political Consequences of the Conflict Between
Traditions and Revolutionary Principles During
the Last Century
Table of Contents
1. The Psychological Causes of the continued Revolutionary Movements to
which France has been subject.
In examining, in a subsequent chapter, the evolution of revolutionary ideas
during the last century, we shall see that during more than fifty years they
very slowly spread through the various strata of society.
During the whole of this period the great majority of the people and the
bourgeoisie rejected them, and their diffusion was effected only by a very
limited number of apostles. But their influence, thanks principally to the
faults of Governments, was sufficient to provoke several revolutions. We
shall examine these briefly when we have examined the psychological
influences which gave them birth.
The history of our political upheavals during the last century is enough
to prove, even if we did not yet realise the fact, that men are governed by
their mentalities far more than by the institutions which their rulers
endeavour to force upon them.
The successive revolutions which France has suffered have been the
consequences of struggles between two portions of the nation whose
mentalities are different. One is religious and monarchical and is dominated
by long ancestral influences; the other is subjected to the same influences,
but gives them a revolutionary form.
From the commencement of the Revolution the struggle between
contrary mentalities was plainly manifested. We have seen that in spite of
the most frightful repression insurrections and conspiracies lasted until the
end of the Directory. They proved that the traditions of the past had left
profound roots in the popular soul. At a certain moment sixty departments
were in revolt against the new Government, and were only repressed by
repeated massacres on a vast scale.
To establish some sort of compromise between the ancien regime and
the new ideals was the most difficult of the problems which Bonaparte had
to resolve. He had to discover institutions which would suit the two
mentalities into which France was divided. He succeeded, as we have seen,
by conciliatory measures, and also by dressing very ancient things in new
names.
His reign was one of those rare periods of French history during which
the mental unity of France was complete.
This unity could not outlive him. On the morrow of his fall all the old
parties reappeared, and have survived until the present day. Some attach
themselves to traditional influences; others violently reject them.
If this long conflict had been between believers and the indifferent, it
could not have lasted, for indifference is always tolerant; but the struggle
was really between two different beliefs. The lay Church very soon
assumed a religious aspect, and its pretended rationalism has become,
especially in recent years, a barely attenuated form of the narrowest clerical
spirit. Now, we have shown that no conciliation is possible between
dissimilar religious beliefs. The clericals when in power could not therefore
show themselves more tolerant towards freethinkers than these latter are to-
day toward the clericals.
These divisions, determined by differences of belief, were complicated
by the addition of the political conceptions derived from those beliefs.
Many simple souls have for long believed that the real history of France
began with the year I. of the Republic. This rudimentary conception is at
last dying out. Even the most rigid revolutionaries renounce it,10 and are
quite willing to recognise that the past was something better than an epoch
of black barbarism dominated by low superstitions.
The religious origin of most of the political beliefs held in France
inspires their adepts with an inextinguishable hatred which always strikes
foreigners with amazement.
"Nothing is more obvious, nothing is more certain," writes Mr. Barret-
Wendell, in his book on France, "than this fact: that not only have the
royalists, revolutionaries, and Bonapartists always been mortally opposed to
one another, but that, owing to the passionate ardour of the French
character, they have always entertained a profound intellectual horror for
one another. Men who believe themselves in possession of the truth cannot
refrain from affirming that those who do not think with them are
instruments of error.
"Each party will gravely inform you that the advocates of the adverse
cause are afflicted by a dense stupidity or are consciously dishonest. Yet
when you meet these latter, who will say exactly the same things as their
detractors, you cannot but recognise, in all good faith, that they are neither
stupid nor dishonest."
This reciprocal execration of the believers of each party has always
facilitated the overthrow of Governments and ministers in France. The
parties in the minority will never refuse to ally themselves against the
triumphant party. We know that a great number of revolutionary Socialists
have been elected to the present Chamber only by the aid of the
monarchists, who are still as unintelligent as they were at the time of the
Revolution.
Our religious and political differences do not constitute the only cause
of dissension in France. They are held by men possessing that particular
mentality which I have already described under the name of the
revolutionary mentality. We have seen that each period always presents a
certain number of individuals ready to revolt against the established order
of things, whatever that may be, even though it may realise all their desires.
The intolerance of the parties in France, and their desire to seize upon
power, are further favoured by the conviction, so prevalent under the
Revolution, that societies can be remade by means of laws. The modern
State, whatever its leader, has inherited in the eyes of the multitudes and
their leaders the mystic power attributed to the ancient kings, when these
latter were regarded as an incarnation of the Divine will. Not only the
people is inspired by this confidence in the power of Government; all our
legislators entertain it also.11
Legislating always, politicians never realise that as institutions are
effects, and not causes, they have no virtue in themselves. Heirs to the great
revolutionary illusion, they do not see that man is created by a past whose
foundations we are powerless to reshape.
The conflict between the principles dividing France, which has lasted
more than a century, will doubtless continue for a long time yet, and no one
can foresee what fresh upheavals it may engender. No doubt if before our
era the Athenians could have divined that their social dissensions would
have led to the enslavement of Greece, they would have renounced them;
but how could they have foreseen as much? M. Guiraud justly writes: "A
generation of men very rarely realises the task which it is accomplishing. It
is preparing for the future; but this future is often the contrary of what it
wishes."
2. Summary of a Century's Revolutionary Movement in France.
The psychological causes of the revolutionary movements which France has
seen during the past century having been explained, it will now suffice to
present a summary picture of these successive revolutions.
The sovereigns in coalition having defeated Napoleon, they reduced
France to her former limits, and placed Louis XVIII., the only possible
sovereign, on the throne.
By a special charter the new king accepted the position of a
constitutional monarch under a representative system of government. He
recognised all the conquests of the Revolution: the civil Code, equality
before the law, liberty of worship, irrevocability of the sale of national
property, &c. The right of suffrage, however, was limited to those paying a
certain amount in taxes.
This liberal Constitution was opposed by the ultra-royalists. Returned
emigres, they wanted the restitution of the national property, and the re-
establishment of their ancient privileges.
Fearing that such a reaction might cause a new revolution, Louis XVIII.
was reduced to dissolving the Chamber. The election having returned
moderate deputies, he was able to continue to govern with the same
principles, understanding very well that any attempt to govern the French
by the ancien regime would be enough to provoke a general rebellion.
Unfortunately, his death, in 1824, placed Charles X., formerly Comte
d'Artois, on the throne. Extremely narrow, incapable of understanding the
new world which surrounded him, and boasting that he had not modified his
ideas since 1789, he prepared a series of reactionary laws—a law by which
an indemnity of forty millions sterling was to be paid to emigres; a law of
sacrilege; and laws establishing the rights of primogeniture, the
preponderance of the clergy, &c.
The majority of the deputies showing themselves daily more opposed to
his projects, in 1830 he enacted Ordinances dissolving the Chamber,
suppressing the liberty of the Press, and preparing for the restoration of the
ancien regime.
The effect was immediate. This autocratic action provoked a coalition
of the leaders of all parties. Republicans, Bonapartists, Liberals, Royalists
—all united in order to raise the Parisian populace. Four days after the
publication of the Ordinances the insurgents were masters of the capital,
and Charles X. fled to England.
The leaders of the movement—Thiers, Casimir-Perier, La Fayette, &c.
—summoned to Paris Louis-Philippe, of whose existence the people were
scarcely aware, and declared him king of the French.
Between the indifference of the people and the hostility of the nobles,
who had remained faithful to the legitimate dynasty, the new king relied
chiefly upon the bourgeoisie. An electoral law having reduced the electors
to less than 200,000, this class played an exclusive part in the government.
The situation of the sovereign was not easy. He had to struggle
simultaneously against the legitimist supporters of Henry V. the grandson of
Charles X., and the Bonapartists, who recognised as their head Louis-
Napoleon, the Emperor's nephew, and finally against the republicans.
By means of their secret societies, analogous to the clubs of the
Revolution, the latter provoked numerous riots at various intervals between
1830 and 1840, but these were easily repressed.
The clericals and legitimists, on their side, did not cease their intrigues.
The Duchess de Berry, the mother of Henry V., tried in vain to raise the
Vendee. As to the clergy, their demands finally made them so intolerable
that an insurrection broke out, in the course of which the palace of the
archbishop of Paris was sacked.
The republicans as a party were not very dangerous, as the Chamber
sided with the king in the struggle against them. The minister Guizot, who
advocated a strong central power, declared that two things were
indispensable to government—"reason and cannon." The famous statesman
was surely somewhat deluded as to the necessity or efficacy of reason.
Despite this strong central power, which in reality was not strong, the
republicans, and above all the Socialists, continued to agitate. One of the
most influential, Louis Blanc, claimed that it was the duty of the
Government to procure work for every citizen. The Catholic party, led by
Lacordaire and Montalembert, united with the Socialists—as to-day in
Belgium—to oppose the Government.
A campaign in favour of electoral reform ended in 1848 in a fresh riot,
which unexpectedly overthrew Louis-Philippe.
His fall was far less justifiable than that of Charles X. There was little
with which he could be reproached. Doubtless he was suspicious of
universal suffrage, but the French Revolution had more than once been
quite suspicious of it. Louis-Philippe not being, like the Directory, an
absolute ruler, could not, as the latter had done, annul unfavourable
elections.
A provisional Government was installed in the Hotel de Ville, to replace
the fallen monarchy. It proclaimed the Republic, established universal
suffrage, and decreed that the people should proceed to the election of a
National Assembly of nine hundred members.
From the first days of its existence the new Government found itself the
victim of socialistic manoeuvres and riots.
The psychological phenomena observed during the first Revolution
were now to be witnessed again. Clubs were formed, whose leaders sent the
people from time to time against the Assembly, for reasons which were
generally quite devoid of common sense—for example, to force the
Government to support an insurrection in Poland, &c.
In the hope of satisfying the Socialists, every day more noisy and
exigent, the Assembly organised national workshops, in which the workers
were occupied in various forms of labour. In these 100,000 men cost the
State more than L40,000 weekly. Their claim to receive pay without
working for it forced the Assembly to close the workshops.
This measure was the origin of a formidable insurrection, 50,000
workers revolting. The Assembly, terrified, confided all the executive
powers to General Cavaignac. There was a four-days battle with the
insurgents, during which three generals and the Archbishop of Paris were
killed; 3,000 prisoners were deported by the Assembly to Algeria, and
revolutionary Socialism was annihilated for a space of fifty years.
These events brought Government stock down from 116 to 50 francs.
Business was at a standstill. The peasants, who thought themselves
threatened by the Socialists, and the bourgeois, whose taxes the Assembly
had increased by half, turned against the Republic, and when Louis-
Napoleon promised to re-establish order he found himself welcomed with
enthusiasm. A candidate for the position of President of the Republic, who
according to the new Constitution must be elected by the whole body of
citizens, he was chosen by 5,500,000 votes.
Very soon at odds with the Chamber, the prince decided on a coup
d'etat. The Assembly was dissolved; 30,000 persons were arrested, 10,000
deported, and a hundred deputies were exiled.
This coup d'etat, although summary, was very favourably received, for
when submitted to a plebiscite it received 7,500,000 votes out of 8,000,000.
On the 2nd of November, 1852, Napoleon had himself named Emperor
by an even greater majority: The horror which the generality of Frenchmen
felt for demagogues and Socialists had restored the Empire.
In the first part of its existence it constituted an absolute Government,
and during the latter half a liberal Government. After eighteen years of rule
the Emperor was overthrown by the revolution of the 4th of September,
1870, after the capitulation of Sedan.
Since that time revolutionary movements have been rare; the only one
of importance was the revolution of March, 1871, which resulted in the
burning of many of the monuments of Paris and the execution of about
20,000 insurgents.
After the war of 1870 the electors, who, amid so many disasters, did not
know which way to turn, sent a great number of Orleanist and legitimist
deputies to the Constituent Assembly. Unable to agree upon the
establishment of a monarchy, they appointed M. Thiers President of the
Republic, later replacing him by Marshal MacMahon. In 1876 the new
elections, like all those that have followed, sent a majority of republicans to
the Chamber.
The various assemblies which have succeeded to this have always been
divided into numerous parties, which have provoked innumerable changes
of ministry.
However, thanks to the equilibrium resulting from this division of
parties, we have for forty years enjoyed comparative quiet. Four Presidents
of the Republic have been overthrown without revolution, and the riots that
have occurred, such as those of Champagne and the Midi, have not had
serious consequences.
A great popular movement, in 1888, did nearly overthrow the Republic
for the benefit of General Boulanger, but it has survived and triumphed over
the attacks of all parties.
Various reasons contribute to the maintenance of the present Republic.
In the first place, of the conflicting factions none is strong enough to crush
the rest. In the second place, the head of the State being purely decorative,
and possessing no power, it is impossible to attribute to him the evils from
which the country may suffer, and to feel sure that matters would be
different were he overthrown. Finally, as the supreme power is distributed
among thousands of hands, responsibilities are so disseminated that it
would be difficult to know where to begin. A tyrant can be overthrown, but
what can be done against a host of little anonymous tyrannies?
If we wished to sum up in a word the great transformations which have
been effected in France by a century of riots and revolutions, we might say
that individual tyranny, which was weak and therefore easily overthrown,
has been replaced by collective tyrannies, which are very strong and
difficult to destroy. To a people avid of equality and habituated to hold its
Governments responsible for every event individual tyranny seemed
insupportable, while a collective tyranny is readily endured, although
generally much more severe.
The extension of the tyranny of the State has therefore been the final
result of all our revolutions, and the common characteristic of all systems of
government which we have known in France. This form of tyranny may be
regarded as a racial ideal, since successive upheavals of France have only
fortified it. Statism is the real political system of the Latin peoples, and the
only system that receives all suffrages. The other forms of government—
republic, monarchy, empire—represent empty labels, powerless shadows.
10. We may judge of the recent evolution of ideas upon this point by the following passage from a
speech by M. Jaures, delivered in the Chamber of Deputies: "The greatness of to-day is built of
the efforts of past centuries. France is not contained in a day nor in an epoch, but in the
succession of all days, all periods, all her twilights and all her dawns."
11. After the publication of an article of mine concerning legislative illusions, I received from one
of our most eminent politicians, M. Boudenot the senator, a letter from which I extract the
following passage: "Twenty years passed in the Chamber and the Senate have shown me how
right you are. How many times I have heard my colleagues say: `The Government ought to
prevent this, order that,' &c. What would you have? there are fourteen centuries of monarchical
atavism in our blood."
Part III.
The Recent Evolution of the Revolutionary
Principles
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
The Progress of Democratic Beliefs Since the
Revolution
Table of Contents
1. Gradual Propagation of Democratic Ideas after the Revolution.
Ideas which are firmly established, incrusted, as it were, in men's minds,
continue to act for several generations. Those which resulted from the
French Revolution were, like others, subject to this law.
Although the life of the Revolution as a Government was short, the
influence of its principles was, on the contrary, very long- lived. Becoming
a form of religious belief, they profoundly modified the orientation of the
sentiments and ideas of several generations.
Despite a few intervals, the French Revolution has continued up to the
present, and still survives. The role of Napoleon was not confined to
overturning the world, changing the map of Europe, and remaking the
exploits of Alexander. The new rights of the people, created by the
Revolution and established by its institutions, have exercised a profound
influence. The military work of the conqueror was soon dissolved, but the
revolutionary principles which he contributed to propagate have survived
him.
The various restorations which followed the Empire caused men at first
to become somewhat forgetful of the principles of the Revolution. For fifty
years this propagation was far from rapid. One might almost have supposed
that the people had forgotten them. Only a small number of theorists
maintained their influence. Heirs to the "simplicist" spirit of the Jacobins,
believing, like them, that societies can be remade from top to bottom by the
laws, and persuaded that the Empire had only interrupted the task of
revolution, they wished to resume it.
While waiting until they could recommence, they attempted to spread
the principles of the Revolution by means of their writings. Faithful
imitators of the men of the Revolution, they never stopped to ask if their
schemes for reform were in conformity with human nature. They too were
erecting a chimerical society for an ideal man, and were persuaded that the
application of their dreams would regenerate the human species.
Deprived of all constructive power, the theorists of all the ages have
always been very ready to destroy. Napoleon at St. Helena stated that "if
there existed a monarchy of granite the idealists and theorists would
manage to reduce it to powder."
Among the galaxy of dreamers such as Saint-Simon, Fourier, Pierre
Leroux, Louis Blanc, Quinet, &c., we find that only Auguste Comte
understood that a transformation of manners and ideas must precede
political reorganisation.
Far from favouring the diffusion of democratic ideas, the projects of
reform of the theorists of this period merely impeded their progress.
Communistic Socialism, which several of them professed would restore the
Revolution, finally alarmed the bourgeoisie and even the working-classes.
We have already seen that the fear of their ideas was one of the principal
causes of the restoration of the Empire.
If none of the chimerical lucubrations of the writers of the first half of
the nineteenth century deserve to be discussed, it is none the less interesting
to examine them in order to observe the part played by religious and moral
ideas which to-day are regarded with contempt. Persuaded that a new
society could not, any more than the societies of old, be built up without
religious and moral beliefs, the reformers were always endeavouring to
found such beliefs.
But on what could they be based? Evidently on reason. By means of
reason men create complicated machines: why not therefore a religion and a
morality, things which are apparently so simple? Not one of them suspected
the fact that no religious or moral belief ever had rational logic as its basis.
Auguste Comte saw no more clearly. We know that he founded a so-called
positivist religion, which still has a few followers. Scientists were to form a
clergy directed by a new Pope, who was to replace the Catholic Pope.
All these conceptions—political, religious, or moral—had, I repeat, no
other results for a long time than to turn the multitude away from
democratic principles.
If these principles did finally become widespread, it was not on account
of the theorists, but because new conditions of life had arisen. Thanks to the
discoveries of science, industry developed and led to the erection of
immense factories. Economic necessities increasingly dominated the wills
of Governments and the people and finally created a favourable soil for the
extension of Socialism, and above all of Syndicalism, the modern forms of
democratic ideas.
2. The Unequal Influence of the Three Fundamental Principles of the
Revolution.
The heritage of the Revolution is summed up in its entirety in the one
phrase—Liberty, equality, and Fraternity. The principle of equality, as we
have seen, has exerted a powerful influence, but the two others did not
share its lot.
Although the sense of these terms seems clear enough, they were
comprehended in very different fashions according to men and times. We
know that the various interpretation of the same words by persons of
different mentality has been one of the most frequent causes of the conflicts
of history.
To the member of the Convention liberty signified merely the exercise
of its unlimited despotism. To a young modern "intellectual" the same word
means a general release from everything irksome: tradition, law, superiority,
&c. To the modern Jacobin liberty consists especially in the right to
persecute his adversaries.
Although political orators still occasionally mention liberty in their
speeches, they have generally ceased to evoke fraternity. It is the conflict of
the different classes and not their alliance that they teach to-day. Never did
a more profound hatred divide the various strata of society and the political
parties which lead them.
But while liberty has become very doubtful and fraternity has
completely vanished, the principle of equality has grown unchecked. It has
been supreme in all the political upheavals of which France has been the
stage during the last century, and has reached such a development that our
political and social life, our laws, manners, and customs are at least in
theory based on this principle. It constitutes the real legacy of the
Revolution. The craving for equality, not only before the law, but in
position and fortune, is the very pivot of the last product of democracy:
Socialism. This craving is so powerful that it is spreading in all directions,
although in contradiction with all biological and economic laws. It is a new
phase of the interrupted struggle of the sentiments against reason, in which
reason so rarely triumphs.
3. The Democracy of the "Intellectuals" and Popular Democracy.
All ideas that have hitherto caused an upheaval of the world of men have
been subject to two laws: they evolve slowly, and they completely change
their sense according to the mentalities in which they find reception.
A doctrine may be compared to a living being. It subsists only by
process of transformation. The books are necessarily silent upon these
variations, so that the phase of things which they establish belongs only to
the past. They do not reflect the image of the living, but of the dead. The
written statement of a doctrine often represents the most negligible side of
that doctrine.
I have shown in another work how institutions, arts, and languages are
modified in passing from one people to another, and how the laws of these
transformations differ from the truth as stated in books. I allude to this
matter now merely to show why, in examining the subject of democratic
ideas, we occupy ourselves so little with the text of doctrines, and seek only
for the psychological elements of which they constitute the vestment, and
the reactions which they provoke in the various categories of men who have
accepted them.
Modified rapidly by men of different mentalities, the original theory is
soon no more than a label which denotes something quite unlike itself.
Applicable to religious beliefs, these principles are equally so to
political beliefs. When a man speaks of democracy, for example, must we
inquire what this word means to various peoples, and also whether in the
same people there is not a great difference between the democracy of the
"intellectuals" and popular democracy.
In confining ourselves now to the consideration of this latter point we
shall readily perceive that the democratic ideas to be found in books and
journals are purely the theories of literary people, of which the people know
nothing, and by the application of which they would have nothing to gain.
Although the working- man possesses the theoretical right of passing the
barriers which separate him from the upper classes by a whole series of
competitions and examinations, his chance of reaching them is in reality
extremely slight.
The democracy of the lettered classes has no other object than to set up
a selection which shall recruit the directing classes exclusively from
themselves. I should have nothing to say against this if the selection were
real. It would then constitute the application of the maxim of Napoleon:
"The true method of government is to employ the aristocracy, but under the
forms of democracy."
Unhappily the democracy of the "intellectuals" would simply lead to the
substitution of the Divine right of kings by the Divine right of a petty
oligarchy, which is too often narrow and tyrannical. Liberty cannot be
created by replacing a tyranny.
Popular democracy by no means aims at manufacturing rulers.
Dominated entirely by the spirit of equality and the desire to ameliorate the
lot of the workers, it rejects the idea of fraternity, and exhibits no anxiety in
respect of liberty. No government is conceivable to popular democracy
except in the form of an autocracy. We see this, not only in history, which
shows us that since the Revolution all despotic Governments have been
vigorously acclaimed, but also in the autocratic fashion in which the
workers' trades unions are conducted.
This profound distinction between the democracy of the lettered classes
and popular democracy is far more obvious to the workers than to the
intellectuals. In their mentalities there is nothing in common; the two
classes do not speak the same language. The syndicalists emphatically
assert to-day that no alliance could possibly exist between them and the
politicians of the bourgeoisie. This assertion is strictly true.
It was always so, and this, no doubt, is why popular democracy, from
Plato's to our own times, has never been defended by the great thinkers.
This fact has greatly struck Emile Faguet. "Almost all the thinkers of
the nineteenth century," he says, "were not democrats. When I was writing
my Politiques et moralistes du XIXe siecle this was my despair. I could not
find one who had been a democrat; yet I was extremely anxious to find one
so that I could give the democratic doctrine as formulated by him."
The eminent writer might certainly have found plenty of professional
politicians, but these latter rarely belong to the category of thinkers.
4. Natural Inequalities and Democratic Equalisation.
The difficulty of reconciling democratic equalisation with natural
inequalities constitutes one of the most difficult problems of the present
hour. We know what are the desires of democracy. Let us see what Nature
replies to these demands.
The democratic ideas which have so often shaken the world from the
heroic ages of Greece to modern times are always clashing with natural
inequalities. Some observers have held, with Helvetius, that the inequality
between men is created by education.
As a matter of fact, Nature does not know such a thing as equality. She
distributes unevenly genius, beauty, health, vigour, intelligence, and all the
qualities which confer on their possessors a superiority over their fellows.
No theory can alter these discrepancies, so that democratic doctrines
will remain confined to words until the laws of heredity consent to unify the
capacities of men.
Can we suppose that societies will ever succeed in establishing
artificially the equality refused by Nature?
A few theorists have believed for a long time that education might effect
a general levelling. Many years of experience have shown the depth of this
illusion.
It would not, however, be impossible for a triumphant Socialism to
establish equality for a time by rigorously eliminating all superior
individuals. One can easily foresee what would become of a people that had
suppressed its best individuals while surrounded by other nations
progressing by means of their best individuals.
Not only does Nature not know equality, but since the beginning of the
ages she has always realised progress by means of successive
differentiations—that is to say, by increasing inequalities. These alone could
raise the obscure cell of the early geological periods to the superior beings
whose inventions were to change the face of the earth.
The same phenomenon is to be observed in societies. The forms of
democracy which select the better elements of the popular classes finally
result in the creation of an intellectual aristocracy, a result the contrary of
the dream of the pure theorists, to beat down the superior elements of
society to the level of the inferior elements.
On the side of natural law, which is hostile to theories of equality, are
the conditions of modern progress. Science and industry demand more and
more considerable intellectual efforts, so that mental inequalities and the
differences of social condition which spring from them cannot but become
accentuated.
We therefore observe this striking phenomenon: as laws and institutions
seek to level individuals the progress of civilisation tends still further to
differentiate them. From the peasant to the feudal baron the intellectual
difference was not great, but from the working-man to the engineer it is
immense and is increasing daily.
Capacity being the principal factor of progress, the capable of each class
rise while the mediocre remain stationary or sink. What could laws do in the
face of such inevitable necessities?
In vain do the incapable pretend that, representing number, they also
represent force. Deprived of the superior brains by whose researches all
workers profit, they would speedily sink into poverty and anarchy.
The capital role of the elect in modern civilisation seems too obvious to
need pointing out. In the case of civilised nations and barbarian peoples,
which contain similar averages of mediocrities, the superiority of the former
arises solely from the superior minds which they contain. The United States
have understood this so thoroughly that they forbid the immigration of
Chinese workers, whose capacity is identical with that of American
workers, and who, working for lower wages, tend to create a formidable
competition with the latter. Despite these evidences we see the antagonism
between the multitude and the elect increasing day by day. At no period
were the elect more necessary, yet never were they supported with such
difficulty.
One of the most solid foundations of Socialism is an intense hatred of
the elect. Its adepts always forget that scientific, artistic, and industrial
progress, which creates the strength of a country and the prosperity of
millions of workers, is due solely to a small number of superior brains.
If the worker makes three times as much to-day as he did a hundred
years ago, and enjoys commodities then unknown to great nobles, he owes
it entirely to the elect.
Suppose that by some miracle Socialism had been universally accepted
a century ago. Risk, speculation, initiative—in a word, all the stimulants of
human activity—being suppressed, no progress would have been possible,
and the worker would have remained as poor as he was. Men would merely
have established that equality in poverty desired by the jealousy and envy
of a host of mediocre minds. Humanity will never renounce the progress of
civilisation to satisfy so low an ideal.
Chapter II.
The Results of Democratic Evolution
Table of Contents
1. The Influence upon Social Evolution of Theories of no Rational Value.
We have seen that natural laws do not agree with the aspirations of
democracy. We know, also, that such a statement has never affected
doctrines already in men's minds. The man led by a belief never troubles
about its real value.
The philosopher who studies a belief must obviously discuss its rational
content, but he is more concerned with its influences upon the general
mind.
Applied to the interpretation of all the great beliefs of history, the
importance of this distinction is at once evident. Jupiter, Moloch, Vishnu,
Allah, and so many other divinities, were, no doubt, from the rational point
of view, mere illusions, yet their effect upon the life of the peoples has been
considerable.
The same distinction is applicable to the beliefs which prevailed during
the Middle Ages. Equally illusory, they nevertheless exercised as profound
an influence as if they had corresponded with realities.
If any one doubts this, let him compare the domination of the Roman
Empire and that of the Church of Rome. The first was perfectly real and
tangible, and implied no illusion. The second, while its foundations were
entirely chimerical, was fully as powerful. Thanks to it, during the long
night of the Middle Ages, semi-barbarous peoples acquired those social
bonds and restraints and that national soul without which there is no
civilisation.
The power possessed by the Church proves, again, that the power of
certain illusions is sufficiently great to create, at least momentarily,
sentiments as contrary to the interests of the individual as they are to that of
society—such as the love of the monastic life, the desire for martyrdom, the
crusades, the religious wars, &c.
The application to democratic and socialistic ideas of the preceding
considerations shows that it matters little that these ideas have no defensible
basis. They impress and influence men's minds, and that is sufficient. Their
results may be disastrous in the extreme, but we cannot prevent them.
The apostles of the new doctrines are quite wrong in taking so much
trouble to find a rational basis for their aspirations. They would be far more
convincing were they to confine themselves to making affirmations and
awakening hopes. Their real strength resides in the religious mentality
which is inherent in the heart of man, and which during the ages has only
changed its object.
Later on we shall consider from a philosophical point of view various
consequences of the democratic evolution whose course we see
accelerating. We may say in respect of the Church in the Middle Ages that it
had the power of profoundly influencing the mentality of men. Examining
certain results of the democratic doctrines, we shall see that the power of
these is no less than that of the Church.
2. The Jacobin Spirit and the Mentality created by Democratic Beliefs.
Existing generations have inherited, not only the revolutionary principles
but also the special mentality which achieves their success.
Describing this mentality when we were examining the Jacobin spirit,
we saw that it always endeavours to impose by force illusions which it
regards as the truth. The Jacobin spirit has finally become so general in
France and in other Latin countries that it has affected all political parties,
even the most conservative. The bourgeoisie is strongly affected by it, and
the people still more so.
This increase of the Jacobin spirit has resulted in the fact that political
conceptions, institutions, and laws tend to impose themselves by force.
Syndicalism, peaceful enough in other countries, immediately assumed in
France an uncompromising and anarchical aspect, which betrayed itself in
the shape of riots, sabotage, and incendiarism.
Not to be repressed by timid Governments, the Jacobin spirit produces
melancholy ravages in minds of mediocre capacity. At a recent congress of
railway men a third of the delegates voted approval of sabotage, and one of
the secretaries of the Congress began his speech by saying: "I send all
saboteurs my fraternal greeting and all my admiration."
This general mentality engenders an increasing anarchy. That France is
not in a permanent state of anarchy is, as I have already remarked, due to
the fact that the parties by which she is divided produce something like
equilibrium. They are animated by a mortal hatred for one another, but none
of them is strong enough to enslave its rivals.
This Jacobin intolerance is spreading to such an extent that the rulers
themselves employ without scruple the most revolutionary tactics with
regard to their enemies, violently persecuting any party that offers the least
resistance, and even despoiling it of its property. Our rulers to-day behave
as the ancient conquerors used; the vanquished have nothing to hope from
the victors.
Far from being peculiar to the lower orders, intolerance is equally
prominent among the ruling classes. Michelet remarked long ago that the
violence of the cultivated classes is often greater than that of the people. It
is true that they do not break the street lamps, but they are ready enough to
cause heads to be broken. The worst violence of the revolution was the
work of cultivated bourgeoisie—professors, lawyers, &c., possessors of that
classical education which is supposed to soften the manners. It has not done
so in these days, any more than it did of old. One can make sure of this by
reading the advanced journals, whose contributors and editors are recruited
chiefly from among the professors of the University.
Their books are as violent as their articles, and one wonders how such
favourites of fortune can have secreted such stores of hatred.
One would find it hard to credit them did they assure us that they were
consumed by an intense passion for altruism. One might more readily admit
that apart from a narrow religious mentality the hope of being remarked by
the mighty ones of the day, or of creating a profitable popularity, is the only
possible explanation of the violence recommended in their written
propaganda.
I have already, in one of my preceding works, cited some passages from
a book written by a professor at the College of France, in which the author
incites the people to seize upon the riches of the bourgeoisie, whom he
furiously abuses, and have arrived at the conclusion that a new revolution
would readily find among the authors of such books the Marats,
Robespierres, and Carriers whom it might require.
The Jacobin religion—above all in its Socialist form—has all the power
of the ancient faiths over feeble minds Blinded by their faith, they believe
that reason is their guide, but are really actuated solely by their passions and
their dreams.
The evolution of democratic ideas has thus produced not only the
political results already mentioned, but also a considerable effect upon the
mentality of modern men.
If the ancient dogmas have long ago exhausted their power, the theories
of democracy are far from having lost theirs, and we see their consequences
increasing daily. One of the chief results has been the general hatred of
superiority.
This hatred of whatever passes the average in social fortune or
intelligence is to-day general in all classes, from the working- classes to the
upper strata of the bourgeoisie. The results are envy, detraction, and a love
of attack, of raillery, of persecution, and a habit of attributing all actions to
low motives, of refusing to believe in probity, disinterestedness, and
intelligence.
Conversation, among the people as among the most cultivated
Frenchmen, is stamped with the craze for abasing and abusing everything
and everyone. Even the greatest of the dead do not escape this tendency.
Never were so many books written to depreciate the merit of famous men,
men who were formerly regarded as the most precious patrimony of their
country.
Envy and hatred seem from all time to have been inseparable from
democratic theories, but the spread of these sentiments has never been so
great as to-day. It strikes all observers.
"There is a low demagogic instinct," writes M. Bourdeau, "without any
moral inspiration, which dreams of pulling humanity down to the lowest
level, and for which any superiority, even of culture, is an offence to
society. . . it is the sentiment of ignoble equality which animated the
Jacobin butchers when they struck off the head of a Lavoisier or a Chenier.
This hatred of superiority, the most prominent element in the modern
progress of Socialism, is not the only characteristic of the new spirit created
by democratic ideas.
Other consequences, although indirect, are not less profound. Such, for
example, are the progress of "statism," the diminution of the power of the
bourgeoisie, the increasing activity of financiers, the conflict of the classes,
the vanishing of the old social constraints, and the degradation of morality.
All these effects are displayed in a general insubordination and anarchy.
The son revolts against the father, the employee against his patron, the
soldier against his officers. Discontent, hatred, and envy reign throughout.
A social movement which continues is necessarily like a machine in
movement which accelerates its motion. We shall therefore find that the
results of this mentality will become yet more important. It is betrayed from
time to time by incidents whose gravity is daily increasing—railway strikes,
postmen's strikes, explosions on board ironclads, &c. A propos of the
destruction of the Liberte, which cost more than two million pounds and
slew two hundred men in the space of a minute, an ex-Minister of Marine,
M. de Lanessan, expresses himself as follows:—
"The evil that is gnawing at our fleet is the same as that
which is devouring our army, our public administrations, our
parliamentary system, our governmental system, and the
whole fabric of our society. This evil is anarchy—that is to
say, such a disorder of minds and things that nothing is done
as reason would dictate, and no one behaves as his
professional or moral duty should require him to behave."
On the subject of the catastrophe of the Liberte, which followed that of
the Iena, M. Felix Roussel said, in a speech delivered as president of the
municipal council of Paris:—
"The causes of the evil are not peculiar to our day. The evil
is more general, and bears a triple name: irresponsibility,
indiscipline, and anarchy."
These quotations, which state facts with which everyone is familiar,
show that the staunchest upholders of the republican system themselves
recognise the progress of social disorganisation.12 Everyone sees it, while
he is conscious of his own impotence to change anything. It results, in fact,
from mental influences whose power is greater than that of our wills.
3. Universal Suffrage and its Representatives.
Among the dogmas of democracy perhaps the most fundamental of all and
the most attractive is that of universal suffrage. It gives the masses the idea
of equality, since for a moment at least rich and poor, learned and ignorant,
are equal before the electoral urn. The minister elbows the least of his
servants, and during this brief moment the power of one is as great as the
others.
All Governments, including that of the Revolution, have feared
universal suffrage. At a first glance, indeed, the objections which suggests
themselves are numerous. The idea that the multitude could usefully choose
the men capable of governing, that individuals of indifferent morality,
feeble knowledge, and narrow minds should possess, by the sole fact of
number, a certain talent for judging the candidate proposed for its selection
is surely a shocking one.
From a rational point of view the suffrage of numbers is to a certain
extent justified if we think with Pascal.
"Plurality is the best way, because it is visible and has strength to make
itself obeyed; it is, however, the advice of the less able."
As universal suffrage cannot in our times be replaced by any other
institution, we must accept it and try to adapt it. It is accordingly useless to
protest against it or to repeat with the queen Marie Caroline, at the time of
her struggle with Napoleon: "Nothing is more dreadful than to govern men
in this enlightened century, when every cobbler reasons and criticises the
Government."
To tell the truth, the objections are not always as great as they appear.
The laws of the psychology of crowds being admitted, it is very doubtful
whether a limited suffrage would give a much better choice of men than
that obtained by universal suffrage.
These same psychological laws also show us that so-called universal
suffrage is in reality a pure fiction. The crowd, save in very rare cases, has
no opinion but that of its leaders. Universal suffrage really represents the
most limited of suffrages.
There justly resides its real danger. Universal suffrage is made
dangerous by the fact that the leaders who are its masters are the creatures
of little local committees analogous to the clubs of the Revolution. The
leader who canvasses for a mandate is chosen by them.
Once nominated, he exercises an absolute local power, on condition of
satisfying the interests of his committees. Before this necessity the general
interest of the country disappears almost totally from the mind of the
elected representative.
Naturally the committees, having need of docile servants, do not choose
for this task individuals gifted with a lofty intelligence nor, above all, with a
very high morality. They must have men without character, without social
position, and always docile.
By reason of these necessities the servility of the deputy in respect of
these little groups which patronise him, and without which he would be no
one, is absolute. He will speak and vote just as his committee tells him. His
political ideal may be expressed in a few words: it is to obey, that he may
retain his post.
Sometimes, rarely indeed, and only when by name or position or wealth
he has a great prestige, a superior character may impose himself upon the
popular vote by overcoming the tyranny of the impudent minorities which
constitute the local committees.
Democratic countries like France are only apparently governed by
universal suffrage. For this reason is it that so many measures are passed
which do not interest the people and which the people never demanded.
Such were the purchase of the Western railways, the laws respecting
congregations, &c. These absurd manifestations merely translated the
demands of fanatical local committees, and were imposed upon deputies
whom they had chosen.
We may judge of the influence of these committees when we see
moderate deputies forced to patronise the anarchical destroyers of arsenals,
to ally themselves with anti-militarists, and, in a word, to obey the most
atrocious demands in order to ensure re-election. The will of the lowest
elements of democracy has thus created among the elected representatives
manners and a morality which we can but recognise are of the lowest. The
politician is the man in public employment, and as Nietzsche says:—
"Where public employment begins there begins also the
clamour of the great comedians and the buzzing of
venomous flies. . . . The comedian always believes in that
which makes him obtain his best effects, in that which
impels the people to believe in him. To- morrow he will have
a new faith, and the day after to-morrow yet another. . . . All
that is great has its being far from public employment and
glory."
4. The Craving for Reforms.
The craze for reforms imposed suddenly by means of decrees is one of the
most disastrous conceptions of the Jacobin spirit, one of the formidable
legacies left by the Revolution. It is among the principal factors of all the
incessant political upheavals of the last century in France.
One of the psychological causes of this intense thirst for reforms arises
from the difficulty of determining the real causes of the evils complained
of. The need of explanation creates fictitious causes of the simplest nature.
Therefore the remedies also appear simple.
For forty years we have incessantly been passing reforms, each of
which is a little revolution in itself. In spite of all these, or rather because of
them, the French have evolved almost as little as any race in Europe.
The slowness of our actual evolution may be seen if we compare the
principal elements of our social life—commerce, industry, &c.—with those
of other nations. The progress of other nations—of the Germans especially
—then appears enormous, while our own has been very slow.
Our administrative, industrial, and commercial organisation is
considerably out of date, and is no longer equal to our new needs. Our
industry is not prospering; our marine is declining. Even in our own
colonies we cannot compete with foreign countries, despite the enormous
pecuniary subventions accorded by the State. M. Cruppi, an ex-Minister of
Commerce, has insisted on this melancholy decline in a recent book. Falling
into the usual errors, he believed it easy to remedy this inferiority by new
laws.
All politicians share the same opinion, which is why we progress so
slowly. Each party is persuaded that by means of reforms all evils could be
remedied. This conviction results in struggles such as have made France the
most divided country in the world and the most subject to anarchy.
No one yet seems to understand that individuals and their methods, not
regulations, make the value of a people. The efficacious reforms are not the
revolutionary reforms but the trifling ameliorations of every day
accumulated in course of time. The great social changes, like the great
geological changes, are effected by the daily addition of minute causes. The
economic history of Germany during the last forty years proves in a striking
manner the truth of this law.
Many important events which seem to depend more or less on hazard—
as battles, for example—are themselves subject to this law of the
accumulation of small causes. No doubt the decisive struggle is sometimes
terminated in a day or less, but many minute efforts, slowly accumulated,
are essential to victory. We had a painful experience of this in 1870, and the
Russians have learned it more recently. Barely half an hour did Admiral
Togo need to annihilate the Russian fleet, at the battle of Tsushima, which
finally decided the fate of Japan, but thousands of little factors, small and
remote, determined that success. Causes not less numerous engendered the
defeat of the Russians—a bureaucracy as complicated as ours, and as
irresponsible; lamentable material, although paid for by its weight in gold; a
system of graft at every degree of the social hierarchy, and general
indifference to the interests of the country.
Unhappily the progress in little things which by their total make up the
greatness of a nation is rarely apparent, produces no impression on the
public, and cannot serve the interests of politicians at elections. These latter
care nothing for such matters, and permit the accumulation, in the countries
subject to their influence, of the little successive disorganisations which
finally result in great downfalls.
5. Social Distinctions in Democracies and Democratic Ideas in Various
Countries.
When men were divided into castes and differentiated chiefly by birth,
social distinctions were generally accepted as the consequences of an
unavoidable natural law.
As soon as the old social divisions were destroyed the distinctions of the
classes appeared artificial, and for that reason ceased to be tolerated.
The necessity of equality being theoretical, we have seen among
democratic peoples the rapid development of artificial inequalities,
permitting their possessors to make for themselves a plainly visible
supremacy. Never was the thirst for titles and decorations so general as to-
day.
In really democratic countries, such as the United States, titles and
decorations do not exert much influence, and fortune alone creates
distinctions. It is only by exception that we see wealthy young American
girls allying themselves to the old names of the European aristocracy. They
are then instinctively employing the only means which will permit a young
race to acquire a past that will establish its moral framework.
But in a general fashion the aristocracy that we see springing up in
America is by no means founded on titles and decorations. Purely financial,
it does not provoke much jealousy, because every one hopes one day to
form part of it.
When, in his book on democracy in America, Toqueville spoke of the
general aspiration towards equality he did not realise that the prophesied
equality would end in the classification of men founded exclusively on the
number of dollars possessed by them. No other exists in the United States,
and it will doubtless one day be the same in Europe.
At present we cannot possibly regard France as a democratic country
save on paper, and here we feel the necessity, already referred to, of
examining the various ideas which in different countries are expressed by
the word "democracy."
Of truly democratic nations we can practically mention only England
and the United States. There, democracy occurs in different forms, but the
same principles are observed—notably, a perfect toleration of all opinions.
Religious persecutions are unknown. Real superiority easily reveals itself in
the various professions which any one can enter at any age if he possesses
the necessary capacity. There is no barrier to individual effort.
In such countries men believe themselves equal because all have the
idea that they are free to attain the same position. The workman knows he
can become foreman, and then engineer. Forced to begin on the lower rungs
of the ladder instead of high up the scale, as in France, the engineer does
not regard himself as made of different stuff to the rest of mankind. It is the
same in all professions. This is why the class hatred, so intense in Europe, is
so little developed in England and America.
In France the democracy is practically non-existent save in speeches. A
system of competitions and examinations, which must be worked through in
youth, firmly closes the door upon the liberal professions, and creates
inimical and separate classes.
The Latin democracies are therefore purely theoretical. The absolutism
of the State has replaced monarchical absolutism, but it is no less severe.
The aristocracy of fortune has replaced that of birth, and its privileges are
no less considerable.
Monarchies and democracies differ far more in form than in substance.
It is only the variable mentality of men that varies their effects. All the
discussions as to various systems of government are really of no interest,
for these have no special virtue of themselves. Their value will always
depend on that of the people governed. A people effects great and rapid
progress when it discovers that it is the sum of the personal efforts of each
individual and not the system of government that determines the rank of a
nation in the world.
12. This disorder is the same in all the Government departments Interesting examples will be found
in a report of M. Dausset to the Municipal Council:—
"The service of the public highways, which ought above all to be noted for its rapid
execution, is, on the contrary, the very type of red-tape, bureaucratic, and ink-slinging
administration, possessing men and money and wasting both in tasks which are often
useless, for lack of order, initiative, and method—in a word, of organisation.
Speaking then of the directors of departments, each of whom works as he pleases, and after his
own fashion, he adds:—
"These important persons completely ignore one another; they prepare and execute
their plans without knowing anything of what their neighbours are doing; there is no
one above them to group and co-ordinate their work." This is why a road is often torn
up, repaired, and then torn up again a few days later, because the departments dealing
with the supply of water, gas, electricity, and the sewers are mutually jealous, and
never attempt to work together. This anarchy and indiscipline naturally cost enormous
sums of money, and a private firm which operated in this manner would soon find
itself bankrupt.
Chapter III.
The New Forms of Democratic Belief
Table of Contents
1. The Conflict between Capital and Labour.
While our legislators are reforming and legislating at hazard, the natural
evolution of the world is slowly pursuing its course. New interests arise, the
economic competition between nation and nation increases in severity, the
working-classes are bestirring themselves, and on all sides we see the birth
of formidable problems which the harangues of the politicians will never
resolve.
Among these new problems one of the most complicated will be the
problem of the conflict between labour and capital. It is becoming acute
even in such a country of tradition as England. Workingmen are ceasing to
respect the collective contracts which formerly constituted their charter,
strikes are declared for insignificant motives, and unemployment and
pauperism are attaining disquieting proportions.
In America these strikes would finally have affected all industries but
that the very excess of the evil created a remedy. During the last ten years
the industrial leaders have organised great employers' federations, which
have become powerful enough to force the workers to submit to arbitration.
The labour question is complicated in France by the intervention of
numerous foreign workers, which the stagnation of our population has
rendered necessary.13 This stagnation will also make it difficult for France
to contend with her rivals, whose soil will soon no longer be able to nourish
its inhabitants, who, following one of the oldest laws of history, will
necessarily invade the less densely peopled countries.
These conflicts between the workers and employers of the same nation
will be rendered still more acute by the increasing economic struggle
between the Asiatics, whose needs are small, and who can therefore
produce manufactured articles at very low prices, and the Europeans, whose
needs are many. For twenty-five years I have laid stress upon this point.
General Hamilton, ex- military attache to the Japanese army, who foresaw
the Japanese victories long before the outbreak of hostilities, writes as
follows in an essay translated by General Langlois:—
"The Chinaman, such as I have seen him in Manchuria, is capable of
destroying the present type of worker of the white races. He will drive
him off the face of the earth. The Socialists, who preach equality to the
labourer, are far from thinking what would be the practical result of
carrying out their theories. Is it, then, the destiny of the white races to
disappear in the long run? In my humble opinion this destiny depends
upon one single factor: Shall we or shall we not have the good sense to
close our ears to speeches which present war and preparation for war
as a useless evil?
"I believe the workers must choose. Given the present constitution
of the world, they must cultivate in their children the military ideal,
and accept gracefully the cost and trouble which militarism entails, or
they will be let in for a cruel struggle for life with a rival worker of
whose success there is not the slightest doubt. There is only one means
of refusing Asiatics the right to emigrate, to lower wages by
competition, and to live in our midst, and that is the sword. If
Americans and Europeans forget that their privileged position is held
only by force of arms, Asia will soon have taken her revenge."
We know that in America the invasion of Chinese and Japanese, owing
to the competition between them and the workers of white race, has become
a national calamity. In Europe the invasion is commencing, but has not as
yet gone far. But already Chinese emigrants have formed important colonies
in certain centres— London, Cardiff, Liverpool, &c. They have provoked
several riots by working for low wages. Their appearance has always
lowered salaries.
But these problems belong to the future, and those of the present are so
disquieting that it is useless at the moment to occupy ourselves with others.
2. The Evolution of the Working-Classes and the Syndicalist Movement.
The most important democratic problem of the day will perhaps result from
the recent development of the working-class engendered by the Syndicalist
or Trades Union movement.
The aggregation of similar interests known as Syndicalism has rapidly
assumed such enormous developments in all countries that it may be called
world-wide. Certain corporations have budgets comparable to those of
small States. Some German leagues have been cited as having saved over
three millions sterling in subscriptions.
The extension of the labour movement in all countries shows that it is
not, like Socialism, a dream of Utopian theorists, but the result of economic
necessities. In its aim, its means of action, and its tendencies, Syndicalism
presents no kinship with Socialism. Having sufficiently explained it in my
Political Psychology, it will suffice here to recall in a few words the
difference between the two doctrines.
Socialism would obtain possession of all industries, and have them
managed by the State, which would distribute the products equally between
the citizens. Syndicalism, on the other hand, would entirely eliminate the
action of the State, and divide society into small professional groups which
would be self-governing.
Although despised by the Syndicalists and violently attacked by them,
the Socialists are trying to ignore the conflict, but it is rapidly becoming too
obvious to be concealed. The political influence which the Socialists still
possess will soon escape them.
If Syndicalism is everywhere increasing at the expense of Socialism, it
is, I repeat, because this corporative movement, although a renewal of the
past, synthetises certain needs born of the specialisation of modern industry.
We see its manifestations under a great variety of circumstances. In
France its success has not as yet been as great as elsewhere. Having taken
the revolutionary form already mentioned, it has fallen, at least for the time
being, into the hands of the anarchists, who care as little for Syndicalism as
for any sort of organisation, and are simply using the new doctrine in an
attempt to destroy modern society. Socialists, Syndicalists, and anarchists,
although directed by entirely different conceptions, are thus collaborating in
the same eventual aim—the violent suppression of the ruling classes and the
pillage of their wealth.
The Syndicalist doctrine does not in any way derive from the principles
of Revolution. On many points it is entirely in contradiction with the
Revolution. Syndicalism represents rather a return to certain forms of
collective organisation similar to the guilds or corporations proscribed by
the Revolution. It thus constitutes one of those federations which the
Revolution condemned. It entirely rejects the State centralisation which the
Revolution established.
Syndicalism cares nothing for the democratic principles of liberty,
equality, and fraternity. The Syndicalists demand of their members an
absolute discipline which eliminates all liberty.
Not being as yet strong enough to exercise mutual tyranny, the
syndicates so far profess sentiments in respect of one another which might
by a stretch be called fraternal. But as soon as they are sufficiently
powerful, when their contrary interests will necessarily enter into conflict,
as during the Syndicalist period of the old Italian republics—Florence and
Siena, for example—the present fraternity will speedily be forgotten, and
equality will be replaced by the despotism of the most powerful.
Such a future seems near at hand. The new power is increasing very
rapidly, and finds the Governments powerless before it, able to defend
themselves only by yielding to every demand—an odious policy, which
may serve for the moment, but which heavily compromises the future.
It was, however, to this poor recourse that the English Government
recently resorted in its struggle against the Miners' Union, which threatened
to suspend the industrial life of England. The Union demanded a minimum
wage for its members, but they were not bound to furnish a minimum of
work.
Although such a demand was inadmissible, the Government agreed to
propose to Parliament a law to sanction such a measure. We may profitably
read the weighty words pronounced by Mr. Balfour before the House of
Commons:—
"The country has never in its so long and varied history had to face a
danger of this nature and this importance.
"We are confronted with the strange and sinister spectacle of a
mere organisation threatening to paralyse—and paralysing in a large
measure—the commerce and manufactures of a community which
lives by commerce and manufacture.
"The power possessed by the miners is in the present state of the
law almost unlimited. Have we ever seen the like of it? Did ever feudal
baron exert a comparable tyranny? Was there ever an American trust
which served the rights which it holds from the law with such
contempt of the general interest? The very degree of perfection to
which we have brought our laws, our social organisation, the mutual
relation between the various professions and industries, exposes us
more than our predecessors in ruder ages to the grave peril which at
present threatens society. . . . We are witnesses at the present moment
of the first manifestation of the power of elements which, if we are not
heedful, will submerge the whole of society. . . . The attitude of the
Government in yielding to the injunction of the miners gives some
appearance of reality to the victory of those who are pitting themselves
against society."
3. Why certain modern Democratic Governments are gradually being
transformed into Governments by Administrative Castes.
Anarchy and the social conflicts resulting from democratic ideas are to-day
impelling some Governments towards an unforeseen course of evolution
which will end by leaving them only a nominal power. This development,
of which I shall briefly denote the effects, is effected spontaneously under
the stress of those imperious necessities which are still the chief controlling
power of events.
The Governments of democratic countries to-day consist of the
representatives elected by universal suffrage. They vote laws, and appoint
and dismiss ministers chosen from themselves, and provisionally entrusted
with the executive power. These ministers are naturally often replaced,
since a vote will do it. Those who follow them, belonging to a different
party, will govern according to different principles.
It might at first seem that a country thus pulled to and fro by various
influences could have no continuity or stability. But in spite of all these
conditions of instability a democratic Government like that of France works
with fair regularity. How explain such a phenomenon?
Its interpretation, which is very simple, results from the fact that the
ministers who have the appearance of governing really govern the country
only to a very limited extent. Strictly limited and circumscribed, their power
is exercised principally in speeches which are hardly noticed and in a few
inorganic measures.
But behind the superficial authority of ministers, without force or
duration, the playthings of every demand of the politician, an anonymous
power is secretly at work whose might is continually increasing the
administrations. Possessing traditions, a hierarchy, and continuity, they are a
power against which, as the ministers quickly realise, they are incapable of
struggling.14 Responsibility is so divided in the administrative machine that
a minister may never find himself opposed by any person of importance.
His momentary impulses are checked by a network of regulations, customs,
and decrees, which are continually quoted to him, and which he knows so
little that he dare not infringe them.
This diminution of the power of democratic Governments can only
develop. One of the most constant laws of history is that of which I have
already spoken: Immediately any one class becomes preponderant—nobles,
clergy, army, or the people—it speedily tends to enslave others. Such were
the Roman armies, which finally appointed and overthrew the emperors;
such were the clergy, against whom the kings of old could hardly struggle;
such were the States General, which at the moment of Revolution speedily
absorbed all the powers of government, and supplanted the monarchy.
The caste of functionaries is destined to furnish a fresh proof of the truth
of this law. Preponderant already, they are beginning to speak loudly, to
make threats, and even to indulge in strikes, such as that of the postmen,
which was quickly followed by that of the Government railway employees.
The administrative power thus forms a little State within the State, and if its
present rate of revolution continues it will soon constitute the only power in
the State. Under a Socialist Government there would be no other power. All
our revolutions would then have resulted in stripping the king of his powers
and his throne in order to bestow them upon the irresponsible, anonymous
and despotic class of Government clerks.
To foresee the issue of all the conflicts which threaten to cloud the
future is impossible. We must steer clear of pessimism as of optimism; all
we can say is that necessity will always finally bring things to an
equilibrium. The world pursues its way without bothering itself with our
speeches, and sooner or later we manage to adapt ourselves to the variations
of our environment. The difficulty is to do so without too much friction, and
above all to resist the chimerical conceptions of dreamers. Always
powerless to re-organise the world, they have often contrived to upset it.
Athens, Rome, Florence, and many other cities which formerly shone in
history, were victims of these terrible theorists. The results of their
influence has always been the same—anarchy, dictatorship, and decadence.
But such lessons will not affect the numerous Catilines of the present
day. They do not yet see that the movements unchained by their ambitions
threaten to submerge them. All these Utopians have awakened impossible
hopes in the mind of the crowd, excited their appetites, and sapped the
dykes which have been slowly erected during the centuries to restrain them.
The struggle of the blind multitudes against the elect is one of the
continuous facts of history, and the triumph of popular sovereignties
without counterpoise has already marked the end of more than one
civilisation. The elect create, the plebs destroys. As soon as the first lose
their hold the latter begins its precious work.
The great civilisations have only prospered by dominating their lower
elements. It is not only in Greece that anarchy, dictatorship, invasion, and,
finally, the loss of independence has resulted from the despotism of a
democracy. Individual tyranny is always born of collective tyranny. It ended
the first cycle of the greatness of Rome; the Barbarians achieved the
second.
13. Population of the Great Powers:—
1789.
1906.
Russia …
…
28,000,000
129,000,000
Germany …
…
28,000,000
57,000,000
Austria …
…
18,000,000
44,000,000
England …
…
12,000,000
40,000,000
France …
…
26,000,000
39,000,000
14. The impotence of ministers in their own departments has been well described by one of them,
M. Cruppi, in a recent book. The most ardent wishes of the minister being immediately
paralysed by his department, he promptly ceases to struggle against it.
Conclusions
Table of Contents
The principal revolutions of history have been studied in this volume. But
we have dealt more especially with the most important of all—that which
for more than twenty years overwhelmed all Europe, and whose echoes are
still to be heard.
The French Revolution is an inexhaustible mine of psychological
documents. No period of the life of humanity has presented such a mass of
experience, accumulated in so short a time.
On each page of this great drama we have found numerous applications
of the principles expounded in my various works, concerning the transitory
mentality of crowds and the permanent soul of the peoples, the action of
beliefs, the influence of mystic, affective, and collective elements, and the
conflict between the various forms of logic.
The Revolutionary Assemblies illustrate all the known laws of the
psychology of crowds. Impulsive and timid, they are dominated by a small
number of leaders, and usually act in a sense contrary to the wishes of their
individual members.
The Royalist Constituent Assembly destroyed an ancient monarchy; the
humanitarian Legislative Assembly allowed the massacres of September.
The same pacific body led France into the most formidable campaigns.
There were similar contradictions during the Convention. The immense
majority of its members abhorred violence. Sentimental philosophers, they
exalted equality, fraternity, and liberty, yet ended by exerting the most
terrible despotism.
The same contradictions were visible during the Directory. Extremely
moderate in their intentions at the outset, the Assemblies were continually
effecting bloodthirsty coups d'etat. They wished to re-establish religious
peace, and finally sent thousands of priests into imprisonment. They wished
to repair the ruins which covered France, and only succeeded in adding to
them.
Thus there was always a complete contradiction between the individual
wills of the men of the revolutionary period and the deeds of the Assemblies
of which they were units.
The truth is that they obeyed invisible forces of which they were not the
masters. Believing that they acted in the name of pure reason, they were
really 
subject 
to 
mystic, 
affective, 
and 
collective 
influences,
incomprehensible to them, and which we are only to-day beginning to
understand.
Intelligence has progressed in the course of the ages, and has opened a
marvellous outlook to man, although his character, the real foundation of
his mind, and the sure motive of his actions, has scarcely changed.
Overthrown one moment, it reappears the next. Human nature must be
accepted as it is.
The founders of the Revolution did not resign themselves to the facts of
human nature. For the first time in the history of humanity they attempted
to transform men and society in the name of reason.
Never was any undertaking commenced with such chances of success.
The theorists, who claimed to effect it, had a power in their hands greater
than that of any despot.
Yet, despite this power, despite the success of the armies, despite
Draconian laws and repeated coups d'etat, the Revolution merely heaped
ruin upon ruin, and ended in a dictatorship.
Such an attempt was not useless, since experience is necessary to the
education of the peoples. Without the Revolution it would have been
difficult to prove that pure reason does not enable us to change human
nature, and, consequently, that no society can be rebuilt by the will of
legislators, however absolute their power.
Commenced by the middle classes for their own profit, the Revolution
speedily became a popular movement, and at the same time a struggle of
the instinctive against the rational, a revolt against all the constraints which
make civilisation out of barbarism. It was by relying on the principle of
popular sovereignty that the reformers attempted to impose their doctrines.
Guided by leaders, the people intervened incessantly in the deliberations of
the Assemblies, and committed the most sanguinary acts of violence.
The history of the multitudes during the Revolution is eminently
instructive. It shows the error of the politicians who attribute all the virtues
to the popular soul.
The facts of the Revolution teach us, on the contrary, that a people freed
from social constraints, the foundations of civilisation, and abandoned to its
instinctive impulses, speedily relapses into its ancestral savagery. Every
popular revolution which succeeds in triumphing is a temporary return to
barbarism. If the Commune of 1871 had lasted, it would have repeated the
Terror. Not having the power to kill so many people, it had to confine itself
to burning the principal monuments of the capital.
The Revolution represents the conflict of psychological forces liberated
from the bonds whose function it is to restrain them. Popular instincts,
Jacobin beliefs, ancestral influences, appetites, and passions unloosed, all
these various influences engaged in a furious mutual conflict for the space
of ten years, during which time they soaked France in blood and covered
the land with ruins.
Seen from a distance, this seems to be the whole upshot of the
Revolution. There was nothing homogeneous about it. One must resort to
analysis before one can understand and grasp the great drama and display
the impulses which continually actuated its heroes. In normal times we are
guided by the various forms of logic—rational, affective, collective, and
mystic—which more or less perfectly balance one another. During seasons
of upheaval they enter into conflict, and man is no longer himself.
We have by no means undervalued in this work the importance of
certain acquisitions of the Revolution in respect of the rights of the people.
But with many other historians, we are forced to admit that the prize gained
at the cost of such ruin and bloodshed would have been obtained at a later
date without effort, by the mere progress of civilisation. For a few years
gained, what a load of material disaster, what moral disintegration! We are
still suffering as a result of the latter. These brutal pages in the book of
history will take long to efface: they are not effaced as yet.
Our young men of to-day seem to prefer action to thought. Disdaining
the sterile dissertations of the philosophers, they take no interest in vain
speculation concerning matters whose essential nature remains unknown.
Action is certainly an excellent thing, and all real progress is a result of
action, but it is only useful when properly directed. The men of the
Revolution were assuredly men of action, yet the illusions which they
accepted as guides led them to disaster.
Action is always hurtful when, despising realities, it professes violently
to change the course of events. One cannot experiment with society as with
apparatus in a laboratory. Our political upheavals show us what such social
errors may cost.
Although the lesson of the Revolution was extremely categorical, many
unpractical spirits, hallucinated by their dreams, are hoping to recommence
it. Socialism, the modern synthesis of this hope, would be a regression to
lower forms of evolution, for it would paralyse the greatest sources of our
activity. By replacing individual initiative and responsibility by collective
initiative and responsibility mankind would descend several steps on the
scale of human values.
The present time is hardly favourable to such experiments. While
dreamers are pursuing their dreams, exciting appetites and the passions of
the multitude, the peoples are every day arming themselves more
powerfully. All feel that amid the universal competition of the present time
there is no room for weak nations.
In the centre of Europe a formidable military Power is increasing in
strength, and aspiring to dominate the world, in order to find outlets for its
goods, and for an increasing population, which it will soon be unable to
nourish.
If we continue to shatter our cohesion by intestine struggles, party
rivalries, base religious persecutions, and laws which fetter industrial
development, our part in the world will soon be over. We shall have to make
room for peoples more solidly knit, who have been able to adapt themselves
to natural necessities instead of pretending to turn back upon their course.
The present does not repeat the past, and the details of history are full of
unforeseen consequences; but in their main lines events are conditioned by
eternal laws.
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego
(Sigmund Freud)
Table of Contents
Translator's Note
A comparison of the following pages with the German original
(Massenpsychologie 
und 
Ich-Analyse, 
Internationaler
Psychoanalytischer Verlag, Vienna, 1921) will show that certain
passages have been transferred in the English version from the text to
the footnotes. This alteration has been carried out at the author's
express desire.
All technical terms have been translated in accordance with the
Glossary to be published as a supplement to the International Journal
of Psycho-Analysis.
J. S.
Table of Contents
I. Introduction
II. Le Bon's Description of the Group Mind
III. Other Accounts of Collective Mental Life
IV. Suggestion and Libido
V. Two Artificial Groups: The Church and the Army
VI. Further Problems and Lines of Work
VII. Identification
VIII. Being in Love and Hypnosis
IX. The Herd Instinct
X. The Group and the Primal Horde
XI. A Differentiating Grade in the Ego
XII. Postscript
I.
Introduction
Table of Contents
The contrast between Individual Psychology and Social or Group1
Psychology, which at a first glance may seem to be full of significance,
loses a great deal of its sharpness when it is examined more closely. It is
true that Individual Psychology is concerned with the individual man and
explores the paths by which he seeks to find satisfaction for his instincts;
but only rarely and under certain exceptional conditions is Individual
Psychology in a position to disregard the relations of this individual to
others. In the individual's mental life someone else is invariably involved,
as a model, as an object, as a helper, as an opponent, and so from the very
first Individual Psychology is at the same time Social Psychology as well—
in this extended but entirely justifiable sense of the words.
The relations of an individual to his parents and to his brothers and
sisters, to the object of his love, and to his physician—in fact all the
relations which have hitherto been the chief subject of psycho-analytic
research—may claim to be considered as social phenomena; and in this
respect they may be contrasted with certain other processes, described by us
as 'narcissistic', in which the satisfaction of the instincts is partially or
totally withdrawn from the influence of other people. The contrast between
social and narcissistic—Bleuler would perhaps call them 'autistic'—mental
acts therefore falls wholly within the domain of Individual Psychology, and
is not well calculated to differentiate it from a Social or Group Psychology.
The individual in the relations which have already been mentioned—to
his parents and to his brothers and sisters, to the person he is in love with, to
his friend, and to his physician—comes under the influence of only a single
person, or of a very small number of persons, each one of whom has
become enormously important to him. Now in speaking of Social or Group
Psychology it has become usual to leave these relations on one side and to
isolate as the subject of inquiry the influencing of an individual by a large
number of people simultaneously, people with whom he is connected by
something, though otherwise they may in many respects be strangers to
him. Group Psychology is therefore concerned with the individual man as a
member of a race, of a nation, of a caste, of a profession, of an institution,
or as a component part of a crowd of people who have been organised into a
group at some particular time for some definite purpose. When once natural
continuity has been severed in this way, it is easy to regard the phenomena
that appear under these special conditions as being expressions of a special
instinct that is not further reducible, the social instinct ('herd instinct', 'group
mind'), which does not come to light in any other situations. But we may
perhaps venture to object that it seems difficult to attribute to the factor of
number a significance so great as to make it capable by itself or arousing in
our mental life a new instinct that is otherwise not brought into play. Our
expectation is therefore directed towards two other possibilities: that the
social instinct may not be a primitive one and insusceptible of dissection,
and that it may be possible to discover the beginnings of its development in
a narrower circle, such as that of the family.
Although Group Psychology is only in its infancy, it embraces an
immense number of separate issues and offers to investigators countless
problems which have hitherto not even been properly distinguished from
one another. The mere classification of the different forms of group
formation and the description of the mental phenomena produced by them
require a great expenditure of observation and exposition, and have already
given rise to a copious literature. Anyone who compares the narrow
dimensions of this little book with the extent of Group Psychology will at
once be able to guess that only a few points chosen from the whole material
are to be dealt with here. And they will in fact only be a few questions with
which the depth-psychology of psycho-analysis is specially concerned.
II.
Le Bon's Description of the Group Mind
Table of Contents
Instead of starting from a definition, it seems more useful to begin with
some indication of the range of the phenomena under review, and to select
from among them a few specially striking and characteristic facts to which
our inquiry can be attached. We can achieve both of these aims by means of
quotation from Le Bon's deservedly famous work Psychologie des foules.2
Let us make the matter clear once again. If a Psychology, concerned
with exploring the predispositions, the instincts, the motives and the aims of
an individual man down to his actions and his relations with those who are
nearest to him, had completely achieved its task, and had cleared up the
whole of these matters with their inter-connections, it would then suddenly
find itself confronted by a new task which would lie before it unachieved. It
would be obliged to explain the surprising fact that under a certain
condition this individual whom it had come to understand thought, felt, and
acted in quite a different way from what would have been expected. And
this condition is his insertion into a collection of people which has acquired
the characteristic of a 'psychological group'. What, then, is a 'group'? How
does it acquire the capacity for exercising such a decisive influence over the
mental life of the individual? And what is the nature of the mental change
which it forces upon the individual?
It is the task of a theoretical Group Psychology to answer these three
questions. The best way of approaching them is evidently to start with the
third. Observation of the changes in the individual's reactions is what
provides Group Psychology with its material; for every attempt at an
explanation must be preceded by a description of the thing that is to be
explained.
I will now let Le Bon speak for himself. He says: 'The most striking
peculiarity presented by a psychological group3 is the following. Whoever
be the individuals that compose it, however like or unlike be their mode of
life, their occupations, their character, or their intelligence, the fact that they
have been transformed into a group puts them in possession of a sort of
collective mind which makes them feel, think, and act in a manner quite
different from that in which each individual of them would feel, think, and
act were he in a state of isolation. There are certain ideas and feelings which
do not come into being, or do not transform themselves into acts except in
the case of individuals forming a group. The psychological group is a
provisional being formed of heterogeneous elements, which for a moment
are combined, exactly as the cells which constitute a living body form by
their reunion a new being which displays characteristics very different from
those possessed by each of the cells singly.' (p. 29.)4
We shall take the liberty of interrupting Le Bon's exposition with
glosses of our own, and shall accordingly insert an observation at this point.
If the individuals in the group are combined into a unity, there must surely
be something to unite them, and this bond might be precisely the thing that
is characteristic of a group. But Le Bon does not answer this question; he
goes on to consider the alteration which the individual undergoes when in a
group and describes it in terms which harmonize well with the fundamental
postulates of our own depth-psychology.
'It is easy to prove how much the individual forming part of a group
differs from the isolated individual, but it is less easy to discover the causes
of this difference.
'To obtain at any rate a glimpse of them it is necessary in the first place
to call to mind the truth established by modern psychology, that
unconscious phenomena play an altogether preponderating part not only in
organic life, but also in the operations of the intelligence. The conscious life
of the mind is of small importance in comparison with its unconscious life.
The most subtle analyst, the most acute observer, is scarcely successful in
discovering more than a very small number of the conscious5 motives that
determine his conduct. Our conscious acts are the outcome of an
unconscious substratum created in the mind in the main by hereditary
influences. This substratum consists of the innumerable common
characteristics handed down from generation to generation, which
constitute the genius of a race. Behind the avowed causes of our acts there
undoubtedly lie secret causes that we do not avow, but behind these secret
causes there are many others more secret still, of which we ourselves are
ignorant.6 The greater part of our daily actions are the result of hidden
motives which escape our observation.' (p. 30.)
Le Bon thinks that the particular acquirements of individuals become
obliterated in a group, and that in this way their distinctiveness vanishes.
The racial unconscious emerges; what is heterogeneous is submerged in
what is homogeneous. We may say that the mental superstructure, the
development of which in individuals shows such dissimilarities, is removed,
and that the unconscious foundations, which are similar in everyone, stand
exposed to view.
In this way individuals in a group would come to show an average
character. But Le Bon believes that they also display new characteristics
which they have not previously possessed, and he seeks the reason for this
in three different factors.
'The first is that the individual forming part of a group acquires, solely
from numerical considerations, a sentiment of invincible power which
allows him to yield to instincts which, had he been alone, he would perforce
have kept under restraint. He will be the less disposed to check himself
from the consideration that, a group being anonymous, and in consequence
irresponsible, the sentiment of responsibility which always controls
individuals disappears entirely.' (p. 33.)
From our point of view we need not attribute so much importance to the
appearance of new characteristics. For us it would be enough to say that in a
group the individual is brought under conditions which allow him to throw
off the repressions of his unconscious instincts. The apparently new
characteristics which he then displays are in fact the manifestations of this
unconscious, in which all that is evil in the human mind is contained as a
predisposition. We can find no difficulty in understanding the disappearance
of conscience or of a sense of responsibility in these circumstances. It has
long been our contention that 'dread of society [soziale Angst]' is the
essence of what is called conscience.7
'The second cause, which is contagion, also intervenes to determine the
manifestation in groups of their special characteristics, and at the same time
the trend they are to take. Contagion is a phenomenon of which it is easy to
establish the presence, but that it is not easy to explain. It must be classed
among those phenomena of a hypnotic order, which we shall shortly study.
In a group every sentiment and act is contagious, and contagious to such a
degree that an individual readily sacrifices his personal interest to the
collective interest. This is an aptitude very contrary to his nature, and of
which a man is scarcely capable, except when he makes part of a group.' (p.
33.)
We shall later on base an important conjecture upon this last statement.
'A third cause, and by far the most important, determines in the
individuals of a group special characteristics which are quite contrary at
times to those presented by the isolated individual. I allude to that
suggestibility of which, moreover, the contagion mentioned above is only
an effect.
'To understand this phenomenon it is necessary to bear in mind certain
recent physiological discoveries. We know to-day that by various processes
an individual may be brought into such a condition that, having entirely lost
his conscious personality, he obeys all the suggestions of the operator who
has deprived him of it, and commits acts in utter contradiction with his
character and habits. The most careful investigations seem to prove that an
individual immersed for some length of time in a group in action soon finds
himself—either in consequence of the magnetic influence given out by the
group, or from some other cause of which we are ignorant—in a special
state, which much resembles the state of fascination in which the
hypnotised individual finds himself in the hands of the hypnotiser.... The
conscious personality has entirely vanished; will and discernment are lost.
All feelings and thoughts are bent in the direction determined by the
hypnotiser.
'Such also is approximately the state of the individual forming part of a
psychological group. He is no longer conscious of his acts. In his case, as in
the case of the hypnotised subject, at the same time that certain faculties are
destroyed, others may be brought to a high degree of exaltation. Under the
influence of a suggestion, he will undertake the accomplishment of certain
acts with irresistible impetuosity. This impetuosity is the more irresistible in
the case of groups than in that of the hypnotised subject, from the fact that,
the suggestion being the same for all the individuals of the group, it gains in
strength by reciprocity.' (p. 34.)
'We see, then, that the disappearance of the conscious personality, the
predominance of the unconscious personality, the turning by means of
suggestion and contagion of feelings and ideas in an identical direction, the
tendency to immediately transform the suggested ideas into acts; these, we
see, are the principal characteristics of the individual forming part of a
group. He is no longer himself, but has become an automaton who has
ceased to be guided by his will.' (p. 35.)
I have quoted this passage so fully in order to make it quite clear that Le
Bon explains the condition of an individual in a group as being actually
hypnotic, and does not merely make a comparison between the two states.
We have no intention of raising any objection at this point, but wish only to
emphasize the fact that the two last causes of an individual becoming
altered in a group (the contagion and the heightened suggestibility) are
evidently not on a par, since the contagion seems actually to be a
manifestation of the suggestibility. Moreover the effects of the two factors
do not seem to be sharply differentiated in the text of Le Bon's remarks. We
may perhaps best interpret his statement if we connect the contagion with
the effects of the individual members of the group upon one another, while
we point to another source for those manifestations of suggestion in the
group which are put on a level with the phenomena of hypnotic influence.
But to what source? We cannot avoid being struck with a sense of
deficiency when we notice that one of the chief elements of the comparison,
namely the person who is to replace the hypnotist in the case of the group,
is not mentioned in Le Bon's exposition. But he nevertheless distinguishes
between this influence of fascination which remains plunged in obscurity
and the contagious effect which the individuals exercise upon one another
and by which the original suggestion is strengthened.
Here is yet another important consideration for helping us to understand
the individual in a group: 'Moreover, by the mere fact that he forms part of
an organised group, a man descends several rungs in the ladder of
civilisation. Isolated, he may be a cultivated individual; in a crowd, he is a
barbarian—that is, a creature acting by instinct. He possesses the
spontaneity, the violence, the ferocity, and also the enthusiasm and heroism
of primitive beings.' (p. 36.) He then dwells especially upon the lowering in
intellectual ability which an individual experiences when he becomes
merged in a group.8
Let us now leave the individual, and turn to the group mind, as it has
been outlined by Le Bon. It shows not a single feature which a psycho-
analyst would find any difficulty in placing or in deriving from its source.
Le Bon himself shows us the way by pointing to its similarity with the
mental life of primitive people and of children (p. 40).
A group is impulsive, changeable and irritable. It is led almost
exclusively by the unconscious.9 The impulses which a group obeys may
according to circumstances be generous or cruel, heroic or cowardly, but
they are always so imperious that no personal interest, not even that of self-
preservation, can make itself felt (p. 41). Nothing about it is premeditated.
Though it may desire things passionately, yet this is never so for long, for it
is incapable of perseverance. It cannot tolerate any delay between its desire
and the fulfilment of what it desires. It has a sense of omnipotence; the
notion of impossibility disappears for the individual in a group.10
A group is extraordinarily credulous and open to influence, it has no
critical faculty, and the improbable does not exist for it. It thinks in images,
which call one another up by association (just as they arise with individuals
in states of free imagination), and whose agreement with reality is never
checked by any reasonable function [Instanz].11 The feelings of a group are
always very simple and very exaggerated. So that a group knows neither
doubt nor uncertainty.12
It goes directly to extremes; if a suspicion is expressed, it is instantly
changed into an incontrovertible certainty; a trace of antipathy is turned into
furious hatred (p. 56).13
Inclined as it itself is to all extremes, a group can only be excited by an
excessive stimulus. Anyone who wishes to produce an effect upon it needs
no logical adjustment in his arguments; he must paint in the most forcible
colours, he must exaggerate, and he must repeat the same thing again and
again.
Since a group is in no doubt as to what constitutes truth or error, and is
conscious, moreover, of its own great strength, it is as intolerant as it is
obedient to authority. It respects force and can only be slightly influenced
by kindness, which it regards merely as a form of weakness. What it
demands of its heroes is strength, or even violence. It wants to be ruled and
oppressed and to fear its masters. Fundamentally it is entirely conservative,
and it has a deep aversion from all innovations and advances and an
unbounded respect for tradition (p. 62).
In order to make a correct judgement upon the morals of groups, one
must take into consideration the fact that when individuals come together in
a group all their individual inhibitions fall away and all the cruel, brutal and
destructive instincts, which lie dormant in individuals as relics of a
primitive epoch, are stirred up to find free gratification. But under the
influence of suggestion groups are also capable of high achievements in the
shape of abnegation, unselfishness, and devotion to an ideal. While with
isolated individuals personal interest is almost the only motive force, with
groups it is very rarely prominent. It is possible to speak of an individual
having his moral standards raised by a group (p. 65). Whereas the
intellectual capacity of a group is always far below that of an individual, its
ethical conduct may rise as high above his as it may sink deep below it.
Some other features in Le Bon's description show in a clear light how
well justified is the identification of the group mind with the mind of
primitive people. In groups the most contradictory ideas can exist side by
side and tolerate each other, without any conflict arising from the logical
contradiction between them. But this is also the case in the unconscious
mental life of individuals, of children and of neurotics, as psycho-analysis
has long pointed out.14
A group, further, is subject to the truly magical power of words; they
can evoke the most formidable tempests in the group mind, and are also
capable of stilling them (p. 117). 'Reason and arguments are incapable of
combating certain words and formulas. They are uttered with solemnity in
the presence of groups, and as soon as they have been pronounced an
expression of respect is visible on every countenance, and all heads are
bowed. By many they are considered as natural forces, as supernatural
powers.' (p. 117.) It is only necessary in this connection to remember the
taboo upon names among primitive people and the magical powers which
they ascribe to names and words.15
And, finally, groups have never thirsted after truth. They demand
illusions, and cannot do without them. They constantly give what is unreal
precedence over what is real; they are almost as strongly influenced by
what is untrue as by what is true. They have an evident tendency not to
distinguish between the two (p. 77).
We have pointed out that this predominance of the life of phantasy and
of the illusion born of an unfulfilled wish is the ruling factor in the
psychology of neuroses. We have found that what neurotics are guided by is
not ordinary objective reality but psychological reality. A hysterical
symptom is based upon phantasy instead of upon the repetition of real
experience, and the sense of guilt in an obsessional neurosis is based upon
the fact of an evil intention which was never carried out. Indeed, just as in
dreams and in hypnosis, in the mental operations of a group the function for
testing the reality of things falls into the background in comparison with the
strength of wishes with their affective cathexis.16
What Le Bon says on the subject of leaders of groups is less exhaustive,
and does not enable us to make out an underlying principle so clearly. He
thinks that as soon as living beings are gathered together in certain
numbers, no matter whether they are a herd of animals or a collection of
human beings, they place themselves instinctively under the authority of a
chief (p. 134). A group is an obedient herd, which could never live without
a master. It has such a thirst for obedience that it submits instinctively to
anyone who appoints himself its master.
Although in this way the needs of a group carry it half-way to meet the
leader, yet he too must fit in with it in his personal qualities. He must
himself be held in fascination by a strong faith (in an idea) in order to
awaken the group's faith; he must possess a strong and imposing will,
which the group, which has no will of its own, can accept from him. Le Bon
then discusses the different kinds of leaders, and the means by which they
work upon the group. On the whole he believes that the leaders make
themselves felt by means of the ideas in which they themselves are fanatical
believers.
Moreover, he ascribes both to the ideas and to the leaders a mysterious
and irresistible power, which he calls 'prestige'. Prestige is a sort of
domination exercised over us by an individual, a work or an idea. It entirely
paralyses our critical faculty, and fills us with astonishment and respect. It
would seem to arouse a feeling like that of fascination in hypnosis (p. 148).
He distinguishes between acquired or artificial and personal prestige. The
former is attached to persons in virtue of their name, fortune and reputation,
and to opinions, works of art, etc., in virtue of tradition. Since in every case
it harks back to the past, it cannot be of much help to us in understanding
this puzzling influence. Personal prestige is attached to a few people, who
become leaders by means of it, and it has the effect of making everything
obey them as though by the operation of some magnetic magic. All prestige,
however, is also dependent upon success, and is lost in the event of failure
(p. 159).
We cannot feel that Le Bon has brought the function of the leader and
the importance of prestige completely into harmony with his brilliantly
executed picture of the group mind.
III.
Other Accounts of Collective Mental Life
Table of Contents
We have made use of Le Bon's description by way of introduction, because
it fits in so well with our own Psychology in the emphasis which it lays
upon unconscious mental life. But we must now add that as a matter of fact
none of that author's statements bring forward anything new. Everything
that he says to the detriment and depreciation of the manifestations of the
group mind had already been said by others before him with equal
distinctness and equal hostility, and has been repeated in unison by thinkers,
statesmen and writers since the earliest periods of literature.17 The two
theses which comprise the most important of Le Bon's opinions, those
touching upon the collective inhibition of intellectual functioning and the
heightening of affectivity in groups, had been formulated shortly before by
Sighele.18 At bottom, all that is left over as being peculiar to Le Bon are the
two notions of the unconscious and of the comparison with the mental life
of primitive people, and even these had naturally often been alluded to
before him.
But, what is more, the description and estimate of the group mind as
they have been given by Le Bon and the rest have not by any means been
left undisputed. There is no doubt that all the phenomena of the group mind
which have just been mentioned have been correctly observed, but it is also
possible to distinguish other manifestations of the group formation, which
operate in a precisely opposite sense, and from which a much higher
opinion of the group mind must necessarily follow.
Le Bon himself was prepared to admit that in certain circumstances the
morals of a group can be higher than those of the individuals that compose
it, and that only collectivities are capable of a high degree of unselfishness
and devotion. 'While with isolated individuals personal interest is almost
the only motive force, with groups it is very rarely prominent.' (p. 65.)
Other writers adduce the fact that it is only society which prescribes any
ethical standards at all for the individual, while he as a rule fails in one way
or another to come up to its high demands. Or they point out that in
exceptional circumstances there may arise in communities the phenomenon
of enthusiasm, which has made the most splendid group achievements
possible.
As regards intellectual work it remains a fact, indeed, that great
decisions in the realm of thought and momentous discoveries and solutions
of problems are only possible to an individual, working in solitude. But
even the group mind is capable of genius in intellectual creation, as is
shown above all by language itself, as well as by folk-song, folk-lore and
the like. It remains an open question, moreover, how much the individual
thinker or writer owes to the stimulation of the group in which he lives, or
whether he does more than perfect a mental work in which the others have
had a simultaneous share.
In face of these completely contradictory accounts, it looks as though
the work of Group Psychology were bound to come to an ineffectual end.
But it is easy to find a more hopeful escape from the dilemma. A number of
very different formations have probably been merged under the term 'group'
and may require to be distinguished. The assertions of Sighele, Le Bon and
the rest relate to groups of a short-lived character, which some passing
interest has hastily agglomerated out of various sorts of individuals. The
characteristics of revolutionary groups, and especially those of the great
French Revolution, have unmistakably influenced their descriptions. The
opposite opinions owe their origin to the consideration of those stable
groups or associations in which mankind pass their lives, and which are
embodied in the institutions of society. Groups of the first kind stand in the
same sort of relation to those of the second as a high but choppy sea to a
ground swell.
McDougall, in his book on The Group Mind,19 starts out from the same
contradiction that has just been mentioned, and finds a solution for it in the
factor of organisation. In the simplest case, he says, the 'group' possesses no
organisation at all or one scarcely deserving the name. He describes a group
of this kind as a 'crowd'. But he admits that a crowd of human beings can
hardly come together without possessing at all events the rudiments of an
organisation, and that precisely in these simple groups many of the
fundamental facts of Collective Psychology can be observed with special
ease (p. 22). Before the members of a random crowd of people can
constitute something in the nature of a group in the psychological sense of
the word, a condition has to be fulfilled; these individuals must have
something in common with one another, a common interest in an object, a
similar emotional bias in some situation or other, and ('consequently', I
should like to interpolate) 'some degree of reciprocal influence' (p. 23). The
higher the degree of 'this mental homogeneity', the more readily do the
individuals form a psychological group, and the more striking are the
manifestations of a group mind.
The most remarkable and also the most important result of the
formation of a group is the 'exaltation or intensification of emotion'
produced in every member of it (p. 24). In McDougall's opinion men's
emotions are stirred in a group to a pitch that they seldom or never attain
under other conditions; and it is a pleasurable experience for those who are
concerned to surrender themselves so unreservedly to their passions and
thus to become merged in the group and to lose the sense of the limits of
their individuality. The manner in which individuals are thus carried away
by a common impulse is explained by McDougall by means of what he
calls the 'principle of direct induction of emotion by way of the primitive
sympathetic response' (p. 25), that is, by means of the emotional contagion
with which we are already familiar. The fact is that the perception of the
signs of an emotional state is calculated automatically to arouse the same
emotion in the person who perceives them. The greater the number of
people in whom the same emotion can be simultaneously observed, the
stronger does this automatic compulsion grow. The individual loses his
power of criticism, and lets himself slip into the same emotion. But in so
doing he increases the excitement of the other people, who had produced
this effect upon him, and thus the emotional charge of the individuals
becomes intensified by mutual interaction. Something is unmistakably at
work in the nature of a compulsion to do the same as the others, to remain
in harmony with the many. The coarser and simpler emotions are the more
apt to spread through a group in this way (p. 39).
This mechanism for the intensification of emotion is favoured by some
other influences which emanate from groups. A group impresses the
individual with a sense of unlimited power and of insurmountable peril. For
the moment it replaces the whole of human society, which is the wielder of
authority, whose punishments the individual fears, and for whose sake he
has submitted to so many inhibitions. It is clearly perilous for him to put
himself in opposition to it, and it will be safer to follow the example of
those around him and perhaps even 'hunt with the pack'. In obedience to the
new authority he may put his former 'conscience' out of action, and so
surrender to the attraction of the increased pleasure that is certainly
obtained from the removal of inhibitions. On the whole, therefore, it is not
so remarkable that we should see an individual in a group doing or
approving things which he would have avoided in the normal conditions of
life; and in this way we may even hope to clear up a little of the mystery
which is so often covered by the enigmatic word 'suggestion'.
McDougall does not dispute the thesis as to the collective inhibition of
intelligence in groups (p. 41). He says that the minds of lower intelligence
bring down those of a higher order to their own level. The latter are
obstructed in their activity, because in general an intensification of emotion
creates unfavourable conditions for sound intellectual work, and further
because the individuals are intimidated by the group and their mental
activity is not free, and because there is a lowering in each individual of his
sense of responsibility for his own performances.
The judgement with which McDougall sums up the psychological
behaviour of a simple 'unorganised' group is no more friendly than that of
Le Bon. Such a group 'is excessively emotional, impulsive, violent, fickle,
inconsistent, irresolute and extreme in action, displaying only the coarser
emotions and the less refined sentiments; extremely suggestible, careless in
deliberation, hasty in judgment, incapable of any but the simpler and
imperfect forms of reasoning; easily swayed and led, lacking in self-
consciousness, devoid of self-respect and of sense of responsibility, and apt
to be carried away by the consciousness of its own force, so that it tends to
produce all the manifestations we have learnt to expect of any irresponsible
and absolute power. Hence its behaviour is like that of an unruly child or an
untutored passionate savage in a strange situation, rather than like that of its
average member; and in the worst cases it is like that of a wild beast, rather
than like that of human beings.' (p. 45.)
Since McDougall contrasts the behaviour of a highly organised group
with what has just been described, we shall be particularly interested to
learn in what this organisation consists, and by what factors it is produced.
The author enumerates five 'principal conditions' for raising collective
mental life to a higher level.
The first and fundamental condition is that there should be some degree
of continuity of existence in the group. This may be either material or
formal; the former, if the same individuals persist in the group for some
time; and the latter, if there is developed within the group a system of fixed
positions which are occupied by a succession of individuals.
The second condition is that in the individual member of the group
some definite idea should be formed of the nature, composition, functions
and capacities of the group, so that from this he may develop an emotional
relation to the group as a whole.
The third is that the group should be brought into interaction (perhaps in
the form of rivalry) with other groups similar to it but differing from it in
many respects.
The fourth is that the group should possess traditions, customs and
habits, and especially such as determine the relations of its members to one
another.
The fifth is that the group should have a definite structure, expressed in
the specialisation and differentiation of the functions of its constituents.
According to McDougall, if these conditions are fulfilled, the
psychological disadvantages of the group formation are removed. The
collective lowering of intellectual ability is avoided by withdrawing the
performance of intellectual tasks from the group and reserving them for
individual members of it.
It seems to us that the condition which McDougall designates as the
'organisation' of a group can with more justification be described in another
way. The problem consists in how to procure for the group precisely those
features which were characteristic of the individual and which are
extinguished in him by the formation of the group. For the individual,
outside the primitive group, possessed his own continuity, his self-
consciousness, his traditions and customs, his own particular functions and
position, and kept apart from his rivals. Owing to his entry into an
'unorganised' group he had lost this distinctiveness for a time. If we thus
recognise that the aim is to equip the group with the attributes of the
individual, we shall be reminded of a valuable remark of Trotter's,20 to the
effect that the tendency towards the formation of groups is biologically a
continuation of the multicellular character of all the higher organisms.
IV.
Suggestion and Libido
Table of Contents
We started from the fundamental fact that an individual in a group is
subjected through its influence to what is often a profound alteration in his
mental activity. His emotions become extraordinarily intensified, while his
intellectual ability becomes markedly reduced, both processes being
evidently in the direction of an approximation to the other individuals in the
group; and this result can only be reached by the removal of those
inhibitions upon his instincts which are peculiar to each individual, and by
his resigning those expressions of his inclinations which are especially his
own. We have heard that these often unwelcome consequences are to some
extent at least prevented by a higher 'organisation' of the group; but this
does not contradict the fundamental fact of Group Psychology—the two
theses as to the intensification of the emotions and the inhibition of the
intellect in primitive groups. Our interest is now directed to discovering the
psychological explanation of this mental change which is experienced by
the individual in a group.
It is clear that rational factors (such as the intimidation of the individual
which has already been mentioned, that is, the action of his instinct of self-
preservation) do not cover the observable phenomena. Beyond this what we
are offered as an explanation by authorities upon Sociology and Group
Psychology is always the same, even though it is given various names, and
that is—the magic word 'suggestion'. Tarde calls it 'imitation'; but we cannot
help agreeing with a writer who protests that imitation comes under the
concept of suggestion, and is in fact one of its results.21 Le Bon traces back
all the puzzling features of social phenomena to two factors: the mutual
suggestion of individuals and the prestige of leaders. But prestige, again, is
only recognizable by its capacity for evoking suggestion. McDougall for a
moment gives us an impression that his principle of 'primitive induction of
emotion' might enable us to do without the assumption of suggestion. But
on further consideration we are forced to perceive that this principle says no
more than the familiar assertions about 'imitation' or 'contagion', except for
a decided stress upon the emotional factor. There is no doubt that something
exists in us which, when we become aware of signs of an emotion in
someone else, tends to make us fall into the same emotion; but how often
do we not successfully oppose it, resist the emotion, and react in quite an
opposite way? Why, therefore, do we invariably give way to this contagion
when we are in a group? Once more we should have to say that what
compels us to obey this tendency is imitation, and what induces the emotion
in us is the group's suggestive influence. Moreover, quite apart from this,
McDougall does not enable us to evade suggestion; we hear from him as
well as from other writers that groups are distinguished by their special
suggestibility.
We shall therefore be prepared for the statement that suggestion (or
more correctly suggestibility) is actually an irreducible, primitive
phenomenon, a fundamental fact in the mental life of man. Such, too, was
the opinion of Bernheim, of whose astonishing arts I was a witness in the
year 1889. But I can remember even then feeling a muffled hostility to this
tyranny of suggestion. When a patient who showed himself unamenable
was 
met 
with 
the 
shout: 
'What 
are 
you 
doing? 
Vous 
vous
contresuggestionnez!', I said to myself that this was an evident injustice and
an act of violence. For the man certainly had a right to counter-suggestions
if they were trying to subdue him with suggestions. Later on my resistance
took the direction of protesting against the view that suggestion, which
explained everything, was itself to be preserved from explanation. Thinking
of it, I repeated the old conundrum:22
Christoph trug Christum,
Christus trug die ganze Welt,
Sag' wo hat Christoph
Damals hin den Fuss gestellt?23
Christophorus Christum, sed Christus sustulit orbem:
Constiterit pedibus dic ubi Christophorus?
Now that I once more approach the riddle of suggestion after having
kept away from it for some thirty years, I find there is no change in the
situation. To this statement I can discover only a single exception, which I
need not mention, since it is one which bears witness to the influence of
psycho-analysis. I notice that particular efforts are being made to formulate
the concept of suggestion correctly, that is, to fix the conventional use of the
name.24 And this is by no means superfluous, for the word is acquiring a
more and more extended use and a looser and looser meaning, and will
soon come to designate any sort of influence whatever, just as in English,
where 'to suggest' and 'suggestion' correspond to our nahelegen and
Anregung. But there has been no explanation of the nature of suggestion,
that is, of the conditions under which influence without adequate logical
foundation takes place. I should not avoid the task of supporting this
statement by an analysis of the literature of the last thirty years, if I were
not aware that an exhaustive inquiry is being undertaken close at hand
which has in view the fulfilment of this very task.
Instead of this I shall make an attempt at using the concept of libido for
the purpose of throwing light upon Group Psychology, a concept which has
done us such good service in the study of psycho-neuroses.
Libido is an expression taken from the theory of the emotions. We call
by that name the energy (regarded as a quantitative magnitude, though not
at present actually mensurable) of those instincts which have to do with all
that may be comprised under the word 'love'. The nucleus of what we mean
by love naturally consists (and this is what is commonly called love, and
what the poets sing of) in sexual love with sexual union as its aim. But we
do not separate from this—what in any case has a share in the name 'love'—
on the one hand, self-love, and on the other, love for parents and children,
friendship and love for humanity in general, and also devotion to concrete
objects and to abstract ideas. Our justification lies in the fact that psycho-
analytic research has taught us that all these tendencies are an expression of
the same instinctive activities; in relations between the sexes these instincts
force their way towards sexual union, but in other circumstances they are
diverted from this aim or are prevented from reaching it, though always
preserving enough of their original nature to keep their identity
recognizable (as in such features as the longing for proximity, and self-
sacrifice).
We are of opinion, then, that language has carried out an entirely
justifiable piece of unification in creating the word 'love' with its numerous
uses, and that we cannot do better than take it as the basis of our scientific
discussions and expositions as well. By coming to this decision, psycho-
analysis has let loose a storm of indignation, as though it had been guilty of
an act of outrageous innovation. Yet psycho-analysis has done nothing
original in taking love in this 'wider' sense. In its origin, function, and
relation to sexual love, the 'Eros' of the philosopher Plato coincides exactly
with the love force, the libido, of psycho-analysis, as has been shown in
detail by Nachmansohn and Pfister;25 and when the apostle Paul, in his
famous epistle to the Corinthians, prizes love above all else, he certainly
understands it in the same 'wider' sense.26 But this only shows that men do
not always take their great thinkers seriously, even when they profess most
to admire them.
Psycho-analysis, then, gives these love instincts the name of sexual
instincts, a potiori and by reason of their origin. The majority of 'educated'
people have taken their revenge by retorting upon psycho-analysis with the
reproach of 'pan-sexualism'. Anyone who considers sex as something
mortifying and humiliating to human nature is at liberty to make use of the
more genteel expressions 'Eros' and 'erotic'. I might have done so myself
from the first and thus have spared myself much opposition. But I did not
want to, for I like to avoid concessions to faint-heartedness. One can never
tell where that road may lead one; one gives way first in words, and then
little by little in substance too. I cannot see any merit in being ashamed of
sex; the Greek word 'Eros', which is to soften the affront, is in the end
nothing more than a translation of our German word Liebe [love]; and
finally, he who knows how to wait need make no concessions.
We will try our fortune, then, with the supposition that love
relationships (or, to use a more neutral expression, emotional ties) also
constitute the essence of the group mind. Let us remember that the
authorities make no mention of any such relations. What would correspond
to them is evidently concealed behind the shelter, the screen, of suggestion.
Our hypothesis finds support in the first instance from two passing
thoughts. First, that a group is clearly held together by a power of some
kind: and to what power could this feat be better ascribed than to Eros, who
holds together everything in the world? Secondly, that if an individual gives
up his distinctiveness in a group and lets its other members influence him
by suggestion, it gives one the impression that he does it because he feels
the need of being in harmony with them rather than in opposition to them—
so that perhaps after all he does it 'ihnen zu Liebe'.27
V.
Two Artificial Groups: The Church and the Army
Table of Contents
We may recall from what we know of the morphology of groups that it is
possible to distinguish very different kinds of groups and opposing lines in
their development. There are very fleeting groups and extremely lasting
ones; homogeneous ones, made up of the same sorts of individuals, and
unhomogeneous ones; natural groups, and artificial ones, requiring an
external force to keep them together; primitive groups, and highly organised
ones with a definite structure. But for reasons which have yet to be
explained we should like to lay particular stress upon a distinction to which
the authorities have rather given too little attention; I refer to that between
leaderless groups and those with leaders. And, in complete opposition to the
usual practice, we shall not choose a relatively simple group formation as
our point of departure, but shall begin with highly organised, lasting and
artificial groups. The most interesting example of such structures are
churches—communities of believers—and armies.
A church and an army are artificial groups, that is, a certain external
force is employed to prevent them from disintegrating and to check
alterations in their structure. As a rule a person is not consulted or is given
no choice, as to whether he wants to enter such a group; any attempt at
leaving it is usually met with persecution or with severe punishment, or has
quite definite conditions attached to it. It is quite outside our present interest
to enquire why these associations need such special safeguards. We are only
attracted by one circumstance, namely that certain facts, which are far more
concealed in other cases, can be observed very clearly in those highly
organised groups which are protected from dissolution in the manner that
has been mentioned. In a church (and we may with advantage take the
Catholic Church as a type) as well as in an army, however different the two
may be in other respects, the same illusion holds good of there being a head
—in the Catholic Church Christ, in an army its Commander-in-Chief—who
loves all the individuals in the group with an equal love. Everything
depends upon this illusion; if it were to be dropped, then both Church and
army would dissolve, so far as the external force permitted them to. This
equal love was expressly enunciated by Christ: 'Inasmuch as ye have done it
unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.' He
stands to the individual members of the group of believers in the relation of
a kind elder brother; he is their father surrogate. All the demands that are
made upon the individual are derived from this love of Christ's. A
democratic character runs through the Church, for the very reason that
before Christ everyone is equal, and that everyone has an equal share in his
love. It is not without a deep reason that the similarity between the
Christian community and a family is invoked, and that believers call
themselves brothers in Christ, that is, brothers through the love which
Christ has for them. There is no doubt that the tie which unites each
individual with Christ is also the cause of the tie which unites them with
one another. The like holds good of an army. The Commander-in-Chief is a
father who loves all his soldiers equally, and for that reason they are
comrades among themselves. The army differs structurally from the Church
in being built up of a series of such groups. Every captain is, as it were, the
Commander-in-Chief and the father of his company, and so is every non-
commissioned officer of his section. It is true that a similar hierarchy has
been constructed in the Church, but it does not play the same part in it
economically; for more knowledge and care about individuals may be
attributed to Christ than to a human Commander-in-Chief.28
It is to be noticed that in these two artificial groups each individual is
bound by libidinal29 ties on the one hand to the leader (Christ, the
Commander-in-Chief) and on the other hand to the other members of the
group. How these two ties are related to each other, whether they are of the
same kind and the same value, and how they are to be described
psychologically—these questions must be reserved for subsequent enquiry.
But we shall venture even now upon a mild reproach against the authorities
for not having sufficiently appreciated the importance of the leader in the
psychology of the group, while our own choice of a first object for
investigation has brought us into a more favourable position. It would
appear as though we were on the right road towards an explanation of the
principal phenomenon of Group Psychology—the individual's lack of
freedom in a group. If each individual is bound in two directions by such an
intense emotional tie, we shall find no difficulty in attributing to that
circumstance the alteration and limitation which have been observed in his
personality.
A hint to the same effect, that the essence of a group lies in the libidinal
ties existing in it, is also to be found in the phenomenon of panic, which is
best studied in military groups. A panic arises if a group of that kind
becomes disintegrated. Its characteristics are that none of the orders given
by superiors are any longer listened to, and that each individual is only
solicitous on his own account, and without any consideration for the rest.
The mutual ties have ceased to exist, and a gigantic and senseless dread
[Angst] is set free. At this point, again, the objection will naturally be made
that it is rather the other way round; and that the dread has grown so great
as to be able to disregard all ties and all feelings of consideration for others.
McDougall has even (p. 24) made use of the case of panic (though not of
military panic) as a typical instance of that intensification of emotion by
contagion ('primary induction') upon which he lays so much emphasis. But
nevertheless this rational method of explanation is here quite inadequate.
The very question that needs explanation is why the dread has become so
gigantic. The greatness of the danger cannot be responsible, for the same
army which now falls a victim to panic may previously have faced equally
great or greater danger with complete success; it is of the very essence of
panic that it bears no relation to the danger that threatens, and often breaks
out upon the most trivial occasions. If an individual in panic dread begins to
be solicitous only on his own account, he bears witness in so doing to the
fact that the emotional ties, which have hitherto made the danger seem
small to him, have ceased to exist. Now that he is by himself in facing the
danger, he may surely think it greater. The fact is, therefore, that panic
dread presupposes a relaxation in the libidinal structure of the group and
reacts to it in a justifiable manner, and the contrary view—that the libidinal
ties of the group are destroyed owing to dread in the face of the danger—
can be refuted.
The contention that dread in a group is increased to enormous
proportions by means of induction (contagion) is not in the least
contradicted by these remarks. McDougall's view meets the case entirely
when the danger is a really great one and when the group has no strong
emotional ties—conditions which are fulfilled, for instance, when a fire
breaks out in a theatre or a place of amusement. But the really instructive
case and the one which can be best employed for our purposes is that
mentioned above, in which a body of troops breaks into a panic although
the danger has not increased beyond a degree that is usual and has often
been previously faced. It is not to be expected that the usage of the word
'panic' should be clearly and unambiguously determined. Sometimes it is
used to describe any collective dread, sometimes even dread in an
individual when it exceeds all bounds, and often the name seems to be
reserved for cases in which the outbreak of dread is not warranted by the
occasion. If we take the word 'panic' in the sense of collective dread, we can
establish a far-reaching analogy. Dread in an individual is provoked either
by the greatness of a danger or by the cessation of emotional ties (libidinal
cathexes30 [Libidobesetzungen]); the latter is the case of neurotic dread.31 In
just the same way panic arises either owing to an increase of the common
danger or owing to the disappearance of the emotional ties which hold the
group together; and the latter case is analogous to that of neurotic dread.32
Anyone who, like McDougall (l.c.), describes a panic as one of the
plainest functions of the 'group mind', arrives at the paradoxical position
that this group mind does away with itself in one of its most striking
manifestations. It is impossible to doubt that panic means the disintegration
of a group; it involves the cessation of all the feelings of consideration
which the members of the group otherwise show one another.
The typical occasion of the outbreak of a panic is very much as it is
represented in Nestroy's parody of Hebbel's play about Judith and
Holofernes. A soldier cries out: "The general has lost his head!" and
thereupon all the Assyrians take to flight. The loss of the leader in some
sense or other, the birth, of misgivings about him, brings on the outbreak of
panic, though the danger remains the same; the mutual ties between the
members of the group disappear, as a rule, at the same time as the tie with
their leader. The group vanishes in dust, like a Bologna flask when its top is
broken off.
The dissolution of a religious group is not so easy to observe. A short
time ago there came into my hands an English novel of Catholic origin,
recommended by the Bishop of London, with the title When It Was Dark. It
gave a clever and, as it seems to me, a convincing picture of such a
possibility and its consequences. The novel, which is supposed to relate to
the present day, tells how a conspiracy of enemies of the figure of Christ
and of the Christian faith succeed in arranging for a sepulchre to be
discovered in Jerusalem. In this sepulchre is an inscription, in which Joseph
of Arimathaea confesses that for reasons of piety he secretly removed the
body of Christ from its grave on the third day after its entombment and
buried it in this spot. The resurrection of Christ and his divine nature are by
this means disposed of, and the result of this archaeological discovery is a
convulsion in European civilisation and an extraordinary increase in all
crimes and acts of violence, which only ceases when the forgers' plot has
been revealed.
The phenomenon which accompanies the dissolution that is here
supposed to overtake a religious group is not dread, for which the occasion
is wanting. Instead of it ruthless and hostile impulses towards other people
make their appearance, which, owing to the equal love of Christ, they had
previously been unable to do.33 But even during the kingdom of Christ
those people who do not belong to the community of believers, who do not
love him, and whom he does not love, stand outside this tie. Therefore a
religion, even if it calls itself the religion of love, must be hard and
unloving to those who do not belong to it. Fundamentally indeed every
religion is in this same way a religion of love for all those whom it
embraces; while cruelty and intolerance towards those who do not belong to
it are natural to every religion. However difficult we may find it personally,
we ought not to reproach believers too severely on this account; people who
are unbelieving or indifferent are so much better off psychologically in this
respect. If to-day that intolerance no longer shows itself so violent and cruel
as in former centuries, we can scarcely conclude that there has been a
softening in human manners. The cause is rather to be found in the
undeniable weakening of religious feelings and the libidinal ties which
depend upon them. If another group tie takes the place of the religious one
—and the socialistic tie seems to be succeeding in doing so—, then there
will be the same intolerance towards outsiders as in the age of the Wars of
Religion; and if differences between scientific opinions could ever attain a
similar significance for groups, the same result would again be repeated
with this new motivation.
VI.
Further Problems and Lines of Work
Table of Contents
We have hitherto considered two artificial groups and have found that they
are dominated by two emotional ties. One of these, the tie with the leader,
seems (at all events for these cases) to be more of a ruling factor than the
other, which holds between the members of the group.
Now much else remains to be examined and described in the
morphology of groups. We should have to start from the ascertained fact
that a mere collection of people is not a group, so long as these ties have not
been established in it; but we should have to admit that in any collection of
people the tendency to form a psychological group may very easily become
prominent. We should have to give our attention to the different kinds of
groups, more or less stable, that arise spontaneously, and to study the
conditions of their origin and of their dissolution. We should above all be
concerned with the distinction between groups which have a leader and
leaderless groups. We should consider whether groups with leaders may not
be the more primitive and complete, whether in the others an idea, an
abstraction, may not be substituted for the leader (a state of things to which
religious groups, with their invisible head, form a transition stage), and
whether a common tendency, a wish in which a number of people can have
a share, may not in the same way serve as a substitute. This abstraction,
again, might be more or less completely embodied in the figure of what we
might call a secondary leader, and interesting varieties would arise from the
relation between the idea and the leader. The leader or the leading idea
might also, so to speak, be negative; hatred against a particular person or
institution might operate in just the same unifying way, and might call up
the same kind of emotional ties as positive attachment. Then the question
would also arise whether a leader is really indispensable to the essence of a
group—and other questions besides.
But all these questions, which may, moreover, have been dealt with in
part in the literature of Group Psychology, will not succeed in diverting our
interest from the fundamental psychological problems that confront us in
the structure of a group. And our attention will first be attracted by a
consideration which promises to bring us in the most direct way to a proof
that libidinal ties are what characterize a group.
Let us keep before our eyes the nature of the emotional relations which
hold between men in general. According to Schopenhauer's famous simile
of the freezing porcupines no one can tolerate a too intimate approach to his
neighbour.34
The evidence of psycho-analysis shows that almost every intimate
emotional relation between two people which lasts for some time—
marriage, friendship, the relations between parents and children35—leaves a
sediment of feelings of aversion and hostility, which have first to be
eliminated by repression. This is less disguised in the common wrangles
between business partners or in the grumbles of a subordinate at his
superior. The same thing happens when men come together in larger units.
Every time two families become connected by a marriage, each of them
thinks itself superior to or of better birth than the other. Of two
neighbouring towns each is the other's most jealous rival; every little canton
looks down upon the others with contempt. Closely related races keep one
another at arm's length; the South German cannot endure the North
German, the Englishman casts every kind of aspersion upon the Scotchman,
the Spaniard despises the Portuguese. We are no longer astonished that
greater differences should lead to an almost insuperable repugnance, such
as the Gallic people feel for the German, the Aryan for the Semite, and the
white races for the coloured.
When this hostility is directed against people who are otherwise loved
we describe it as ambivalence of feeling; and we explain the fact, in what is
probably far too rational a manner, by means of the numerous occasions for
conflicts of interest which arise precisely in such intimate relations. In the
undisguised antipathies and aversions which people feel towards strangers
with whom they have to do we may recognize the expression of self-love—
of narcissism. This self-love works for the self-assertion of the individual,
and behaves as though the occurrence of any divergence from his own
particular lines of development involved a criticism of them and a demand
for their alteration. We do not know why such sensitiveness should have
been directed to just these details of differentiation; but it is unmistakable
that in this whole connection men give evidence of a readiness for hatred,
an aggressiveness, the source of which is unknown, and to which one is
tempted to ascribe an elementary character.36
But the whole of this intolerance vanishes, temporarily or permanently,
as the result of the formation of a group, and in a group. So long as a group
formation persists or so far as it extends, individuals behave as though they
were uniform, tolerate other people's peculiarities, put themselves on an
equal level with them, and have no feeling of aversion towards them. Such
a limitation of narcissism can, according to our theoretical views, only be
produced by one factor, a libidinal tie with other people. Love for oneself
knows only one barrier—love for others, love for objects.37 The question
will at once be raised whether community of interest in itself, without any
addition of libido, must not necessarily lead to the toleration of other people
and to considerateness for them. This objection may be met by the reply
that nevertheless no lasting limitation of narcissism is effected in this way,
since this tolerance does not persist longer than the immediate advantage
gained from the other people's collaboration. But the practical importance
of the discussion is less than might be supposed, for experience has shown
that in cases of collaboration libidinal ties are regularly formed between the
fellow-workers which prolong and solidify the relation between them to a
point beyond what is merely profitable. The same thing occurs in men's
social relations as has become familiar to psycho-analytic research in the
course of the development of the individual libido. The libido props itself
upon the satisfaction of the great vital needs, and chooses as its first objects
the people who have a share in that process. And in the development of
mankind as a whole, just as in individuals, love alone acts as the civilizing
factor in the sense that it brings a change from egoism to altruism. And this
is true both of the sexual love for women, with all the obligations which it
involves of sparing what women are fond of, and also of the desexualised,
sublimated homosexual love for other men, which springs from work in
common. If therefore in groups narcissistic self-love is subject to limitations
which do not operate outside them, that is cogent evidence that the essence
of a group formation consists in a new kind of libidinal ties among the
members of the group.
But our interest now leads us on to the pressing question as to what may
be the nature of these ties which exist in groups. In the psycho-analytic
study of neuroses we have hitherto been occupied almost exclusively with
ties that unite with their objects those love instincts which still pursue
directly sexual aims. In groups there can evidently be no question of sexual
aims of that kind. We are concerned here with love instincts which have
been diverted from their original aims, though they do not operate with less
energy on that account. Now we have already observed within the range of
the usual sexual object-cathexis [Objektbesetzung] phenomena which
represent a diversion of the instinct from its sexual aim. We have described
them as degrees of being in love, and have recognized that they involve a
certain encroachment upon the ego. We shall now turn our attention more
closely to these phenomena of being in love, in the firm expectation of
finding in them conditions which can be transferred to the ties that exist in
groups. But we should also like to know whether this kind of object-
cathexis, as we know it in sexual life, represents the only manner of
emotional tie with other people, or whether we must take other mechanisms
of the sort into account. As a matter of fact we learn from psycho-analysis
that there do exist other mechanisms for emotional ties, the so-called
identifications, insufficiently-known processes and hard to describe, the
investigation of which will for some time keep us away from the subject of
Group Psychology.
VII.
Identification
Table of Contents
Identification is known to psycho-analysis as the earliest expression of an
emotional tie with another person. It plays a part in the early history of the
Oedipus complex. A little boy will exhibit a special interest in his father; he
would like to grow like him and be like him, and take his place everywhere.
We may say simply that he takes his father as his ideal. This behaviour has
nothing to do with a passive or feminine attitude towards his father (and
towards males in general); it is on the contrary typically masculine. It fits in
very well with the Oedipus complex, for which it helps to prepare the way.
At the same time as this identification with his father, or a little later, the
boy has begun to develop a true object-cathexis towards his mother
according to the anaclitic type [Anlehnungstypus].38 He then exhibits,
therefore, two psychologically distinct ties: a straightforward sexual object-
cathexis towards his mother and a typical identification towards his father.
The two subsist side by side for a time without any mutual influence or
interference. In consequence of the irresistible advance towards a
unification of mental life they come together at last; and the normal
Oedipus complex originates from their confluence. The little boy notices
that his father stands in his way with his mother. His identification with his
father then takes on a hostile colouring and becomes identical with the wish
to replace his father in regard to his mother as well. Identification, in fact, is
ambivalent from the very first; it can turn into an expression of tenderness
as easily as into a wish for someone's removal. It behaves like a derivative
of the first oral phase of the organisation of the libido, in which the object
that we long for and prize is assimilated by eating and is in that way
annihilated as such. The cannibal, as we know, has remained at this
standpoint; he has a devouring affection for his enemies and only devours
people of whom he is fond.39
The subsequent history of this identification with the father may easily
be lost sight of. It may happen that the Oedipus complex becomes inverted,
and that the father is taken as the object of a feminine attitude, an object
from which the directly sexual instincts look for satisfaction; in that event
the identification with the father has become the precursor of an object tie
with the father. The same holds good, with the necessary substitutions, of
the baby daughter as well.
It is easy to state in a formula the distinction between an identification
with the father and the choice of the father as an object. In the first case
one's father is what one would like to be, and in the second he is what one
would like to have. The distinction, that is, depends upon whether the tie
attaches to the subject or to the object of the ego. The former is therefore
already possible before any sexual object-choice has been made. It is much
more difficult to give a clear metapsychological representation of the
distinction. We can only see that identification endeavours to mould a
person's own ego after the fashion of the one that has been taken as a
'model'.
Let us disentangle identification as it occurs in the structure of a
neurotic symptom from its rather complicated connections. Supposing that
a little girl (and we will keep to her for the present) develops the same
painful symptom as her mother—for instance, the same tormenting cough.
Now this may come about in various ways. The identification may come
from the Oedipus complex; in that case it signifies a hostile desire on the
girl's part to take her mother's place, and the symptom expresses her object
love towards her father, and brings about a realisation, under the influence
of a sense of guilt, of her desire to take her mother's place: 'You wanted to
be your mother, and now you are—anyhow as far as the pain goes'. This is
the complete mechanism of the structure of a hysterical symptom. Or, on
the other hand, the symptom may be the same as that of the person who is
loved—(so, for instance, Dora in the 'Bruchstück einer Hysterieanalyse'40
imitated her father's cough); in that case we can only describe the state of
things by saying that identification has appeared instead of object-choice,
and that object-choice has regressed to identification. We have heard that
identification is the earliest and original form of emotional tie; it often
happens that under the conditions in which symptoms are constructed, that
is, where there is repression and where the mechanisms of the unconscious
are dominant, object-choice is turned back into identification—the ego, that
is, assumes the characteristics of the object. It is noticeable that in these
identifications the ego sometimes copies the person who is not loved and
sometimes the one who is loved. It must also strike us that in both cases the
identification is a partial and extremely limited one and only borrows a
single trait from the person who is its object.
There is a third particularly frequent and important case of symptom
formation, in which the identification leaves any object relation to the
person who is being copied entirely out of account. Supposing, for instance,
that one of the girls in a boarding school has had a letter from someone with
whom she is secretly in love which arouses her jealousy, and that she reacts
to it with a fit of hysterics; then some of her friends who know about it will
contract the fit, as we say, by means of mental infection. The mechanism is
that of identification based upon the possibility or desire of putting oneself
in the same situation. The other girls would like to have a secret love affair
too, and under the influence of a sense of guilt they also accept the pain
involved in it. It would be wrong to suppose that they take on the symptom
out of sympathy. On the contrary, the sympathy only arises out of the
identification, and this is proved by the fact that infection or imitation of
this kind takes place in circumstances where even less pre-existing
sympathy is to be assumed than usually exists between friends in a girls'
school. One ego has perceived a significant analogy with another upon one
point—in our example upon a similar readiness for emotion; an
identification is thereupon constructed on this point, and, under the
influence of the pathogenic situation, is displaced on to the symptom which
the one ego has produced. The identification by means of the symptom has
thus become the mark of a point of coincidence between the two egos
which has to be kept repressed.
What we have learned from these three sources may be summarised as
follows. First, identification is the original form of emotional tie with an
object; secondly, in a regressive way it becomes a substitute for a libidinal
object tie, as it were by means of the introjection of the object into the ego;
and thirdly, it may arise with every new perception of a common quality
shared with some other person who is not an object of the sexual instinct.
The more important this common quality is, the more successful may this
partial identification become, and it may thus represent the beginning of a
new tie.
We already begin to divine that the mutual tie between members of a
group is in the nature of an identification of this kind, based upon an
important emotional common quality; and we may suspect that this
common quality lies in the nature of the tie with the leader. Another
suspicion may tell us that we are far from having exhausted the problem of
identification, and that we are faced by the process which psychology calls
'empathy [Einfühlung]' and which plays the largest part in our
understanding of what is inherently foreign to our ego in other people. But
we shall here limit ourselves to the immediate emotional effects of
identification, and shall leave on one side its significance for our
intellectual life.
Psycho-analytic research, which has already occasionally attacked the
more difficult problems of the psychoses, has also been able to exhibit
identification to us in some other cases which are not immediately
comprehensible. I shall treat two of these cases in detail as material for our
further consideration.
The genesis of male homosexuality in a large class of cases is as
follows. A young man has been unusually long and intensely fixated upon
his mother in the sense of the Oedipus complex. But at last, after the end of
his puberty, the time comes for exchanging his mother for some other
sexual object. Things take a sudden turn: the young man does not abandon
his mother, but identifies himself with her; he transforms himself into her,
and now looks about for objects which can replace his ego for him, and on
which he can bestow such love and care as he has experienced from his
mother. This is a frequent process, which can be confirmed as often as one
likes, and which is naturally quite independent of any hypothesis that may
be made as to the organic driving force and the motives of the sudden
transformation. A striking thing about this identification is its ample scale; it
remoulds the ego in one of its important features—in its sexual character—
upon the model of what has hitherto been the object. In this process the
object itself is renounced—whether entirely or in the sense of being
preserved only in the unconscious is a question outside the present
discussion. Identification with an object that is renounced or lost as a
substitute for it, introjection of this object into the ego, is indeed no longer a
novelty to us. A process of the kind may sometimes be directly observed in
small children. A short time ago an observation of this sort was published in
the Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse. A child who was unhappy
over the loss of a kitten declared straight out that now he himself was the
kitten, and accordingly crawled about on all fours, would not eat at table,
etc.41
Another such instance of introjection of the object has been provided by
the analysis of melancholia, an affection which counts among the most
remarkable of its exciting causes the real or emotional loss of a loved
object. A leading characteristic of these cases is a cruel self-depreciation of
the ego combined with relentless self-criticism and bitter self-reproaches.
Analyses have shown that this disparagement and these reproaches apply at
bottom to the object and represent the ego's revenge upon it. The shadow of
the object has fallen upon the ego, as I have said elsewhere.42 The
introjection of the object is here unmistakably clear.
But these melancholias also show us something else, which may be of
importance for our later discussions. They show us the ego divided, fallen
into two pieces, one of which rages against the second. This second piece is
the one which has been altered by introjection and which contains the lost
object. But the piece which behaves so cruelly is not unknown to us either.
It comprises the conscience, a critical faculty [Instanz]43 within the ego,
which even in normal times takes up a critical attitude towards the ego,
though never so relentlessly and so unjustifiably. On previous occasions we
have been driven to the hypothesis44 that some such faculty develops in our
ego which may cut itself off from the rest of the ego and come into conflict
with it. We have called it the 'ego ideal', and by way of functions we have
ascribed to it self-observation, the moral conscience, the censorship of
dreams, and the chief influence in repression. We have said that it is the heir
to the original narcissism in which the childish ego found its self-
sufficiency; it gradually gathers up from the influences of the environment
the demands which that environment makes upon the ego and which the
ego cannot always rise to; so that a man, when he cannot be satisfied with
his ego itself, may nevertheless be able to find satisfaction in the ego ideal
which has been differentiated out of the ego. In delusions of observation, as
we have further shown, the disintegration of this faculty has become patent,
and has thus revealed its origin in the influence of superior powers, and
above all of parents.45 But we have not forgotten to add that the amount of
distance between this ego ideal and the real ego is very variable from one
individual to another, and that with many people this differentiation within
the ego does not go further than with children.
But before we can employ this material for understanding the libidinal
organisation of groups, we must take into account some other examples of
the mutual relations between the object and the ego.46
VIII.
Being in Love and Hypnosis
Table of Contents
Even in its caprices the usage of language remains true to some kind of
reality. Thus it gives the name of 'love' to a great many kinds of emotional
relationship which we too group together theoretically as love; but then
again it feels a doubt whether this love is real, true, actual love, and so hints
at a whole scale of possibilities within the range of the phenomena of love.
We shall have no difficulty in making the same discovery empirically.
In one class of cases being in love is nothing more than object-cathexis
on the part of the sexual instincts with a view to directly sexual satisfaction,
a cathexis which expires, moreover, when this aim has been reached; this is
what is called common, sensual love. But, as we know, the libidinal
situation rarely remains so simple. It was possible to calculate with
certainty upon the revival of the need which had just expired; and this must
no doubt have been the first motive for directing a lasting cathexis upon the
sexual object and for 'loving' it in the passionless intervals as well.
To this must be added another factor derived from the astonishing
course of development which is pursued by the erotic life of man. In his
first phase, which has usually come to an end by the time he is five years
old, a child has found the first object for his love in one or other of his
parents, and all of his sexual instincts with their demand for satisfaction
have been united upon this object. The repression which then sets in
compels him to renounce the greater number of these infantile sexual aims,
and leaves behind a profound modification in his relation to his parents. The
child still remains tied to his parents, but by instincts which must be
described as being 'inhibited in their aim [zielgehemmte]'. The emotions
which he feels henceforward towards these objects of his love are
characterized as 'tender'. It is well known that the earlier 'sensual'
tendencies remain more or less strongly preserved in the unconscious, so
that in a certain sense the whole of the original current continues to exist.47
At puberty, as we know, there set in new and very strong tendencies
with directly sexual aims. In unfavourable cases they remain separate, in the
form of a sensual current, from the 'tender' emotional trends which persist.
We are then faced by a picture the two aspects of which certain movements
in literature take such delight in idealising. A man of this kind will show a
sentimental enthusiasm for women whom he deeply respects but who do
not excite him to sexual activities, and he will only be potent with other
women whom he does not 'love' but thinks little of or even despises.48 More
often, however, the adolescent succeeds in bringing about a certain degree
of synthesis between the unsensual, heavenly love and the sensual, earthly
love, and his relation to his sexual object is characterised by the interaction
of uninhibited instincts and of instincts inhibited in their aim. The depth to
which anyone is in love, as contrasted with his purely sensual desire, may
be measured by the size of the share taken by the inhibited instincts of
tenderness.
In connection with this question of being in love we have always been
struck by the phenomenon of sexual over-estimation—the fact that the
loved object enjoys a certain amount of freedom from criticism, and that all
its characteristics are valued more highly than those of people who are not
loved, or than its own were at a time when it itself was not loved. If the
sensual tendencies are somewhat more effectively repressed or set aside, the
illusion is produced that the object has come to be sensually loved on
account of its spiritual merits, whereas on the contrary these merits may
really only have been lent to it by its sensual charm.
The tendency which falsifies judgement in this respect is that of
idealisation. But this makes it easier for us to find our way about. We see
that the object is being treated in the same way as our own ego, so that
when we are in love a considerable amount of narcissistic libido overflows
on to the object. It is even obvious, in many forms of love choice, that the
object serves as a substitute for some unattained ego ideal of our own. We
love it on account of the perfections which we have striven to reach for our
own ego, and which we should now like to procure in this roundabout way
as a means of satisfying our narcissism.
If the sexual over-estimation and the being in love increase even further,
then the interpretation of the picture becomes still more unmistakable. The
tendencies whose trend is towards directly sexual satisfaction may now be
pushed back entirely, as regularly happens, for instance, with the young
man's sentimental passion; the ego becomes more and more unassuming
and modest, and the object more and more sublime and precious, until at
last it gets possession of the entire self-love of the ego, whose self-sacrifice
thus follows as a natural consequence. The object has, so to speak,
consumed the ego. Traits of humility, of the limitation of narcissism, and of
self-injury occur in every case of being in love; in the extreme case they are
only intensified, and as a result of the withdrawal of the sensual claims they
remain in solitary supremacy.
This happens especially easily with love that is unhappy and cannot be
satisfied; for in spite of everything each sexual satisfaction always involves
a reduction in sexual over-estimation. Contemporaneously with this
'devotion' of the ego to the object, which is no longer to be distinguished
from a sublimated devotion to an abstract idea, the functions allotted to the
ego ideal entirely cease to operate. The criticism exercised by that faculty is
silent; everything that the object does and asks for is right and blameless.
Conscience has no application to anything that is done for the sake of the
object; in the blindness of love remorselessness is carried to the pitch of
crime. The whole situation can be completely summarised in a formula: The
object has taken the place of the ego ideal.
It is now easy to define the distinction between identification and such
extreme developments of being in love as may be described as fascination
or infatuation. In the former case the ego has enriched itself with the
properties of the object, it has 'introjected' the object into itself, as Ferenczi
expresses it. In the second case it is impoverished, it has surrendered itself
to the object, it has substituted the object for its most important constituent.
Closer consideration soon makes it plain, however, that this kind of account
creates an illusion of contradistinctions that have no real existence.
Economically there is no question of impoverishment or enrichment; it is
even possible to describe an extreme case of being in love as a state in
which the ego has introjected the object into itself. Another distinction is
perhaps better calculated to meet the essence of the matter. In the case of
identification the object has been lost or given up; it is then set up again
inside the ego, and the ego makes a partial alteration in itself after the
model of the lost object. In the other case the object is retained, and there is
a hyper-cathexis of it by the ego and at the ego's expense. But here again a
difficulty presents itself. Is it quite certain that identification presupposes
that object-cathexis has been given up? Can there be no identification with
the object retained? And before we embark upon a discussion of this
delicate question, the perception may already be beginning to dawn on us
that yet another alternative embraces the real essence of the matter, namely,
whether the object is put in the place of the ego or of the ego ideal.
From being in love to hypnosis is evidently only a short step. The
respects in which the two agree are obvious. There is the same humble
subjection, the same compliance, the same absence of criticism, towards the
hypnotist just as towards the loved object. There is the same absorption of
one's own initiative; no one can doubt that the hypnotist has stepped into
the place of the ego ideal. It is only that everything is even clearer and more
intense in hypnosis, so that it would be more to the point to explain being in
love by means of hypnosis than the other way round. The hypnotist is the
sole object, and no attention is paid to any but him. The fact that the ego
experiences in a dream-like way whatever he may request or assert reminds
us that we omitted to mention among the functions of the ego ideal the
business of testing the reality of things.49 No wonder that the ego takes a
perception for real if its reality is vouched for by the mental faculty which
ordinarily discharges the duty of testing the reality of things. The complete
absence of tendencies which are uninhibited in their sexual aims contributes
further towards the extreme purity of the phenomena. The hypnotic relation
is the devotion of someone in love to an unlimited degree but with sexual
satisfaction excluded; whereas in the case of being in love this kind of
satisfaction is only temporarily kept back, and remains in the background as
a possible aim at some later time.
But on the other hand we may also say that the hypnotic relation is (if
the expression is permissible) a group formation with two members.
Hypnosis is not a good object for comparison with a group formation,
because it is truer to say that it is identical with it. Out of the complicated
fabric of the group it isolates one element for us—the behaviour of the
individual to the leader. Hypnosis is distinguished from a group formation
by this limitation of number, just as it is distinguished from being in love by
the absence of directly sexual tendencies. In this respect it occupies a
middle position between the two.
It is interesting to see that it is precisely those sexual tendencies that are
inhibited in their aims which achieve such lasting ties between men. But
this can easily be understood from the fact that they are not capable of
complete satisfaction, while sexual tendencies which are uninhibited in
their aims suffer an extraordinary reduction through the discharge of energy
every time the sexual aim is attained. It is the fate of sensual love to become
extinguished when it is satisfied; for it to be able to last, it must from the
first be mixed with purely tender components—with such, that is, as are
inhibited in their aims—or it must itself undergo a transformation of this
kind.
Hypnosis would solve the riddle of the libidinal constitution of groups
for us straight away, if it were not that it itself exhibits some features which
are not met by the rational explanation we have hitherto given of it as a
state of being in love with the directly sexual tendencies excluded. There is
still a great deal in it which we must recognise as unexplained and mystical.
It contains an additional element of paralysis derived from the relation
between someone with superior power and someone who is without power
and helpless—which may afford a transition to the hypnosis of terror which
occurs in animals. The manner in which it is produced and its relationship
to sleep are not clear; and the puzzling way in which some people are
subject to it, while others resist it completely, points to some factor still
unknown which is realised in it and which perhaps alone makes possible the
purity of the attitudes of the libido which it exhibits. It is noticeable that,
even when there is complete suggestive compliance in other respects, the
moral conscience of the person hypnotized may show resistance. But this
may be due to the fact that in hypnosis as it is usually practised some
knowledge may be retained that what is happening is only a game, an
untrue reproduction of another situation of far more importance to life.
But after the preceding discussions we are quite in a position to give the
formula for the libidinal constitution of groups: or at least of such groups as
we have hitherto considered, namely, those that have a leader and have not
been able by means of too much 'organisation' to acquire secondarily the
characteristics of an individual. A primary group of this kind is a number of
individuals who have substituted one and the same object for their ego ideal
and have consequently identified themselves with one another in their ego.
This condition admits of graphic representation:
IX.
The Herd Instinct
Table of Contents
We cannot for long enjoy the illusion that we have solved the riddle of the
group with this formula. It is impossible to escape the immediate and
disturbing recollection that all we have really done has been to shift the
question on to the riddle of hypnosis, about which so many points have yet
to be cleared up. And now another objection shows us our further path.
It might be said that the intense emotional ties which we observe in
groups are quite sufficient to explain one of their characteristics—the lack
of independence and initiative in their members, the similarity in the
reactions of all of them, their reduction, so to speak, to the level of group
individuals. But if we look at it as a whole, a group shows us more than
this. Some of its features—the weakness of intellectual ability, the lack of
emotional restraint, the incapacity for moderation and delay, the inclination
to exceed every limit in the expression of emotion and to work it off
completely in the form of action—these and similar features, which we find
so impressively described in Le Bon, show an unmistakable picture of a
regression of mental activity to an earlier stage such as we are not surprised
to find among savages or children. A regression of this sort is in particular
an essential characteristic of common groups, while, as we have heard, in
organized and artificial groups it can to a large extent be checked.
We thus have an impression of a state in which an individual's separate
emotion and personal intellectual act are too weak to come to anything by
themselves and are absolutely obliged to wait till they are reinforced
through being repeated in a similar way in the other members of the group.
We are reminded of how many of these phenomena of dependence are part
of the normal constitution of human society, of how little originality and
personal courage are to be found in it, of how much every individual is
ruled by those attitudes of the group mind which exhibit themselves in such
forms as racial characteristics, class prejudices, public opinion, etc. The
influence of suggestion becomes a greater riddle for us when we admit that
it is not exercised only by the leader, but by every individual upon every
other individual; and we must reproach ourselves with having unfairly
emphasized the relation to the leader and with having kept the other factor
of mutual suggestion too much in the background.
After this encouragement to modesty, we shall be inclined to listen to
another voice, which promises us an explanation based upon simpler
grounds. Such a one is to be found in Trotter's thoughtful book upon the
herd instinct, concerning which my only regret is that it does not entirely
escape the antipathies that were set loose by the recent great war.50
Trotter derives the mental phenomena that are described as occurring in
groups from a herd instinct ('gregariousness'), which is innate in human
beings just as in other species of animals. Biologically this gregariousness
is an analogy to multicellularity and as it were a continuation of it. From the
standpoint of the libido theory it is a further manifestation of the inclination,
which proceeds from the libido, and which is felt by all living beings of the
same kind, to combine in more and more comprehensive units.51 The
individual feels 'incomplete' if he is alone. The dread shown by small
children would seem already to be an expression of this herd instinct.
Opposition to the herd is as good as separation from it, and is therefore
anxiously avoided. But the herd turns away from anything that is new or
unusual. The herd instinct would appear to be something primary,
something 'which cannot be split up'.
Trotter gives as the list of instincts which he considers as primary those
of self-preservation, of nutrition, of sex, and of the herd. The last often
comes into opposition with the others. The feelings of guilt and of duty are
the peculiar possessions of a gregarious animal. Trotter also derives from
the herd instinct the repressive forces which psycho-analysis has shown to
exist in the ego, and from the same source accordingly the resistances
which the physician comes up against in psycho-analytic treatment. Speech
owes its importance to its aptitude for mutual understanding in the herd, and
upon it the identification of the individuals with one another largely rests.
While Le Bon is principally concerned with typical transient group
formations, and McDougall with stable associations, Trotter has chosen as
the centre of his interest the most generalised form of assemblage in which
man, that Ϛὡον πολιτικὁν, passes his life, and he gives us its psychological
basis. But Trotter is under no necessity of tracing back the herd instinct, for
he characterizes it as primary and not further reducible. Boris Sidis's
attempt, to which he refers, at tracing the herd instinct back to suggestibility
is fortunately superfluous as far as he is concerned; it is an explanation of a
familiar and unsatisfactory type, and the converse proposition—that
suggestibility is a derivative of the herd instinct—would seem to me to
throw far more light on the subject.
But Trotter's exposition, with even more justice than the others', is open
to the objection that it takes too little account of the leader's part in a group,
while we incline rather to the opposite judgement, that it is impossible to
grasp the nature of a group if the leader is disregarded. The herd instinct
leaves no room at all for the leader; he is merely thrown in along with the
herd, almost by chance; it follows, too, that no path leads from this instinct
to the need for a God; the herd is without a herdsman. But besides this
Trotter's exposition can be undermined psychologically; that is to say, it can
be made at all events probable that the herd instinct is not irreducible, that it
is not primary in the same sense as the instinct of self-preservation and the
sexual instinct.
It is naturally no easy matter to trace the ontogenesis of the herd
instinct. The dread which is shown by small children when they are left
alone, and which Trotter claims as being already a manifestation of the
instinct, nevertheless suggests more readily another interpretation. The
dread relates to the child's mother, and later to other familiar persons, and it
is the expression of an unfulfilled desire, which the child does not yet know
how to deal with in any way except by turning it into dread.52 Nor is the
child's dread when it is alone pacified by the sight of any haphazard
'member of the herd', but on the contrary it is only brought into existence by
the approach of a 'stranger' of this sort. Then for a long time nothing in the
nature of herd instinct or group feeling is to be observed in children.
Something like it grows up first of all, in a nursery containing many
children, out of the children's relation to their parents, and it does so as a
reaction to the initial envy with which the elder child receives the younger
one. The elder child would certainly like to put its successor jealously aside,
to keep it away from the parents, and to rob it of all its privileges; but in
face of the fact that this child (like all that come later) is loved by the
parents in just the same way, and in consequence of the impossibility of
maintaining its hostile attitude without damaging itself, it is forced into
identifying itself with the other children. So there grows up in the troop of
children a communal or group feeling, which is then further developed at
school. The first demand made by this reaction-formation is for justice, for
equal treatment for all. We all know how loudly and implacably this claim
is put forward at school. If one cannot be the favourite oneself, at all events
nobody else shall be the favourite. This transformation—the replacing of
jealousy by a group feeling in the nursery and classroom—might be
considered improbable, if the same process could not later on be observed
again in other circumstances. We have only to think of the troop of women
and girls, all of them in love in an enthusiastically sentimental way, who
crowd round a singer or pianist after his performance. It would certainly be
easy for each of them to be jealous of the rest; but, in face of their numbers
and the consequent impossibility of their reaching the aim of their love,
they renounce it, and, instead of pulling out one another's hair, they act as a
united group, do homage to the hero of the occasion with their common
actions, and would probably be glad to have a share of his flowing locks.
Originally rivals, they have succeeded in identifying themselves with one
another by means of a similar love for the same object. When, as is usual, a
situation in the field of the instincts is capable of various outcomes, we
need not be surprised if the actual outcome is one which involves the
possibility of a certain amount of satisfaction, while another, even though in
itself more obvious, is passed over because the circumstances of life
prevent its attaining this aim.
What appears later on in society in the shape of Gemeingeist, esprit de
corps, 'group spirit', etc., does not belie its derivation from what was
originally envy. No one must want to put himself forward, every one must
be the same and have the same. Social justice means that we deny ourselves
many things so that others may have to do without them as well, or, what is
the same thing, may not be able to ask for them. This demand for equality is
the root of social conscience and the sense of duty. It reveals itself
unexpectedly in the syphilitic's dread of infecting other people, which
psycho-analysis has taught us to understand. The dread exhibited by these
poor wretches corresponds to their violent struggles against the unconscious
wish to spread their infection on to other people; for why should they alone
be infected and cut off from so much? why not other people as well? And
the same germ is to be found in the pretty anecdote of the judgement of
Solomon. If one woman's child is dead, the other shall not have a live one
either. The bereaved woman is recognized by this wish.
Thus social feeling is based upon the reversal of what was first a hostile
feeling into a positively-toned tie of the nature of an identification. So far as
we have hitherto been able to follow the course of events, this reversal
appears to be effected under the influence of a common tender tie with a
person outside the group. We do not ourselves regard our analysis of
identification as exhaustive, but it is enough for our present purpose that we
should revert to this one feature—its demand that equalization shall be
consistently carried through. We have already heard in the discussion of the
two artificial groups, church and army, that their preliminary condition is
that all their members should be loved in the same way by one person, the
leader. Do not let us forget, however, that the demand for equality in a
group applies only to its members and not to the leader. All the members
must be equal to one another, but they all want to be ruled by one person.
Many equals, who can identify themselves with one another, and a single
person superior to them all—that is the situation that we find realised in
groups which are capable of subsisting. Let us venture, then, to correct
Trotter's pronouncement that man is a herd animal and assert that he is
rather a horde animal, an individual creature in a horde led by a chief.
X.
The Group and the Primal Horde
Table of Contents
In 1912 I took up a conjecture of Darwin's to the effect that the primitive
form of human society was that of a horde ruled over despotically by a
powerful male. I attempted to show that the fortunes of this horde have left
indestructible traces upon the history of human descent; and, especially, that
the development of totemism, which comprises in itself the beginnings of
religion, morality, and social organisation, is connected with the killing of
the chief by violence and the transformation of the paternal horde into a
community of brothers.53 To be sure, this is only a hypothesis, like so many
others with which archaeologists endeavour to lighten the darkness of
prehistoric times—a 'Just-So Story', as it was amusingly called by a not
unkind critic (Kroeger); but I think it is creditable to such a hypothesis if it
proves able to bring coherence and understanding into more and more new
regions.
Human groups exhibit once again the familiar picture of an individual
of superior strength among a troop of similar companions, a picture which
is also contained in our idea of the primal horde. The psychology of such a
group, as we know it from the descriptions to which we have so often
referred—the dwindling of the conscious individual personality, the
focussing of thoughts and feelings into a common direction, the
predominance of the emotions and of the unconscious mental life, the
tendency to the immediate carrying out of intentions as they emerge—all
this corresponds to a state of regression to a primitive mental activity, of
just such a sort as we should be inclined to ascribe to the primal horde.54
Thus the group appears to us as a revival of the primal horde. Just as
primitive man virtually survives in every individual, so the primal horde
may arise once more out of any random crowd; in so far as men are
habitually under the sway of group formation we recognise in it the survival
of the primal horde. We must conclude that the psychology of the group is
the oldest human psychology; what we have isolated as individual
psychology, by neglecting all traces of the group, has only since come into
prominence out of the old group psychology, by a gradual process which
may still, perhaps, be described as incomplete. We shall later venture upon
an attempt at specifying the point of departure of this development.
Further reflection will show us in what respect this statement requires
correction. Individual psychology must, on the contrary, be just as old as
group psychology, for from the first there were two kinds of psychologies,
that of the individual members of the group and that of the father, chief, or
leader. The members of the group were subject to ties just as we see them
to-day, but the father of the primal horde was free. His intellectual acts were
strong and independent even in isolation, and his will needed no
reinforcement from others. Consistency leads us to assume that his ego had
few libidinal ties; he loved no one but himself, or other people only in so far
as they served his needs. To objects his ego gave away no more than was
barely necessary.
He, at the very beginning of the history of mankind, was the Superman
whom Nietzsche only expected from the future. Even to-day the members
of a group stand in need of the illusion that they are equally and justly loved
by their leader; but the leader himself need love no one else, he may be of a
masterly nature, absolutely narcissistic, but self-confident and independent.
We know that love puts a check upon narcissism, and it would be possible
to show how, by operating in this way, it became a factor of civilisation.
The primal father of the horde was not yet immortal, as he later became
by deification. If he died, he had to be replaced; his place was probably
taken by a youngest son, who had up to then been a member of the group
like any other. There must therefore be a possibility of transforming group
psychology into individual psychology; a condition must be discovered
under which such a transformation is easily accomplished, just as it is
possible for bees in case of necessity to turn a larva into a queen instead of
into a worker. One can imagine only one possibility: the primal father had
prevented his sons from satisfying their directly sexual tendencies; he
forced them into abstinence and consequently into the emotional ties with
him and with one another which could arise out of those of their tendencies
that were inhibited in their sexual aim. He forced them, so to speak, into
group psychology. His sexual jealousy and intolerance became in the last
resort the causes of group psychology.55
Whoever became his successor was also given the possibility of sexual
satisfaction, and was by that means offered a way out of the conditions of
group psychology. The fixation of the libido to woman and the possibility
of satisfaction without any need for delay or accumulation made and end of
the importance of those of his sexual tendencies that were inhibited in their
aim, and allowed his narcissism always to rise to its full height. We shall
return in a postscript to this connection between love and character
formation.
We may further emphasize, as being specially instructive, the relation
that holds between the contrivance by means of which an artificial group is
held together and the constitution of the primal horde. We have seen that
with an army and a church this contrivance is the illusion that the leader
loves all of the individuals equally and justly. But this is simply an idealistic
remodelling of the state of affairs in the primal horde, where all of the sons
knew that they were equally persecuted by the primal father, and feared him
equally. This same recasting upon which all social duties are built up is
already presupposed by the next form of human society, the totemistic clan.
The indestructible strength of the family as a natural group formation rests
upon the fact that this necessary presupposition of the father's equal love
can have a real application in the family.
But we expect even more of this derivation of the group from the primal
horde. It ought also to help us to understand what is still incomprehensible
and mysterious in group formations—all that lies hidden behind the
enigmatic words hypnosis and suggestion. And I think it can succeed in this
too. Let us recall that hypnosis has something positively uncanny about it;
but the characteristic of uncanniness suggests something old and familiar
that has undergone repression.56 Let us consider how hypnosis is induced.
The hypnotist asserts that he is in possession of a mysterious power which
robs the subject of his own will, or, which is the same thing, the subject
believes it of him. This mysterious power (which is even now often
described popularly as animal magnetism) must be the same that is looked
upon by primitive people as the source of taboo, the same that emanates
from kings and chieftains and makes it dangerous to approach them (mana).
The hypnotist, then, is supposed to be in possession of this power; and how
does he manifest it? By telling the subject to look him in the eyes; his most
typical method of hypnotising is by his look. But it is precisely the sight of
the chieftain that is dangerous and unbearable for primitive people, just as
later that of the Godhead is for mortals. Even Moses had to act as an
intermediary between his people and Jehovah, since the people could not
support the sight of God; and when he returned from the presence of God
his face shone—some of the mana had been transferred on to him, just as
happens with the intermediary among primitive people.57
It is true that hypnosis can also be evoked in other ways, for instance by
fixing the eyes upon a bright object or by listening to a monotonous sound.
This is misleading and has given occasion to inadequate physiological
theories. As a matter of fact these procedures merely serve to divert
conscious attention and to hold it riveted. The situation is the same as if the
hypnotist had said to the subject: 'Now concern yourself exclusively with
my person; the rest of the world is quite uninteresting.' It would of course
be technically inexpedient for a hypnotist to make such a speech; it would
tear the subject away from his unconscious attitude and stimulate him to
conscious opposition. The hypnotist avoids directing the subject's conscious
thoughts towards his own intentions, and makes the person upon whom he
is experimenting sink into an activity in which the world is bound to seem
uninteresting to him; but at the same time the subject is in reality
unconsciously concentrating his whole attention upon the hypnotist, and is
getting into an attitude of rapport, of transference on to him. Thus the
indirect methods of hypnotising, like many of the technical procedures used
in making jokes, have the effect of checking certain distributions of mental
energy which would interfere with the course of events in the unconscious,
and they lead eventually to the same result as the direct methods of
influence by means of staring or stroking.58
Ferenczi has made the true discovery that when a hypnotist gives the
command to sleep, which is often done at the beginning of hypnosis, he is
putting himself in the place of the subject's parents. He thinks that two sorts
of hypnosis are to be distinguished: one coaxing and soothing, which he
considers is modelled upon the mother, and another threatening, which is
derived from the father.59 Now the command to sleep in hypnosis means
nothing more nor less than an order to withdraw all interest from the world
and to concentrate it upon the person of the hypnotist. And it is so
understood by the subject; for in this withdrawal of interest from the outer
world lies the psychological characteristic of sleep, and the kinship between
sleep and the state of hypnosis is based upon it.
By the measures that he takes, then, the hypnotist awakens in the
subject a portion of his archaic inheritance which had also made him
compliant towards his parents and which had experienced an individual re-
animation in his relation to his father; what is thus awakened is the idea of a
paramount and dangerous personality, towards whom only a passive-
masochistic attitude is possible, to whom one's will has to be surrendered,
—while to be alone with him, 'to look him in the face', appears a hazardous
enterprise. It is only in some such way as this that we can picture the
relation of the individual member of the primal horde to the primal father.
As we know from other reactions, individuals have preserved a variable
degree of personal aptitude for reviving old situations of this kind. Some
knowledge that in spite of everything hypnosis is only a game, a deceptive
renewal of these old impressions, may however remain behind and take
care that there is a resistance against any too serious consequences of the
suspension of the will in hypnosis.
The uncanny and coercive characteristics of group formations, which
are shown in their suggestion phenomena, may therefore with justice be
traced back to the fact of their origin from the primal horde. The leader of
the group is still the dreaded primal father; the group still wishes to be
governed by unrestricted force; it has an extreme passion for authority; in
Le Bon's phrase, it has a thirst for obedience. The primal father is the group
ideal, which governs the ego in the place of the ego ideal. Hypnosis has a
good claim to being described as a group of two; there remains as a
definition for suggestion—a conviction which is not based upon perception
and reasoning but upon an erotic tie.60
XI.
A Differentiating Grade in the Ego
Table of Contents
If we survey the life of an individual man of to-day, bearing in mind the
mutually complementary accounts of group psychology given by the
authorities, we may lose the courage, in face of the complications that are
revealed, to attempt a comprehensive exposition. Each individual is a
component part of numerous groups, he is bound by ties of identification in
many directions, and he has built up his ego ideal upon the most various
models. Each individual therefore has a share in numerous group minds—
those of his race, of his class, of his creed, of his nationality, etc.—and he
can also raise himself above them to the extent of having a scrap of
independence and originality. Such stable and lasting group formations,
with their uniform and constant effects, are less striking to an observer than
the rapidly formed and transient groups from which Le Bon has made his
brilliant psychological character sketch of the group mind. And it is just in
these noisy ephemeral groups, which are as it were superimposed upon the
others, that we are met by the prodigy of the complete, even though only
temporary, disappearance of exactly what we have recognized as individual
acquirements.
We have interpreted this prodigy as meaning that the individual gives up
his ego ideal and substitutes for it the group ideal as embodied in the leader.
And we must add by way of correction that the prodigy is not equally great
in every case. In many individuals the separation between the ego and the
ego ideal is not very far advanced; the two still coincide readily; the ego has
often preserved its earlier self-complacency. The selection of the leader is
very much facilitated by this circumstance. He need only possess the typical
qualities of the individuals concerned in a particularly clearly marked and
pure form, and need only give an impression of greater force and of more
freedom of libido; and in that case the need for a strong chief will often
meet him half-way and invest him with a predominance to which he would
otherwise perhaps have had no claim. The other members of the group,
whose ego ideal would not, apart from this, have become embodied in his
person without some correction, are then carried away with the rest by
'suggestion', that is to say, by means of identification.
We are aware that what we have been able to contribute towards the
explanation of the libidinal structure of groups leads back to the distinction
between the ego and the ego ideal and to the double kind of tie which this
makes possible—identification, and substitution of the object for the ego
ideal. The assumption of this kind of differentiating grade [Stufe] in the ego
as a first step in an analysis of the ego must gradually establish its
justification in the most various regions of psychology. In my paper 'Zur
Einführung des Narzissmus' I have put together all the pathological material
that could at the moment be used in support of this separation. But it may
be expected that when we penetrate deeper into the psychology of the
psychoses its significance will be discovered to be far greater. Let us reflect
that the ego now appears in the relation of an object to the ego ideal which
has been developed out of it, and that all the interplay between an outer
object and the ego as a whole, with which our study of the neuroses has
made us acquainted, may possibly be repeated upon this new scene of
action inside the ego.
In this place I shall only follow up one of the consequences which seem
possible from this point of view, thus resuming the discussion of a problem
which I was obliged to leave unsolved elsewhere.61 Each of the mental
differentiations that we have become acquainted with represents a fresh
aggravation of the difficulties of mental functioning, increases its
instability, and may become the starting-point for its breakdown, that is, for
the onset of a disease. Thus, by being born we have made the step from an
absolutely self-sufficient narcissism to the perception of a changing outer
world and to the beginnings of the discovery of objects. And with this is
associated the fact that we cannot endure the new state of things for long,
that we periodically revert from it, in our sleep, to our former condition of
absence of stimulation and avoidance of objects. It is true, however, that in
this we are following a hint from the outer world, which, by means of the
periodical change of day and night, temporarily withdraws the greater part
of the stimuli that affect us. The second example, which is pathologically
more important, is not subject to any such qualification. In the course of our
development we have effected a separation of our mental existence into a
coherent ego and into an unconscious and repressed portion which is left
outside it; and we know that the stability of this new acquisition is exposed
to constant shocks. In dreams and in neuroses what is thus excluded knocks
for admission at the gates, guarded though they are by resistances; and in
our waking health we make use of special artifices for allowing what is
repressed to circumvent the resistances and for receiving it temporarily into
our ego to the increase of our pleasure. Wit and humour, and to some extent
the comic in general, may be regarded in this light. Everyone acquainted
with the psychology of the neuroses will think of similar examples of less
importance; but I hasten on to the application I have in view.
It is quite conceivable that the separation of the ego ideal from the ego
cannot be borne for long either, and has to be temporarily undone. In all
renunciations and limitations imposed upon the ego a periodical
infringement of the prohibition is the rule; this indeed is shown by the
institution of festivals, which in origin are nothing more nor less than
excesses provided by law and which owe their cheerful character to the
release which they bring.62 The Saturnalia of the Romans and our modern
carnival agree in this essential feature with the festivals of primitive people,
which usually end in debaucheries of every kind and the transgression of
what are at other times the most sacred commandments. But the ego ideal
comprises the sum of all the limitations in which the ego has to acquiesce,
and for that reason the abrogation of the ideal would necessarily be a
magnificent festival for the ego, which might then once again feel satisfied
with itself.63
There is always a feeling of triumph when something in the ego
coincides with the ego ideal. And the sense of guilt (as well as the sense of
inferiority) can also be understood as an expression of tension between the
ego and the ego ideal.
It is well known that there are people the general colour of whose mood
oscillates periodically from an excessive depression through some kind of
intermediate state to an exalted sense of well-being. These oscillations
appear in very different degrees of amplitude, from what is just noticeable
to those extreme instances which, in the shape of melancholia and mania,
make the most painful or disturbing inroads upon the life of the person
concerned. In typical cases of this cyclical depression outer exciting causes
do not seem to play any decisive part; as regards inner motives, nothing
more (or nothing different) is to be found in these patients than in all others.
It has consequently become the custom to consider these cases as not being
psychogenic. We shall refer later on to those other exactly similar cases of
cyclical depression which can nevertheless easily be traced back to mental
traumata.
Thus the foundation of these spontaneous oscillations of mood is
unknown; we are without insight into the mechanism of the displacement of
a melancholia by a mania. So we are free to suppose that these patients are
people in whom our conjecture might find an actual application—their ego
ideal might be temporarily resolved into their ego after having previously
ruled it with especial strictness.
Let us keep to what is clear: On the basis of our analysis of the ego it
cannot be doubted that in cases of mania the ego and the ego ideal have
fused together, so that the person, in a mood of triumph and self-
satisfaction, disturbed by no self-criticism, can enjoy the abolition of his
inhibitions, his feelings of consideration for others, and his self-reproaches.
It is not so obvious, but nevertheless very probable, that the misery of the
melancholiac is the expression of a sharp conflict between the two faculties
of his ego, a conflict in which the ideal, in an excess of sensitiveness,
relentlessly exhibits its condemnation of the ego in delusions of inferiority
and in self-depreciation. The only question is whether we are to look for the
causes of these altered relations between the ego and the ego ideal in the
periodic rebellions, which we have postulated above, against the new
institution, or whether we are to make other circumstances responsible for
them.
A change into mania is not an indispensable feature of the
symptomatology of melancholic depression. There are simple melancholias,
some in single and some in recurring attacks, which never show this
development. On the other hand there are melancholias in which the
exciting cause clearly plays an aetiological part. They are those which occur
after the loss of a loved object, whether by death or as a result of
circumstances which have necessitated the withdrawal of the libido from
the object. A psychogenic melancholia of this sort can end in mania, and
this cycle can be repeated several times, just as easily as in a case which
appears to be spontaneous. Thus the state of things is somewhat obscure,
especially as only a few forms and cases of melancholia have been
submitted to psycho-analytical investigation.64 So far we only understand
those cases in which the object is given up because it has shown itself
unworthy of love. It is then set up again inside the ego, by means of
identification, and severely condemned by the ego ideal. The reproaches
and attacks directed towards the object come to light in the shape of
melancholic self-reproaches.65
A melancholia of this kind may also end in a change to mania; so that
the possibility of this happening represents a feature which is independent
of the other characteristics in the symptomatology.
Nevertheless I see no difficulty in assigning to the factor of the
periodical rebellion of the ego against the ego ideal a share in both kinds of
melancholia, the psychogenic as well as the spontaneous. In the
spontaneous kind it may be supposed that the ego ideal is inclined to
display a peculiar strictness, which then results automatically in its
temporary suspension. In the psychogenic kind the ego would be incited to
rebellion by ill-treatment on the part of its ideal—an ill-treatment which it
encounters when there has been identification with a rejected object.
XII.
Postscript
Table of Contents
In the course of the enquiry which has just been brought to a provisional
end we came across a number of side-paths which we avoided pursuing in
the first instance but in which there was much that offered us promises of
insight. We propose now to take up a few of the points that have been left
on one side in this way.
A. The distinction between identification of the ego with an object and
replacement of the ego ideal by an object finds an interesting illustration in
the two great artificial groups which we began by studying, the army and
the Christian church.
It is obvious that a soldier takes his superior, that is, really, the leader of
the army, as his ideal, while he identifies himself with his equals, and
derives from this community of their egos the obligations for giving mutual
help and for sharing possessions which comradeship implies. But he
becomes ridiculous if he tries to identify himself with the general. The
soldier in Wallensteins Lager laughs at the sergeant for this very reason:
Wie er räuspert und wie er spuckt,
Das habt ihr ihm glücklich abgeguckt!66
It is otherwise in the Catholic Church. Every Christian loves Christ as
his ideal and feels himself united with all other Christians by the tie of
identification. But the Church requires more of him. He has also to identify
himself with Christ and love all other Christians as Christ loved them. At
both points, therefore, the Church requires that the position of the libido
which is given by a group formation should be supplemented. Identification
has to be added where object-choice has taken place, and object love where
there is identification. This addition evidently goes beyond the constitution
of the group. One can be a good Christian and yet be far from the idea of
putting oneself in Christ's place and of having like him an all-embracing
love for mankind. One need not think oneself capable, weak mortal that one
is, of the Saviour's largeness of soul and strength of love. But this further
development in the distribution of libido in the group is probably the factor
upon which Christianity bases its claim to have reached a higher ethical
level.
B. We have said that it would be possible to specify the point in the
mental development of man at which the advance from group to individual
psychology was also achieved by the individual members of the group.67
For this purpose we must return for a moment to the scientific myth of
the father of the primal horde. He was later on exalted into the creator of the
world, and with justice, for he had produced all the sons who composed the
first group. He was the ideal of each one of them, at once feared and
honoured, a fact which led later to the idea of taboo. These many
individuals eventually banded themselves together, killed him and cut him
in pieces. None of the group of victors could take his place, or, if one of
them did, the battles began afresh, until they understood that they must all
renounce their father's heritage. They then formed the totemistic community
of brothers, all with equal rights and united by the totem prohibitions which
were to preserve and to expiate the memory of the murder. But the
dissatisfaction with what had been achieved still remained, and it became
the source of new developments. The persons who were united in this group
of brothers gradually came towards a revival of the old state of things at a
new level. Man became once more the chief of a family, and broke down
the prerogatives of the gynaecocracy which had become established during
the fatherless period. As a compensation for this he may at that time have
acknowledged the mother deities, whose priests were castrated for the
mother's protection, after the example that had been given by the father of
the primal horde. And yet the new family was only a shadow of the old one;
there were numbers of fathers and each one was limited by the rights of the
others.
It was then, perhaps, that some individual, in the exigency of his
longing, may have been moved to free himself from the group and take over
the father's part. He who did this was the first epic poet; and the advance
was achieved in his imagination. This poet disguised the truth with lies in
accordance with his longing. He invented the heroic myth. The hero was a
man who by himself had slain the father—the father who still appeared in
the myth as a totemistic monster. Just as the father had been the boy's first
ideal, so in the hero who aspires to the father's place the poet now created
the first ego ideal. The transition to the hero was probably afforded by the
youngest son, the mother's favourite, whom she had protected from paternal
jealousy, and who, in the era of the primal horde, had been the father's
successor. In the lying poetic fancies of prehistoric times the woman, who
had been the prize of battle and the allurement to murder, was probably
turned into the seducer and instigator to the crime.
The hero claims to have acted alone in accomplishing the deed, which
certainly only the horde as a whole would have ventured upon. But, as Rank
has observed, fairy tales have preserved clear traces of the facts which were
disavowed. For we often find in them that the hero who has to carry out
some difficult task (usually a youngest son, and not infrequently one who
has represented himself to the father surrogate as being stupid, that is to say,
harmless)—we often find, then, that this hero can carry out his task only by
the help of a crowd of small animals, such as bees or ants. These would be
the brothers in the primal horde, just as in the same way in dream
symbolism insects or vermin signify brothers and sisters (contemptuously,
considered as babies). Moreover every one of the tasks in myths and fairy
tales is easily recognisable as a substitute for the heroic deed.
The myth, then, is the step by which the individual emerges from group
psychology. The first myth was certainly the psychological, the hero myth;
the explanatory nature myth must have followed much later. The poet who
had taken this step and had in this way set himself free from the group in
his imagination, is nevertheless able (as Rank has further observed) to find
his way back to it in reality. For he goes and relates to the group his hero's
deeds which he has invented. At bottom this hero is no one but himself.
Thus he lowers himself to the level of reality, and raises his hearers to the
level of imagination. But his hearers understand the poet, and, in virtue of
their having the same relation of longing towards the primal father, they can
identify themselves with the hero.68
The lie of the heroic myth culminates in the deification of the hero.
Perhaps the deified hero may have been earlier than the Father God and
may have been a precursor to the return of the primal father as a deity. The
series of gods, then, would run chronologically: Mother Goddess—Hero—
Father God. But it is only with the elevation of the never forgotten primal
father that the deity acquires the features that we still recognise in him to-
day.69
C. A great deal has been said in this paper about directly sexual instincts
and those that are inhibited in their aims, and it may be hoped that this
distinction will not meet with too much resistance. But a detailed discussion
of the question will not be out of place, even if it only repeats what has to a
great extent already been said before.
The development of the libido in children has made us acquainted with
the first but also the best example of sexual instincts which are inhibited in
their aims. All the feelings which a child has towards its parents and those
who look after it pass by an easy transition into the wishes which give
expression to the child's sexual tendencies. The child claims from these
objects of its love all the signs of affection which it knows of; it wants to
kiss them, touch them, and look at them; it is curious to see their genitals,
and to be with them when they perform their intimate excremental
functions; it promises to marry its mother or nurse—whatever it may
understand by that; it proposes to itself to bear its father a child, etc. Direct
observation, as well as the subsequent analytic investigation of the residue
of childhood, leave no doubt as to the complete fusion of tender and jealous
feelings and of sexual intentions, and show us in what a fundamental way
the child makes the person it loves into the object of all its incompletely
centred sexual tendencies.70
This first configuration of the child's love, which in typical cases is co-
ordinated with the Oedipus complex, succumbs, as we know, from the
beginning of the period of latency onwards to a wave of repression. Such of
it as is left over shows itself as a purely tender emotional tie, which relates
to the same people, but is no longer to be described as 'sexual'. Psycho-
analysis, which illuminates the depths of mental life, has no difficulty in
showing that the sexual ties of the earliest years of childhood also persist,
though repressed and unconscious. It gives us courage to assert that
wherever we come across a tender feeling it is the successor to a completely
'sensual' object tie with the person in question or rather with that person's
prototype (or imago). It cannot indeed disclose to us without a special
investigation whether in a given case this former complete sexual current
still exists under repression or whether it has already been exhausted. To put
it still more precisely: it is quite certain that it is still there as a form and
possibility, and can always be charged with cathectic energy and put into
activity again by means of regression; the only question is (and it cannot
always be answered) what degree of cathexis and operative force it still has
at the present moment. Equal care must be taken in this connection to avoid
two sources of error—the Scylla of under-estimating the importance of the
repressed unconscious, and the Charybdis of judging the normal entirely by
the standards of the pathological.
A psychology which will not or cannot penetrate the depths of what is
repressed regards tender emotional ties as being invariably the expression
of tendencies which have no sexual aim, even though they are derived from
tendencies which have such an aim.71
We are justified in saying that they have been diverted from these sexual
aims, even though there is some difficulty in giving a representation of such
a diversion of aim which will conform to the requirements of
metapsychology. Moreover, those instincts which are inhibited in their aims
always preserve some few of their original sexual aims; even an
affectionate devotee, even a friend or an admirer, desires the physical
proximity and the sight of the person who is now loved only in the 'Pauline'
sense. If we choose, we may recognise in this diversion of aim a beginning
of the sublimation of the sexual instincts, or on the other hand we may fix
the limits of sublimation at some more distant point. Those sexual instincts
which are inhibited in their aims have a great functional advantage over
those which are uninhibited. Since they are not capable of really complete
satisfaction, they are especially adapted to create permanent ties; while
those instincts which are directly sexual incur a loss of energy each time
they are satisfied, and must wait to be renewed by a fresh accumulation of
sexual libido, so that meanwhile the object may have been changed. The
inhibited instincts are capable of any degree of admixture with the
uninhibited; they can be transformed back into them, just as they arose out
of them. It is well known how easily erotic wishes develop out of emotional
relations of a friendly character, based upon appreciation and admiration,
(compare Molière's 'Embrassez-moi pour l'amour du grec'), between a
master and a pupil, between a performer and a delighted listener, and
especially in the case of women. In fact the growth of emotional ties of this
kind, with their purposeless beginnings, provides a much frequented
pathway to sexual object-choice. Pfister, in his Frömmigkeit des Grafen von
Zinzendorf,72 has given an extremely clear and certainly not an isolated
example of how easily even an intense religious tie can revert to ardent
sexual excitement. On the other hand it is also very usual for directly sexual
tendencies, short-lived in themselves, to be transformed into a lasting and
purely tender tie; and the consolidation of a passionate love marriage rests
to a large extent upon this process.
We shall naturally not be surprised to hear that the sexual tendencies
that are inhibited in their aims arise out of the directly sexual ones when
inner or outer obstacles make the sexual aims unattainable. The repression
during the period of latency is an inner obstacle of this kind—or rather one
which has become inner. We have assumed that the father of the primal
horde owing to his sexual intolerance compelled all his sons to be abstinent,
and thus forced them into ties that were inhibited in their aims, while he
reserved for himself freedom of sexual enjoyment and in this way remained
without ties. All the ties upon which a group depends are of the character of
instincts that are inhibited in their aims. But here we have approached the
discussion of a new subject, which deals with the relation between directly
sexual instincts and the formation of groups.
D. The last two remarks will have prepared us for finding that directly
sexual tendencies are unfavourable to the formation of groups. In the
history of the development of the family there have also, it is true, been
group relations of sexual love (group marriages); but the more important
sexual love became for the ego, and the more it developed the
characteristics of being in love, the more urgently it required to be limited
to two people—una cum uno—as is prescribed by the nature of the genital
aim. Polygamous inclinations had to be content to find satisfaction in a
succession of changing objects.
Two people coming together for the purpose of sexual satisfaction, in so
far as they seek for solitude, are making a demonstration against the herd
instinct, the group feeling. The more they are in love, the more completely
they suffice for each other. The rejection of the group's influence is
manifested in the shape of a sense of shame. The extremely violent feelings
of jealousy are summoned up in order to protect the sexual object-choice
from being encroached upon by a group tie. It is only when the tender, that
is, the personal, factor of a love relation gives place entirely to the sensual
one, that it is possible for two people to have sexual intercourse in the
presence of others or for there to be simultaneous sexual acts in a group as
occurs at an orgy. But at that point a regression has taken place to an early
stage in sexual relations, at which being in love as yet played no part, and
all sexual objects were judged to be of equal value, somewhat in the sense
of Bernard Shaw's malicious aphorism to the effect that being in love means
greatly exaggerating the difference between one woman and another.
There are abundant indications that being in love only made its
appearance late on in the sexual relations between men and women; so that
the opposition between sexual love and group ties is also a late
development. Now it may seem as though this assumption were
incompatible with our myth of the primal family. For it was after all by their
love for their mothers and sisters that the troop of brothers was, as we have
supposed, driven to parricide; and it is difficult to imagine this love as being
anything but unbroken and primitive—that is, as an intimate union of the
tender and the sensual. But further consideration resolves this objection into
a confirmation. One of the reactions to the parricide was after all the
institution of totemistic exogamy; the prohibition of any sexual relation
with those women of the family who had been tenderly loved since
childhood. In this way a wedge was driven in between a man's tender and
sensual feelings, one still firmly fixed in his erotic life to-day.73 As a result
of this exogamy the sensual needs of men had to be satisfied with strange
and unloved women.
In the great artificial groups, the church and the army, there is no room
for woman as a sexual object. The love relation between men and women
remains outside these organisations. Even where groups are formed which
are composed of both men and women the distinction between the sexes
plays no part. There is scarcely any sense in asking whether the libido
which keeps groups together is of a homosexual or of a heterosexual nature,
for it is not differentiated according to the sexes, and particularly shows a
complete disregard for the aims of the genital organisation of the libido.
Even in a person who has in other respects become absorbed in a group
the directly sexual tendencies preserve a little of his individual activity. If
they become too strong they disintegrate every group formation. The
Catholic Church had the best of motives for recommending its followers to
remain unmarried and for imposing celibacy upon its priests; but falling in
love has often driven even priests to leave the church. In the same way love
for women breaks through the group ties of race, of national separation, and
of the social class system, and it thus produces important effects as a factor
in civilization. It seems certain that homosexual love is far more compatible
with group ties, even when it takes the shape of uninhibited sexual
tendencies—a remarkable fact, the explanation of which might carry us far.
The psycho-analytic investigation of the psycho-neuroses has taught us
that their symptoms are to be traced back to directly sexual tendencies
which are repressed but still remain active. We can complete this formula
by adding to it: or, to tendencies inhibited in their aims, whose inhibition
has not been entirely successful or has made room for a return to the
repressed sexual aim. It is in accordance with this that a neurosis should
make its victim asocial and should remove him from the usual group
formations. It may be said that a neurosis has the same disintegrating effect
upon a group as being in love. On the other hand it appears that where a
powerful impetus has been given to group formation, neuroses may
diminish and at all events temporarily disappear. Justifiable attempts have
also been made to turn this antagonism between neuroses and group
formation to therapeutic account. Even those who do not regret the
disappearance of religious illusions from the civilized world of to-day will
admit that so long as they were in force they offered those who were bound
by them the most powerful protection against the danger of neurosis. Nor is
it hard to discern in all the ties with mystico-religious or philosophico-
religious sects and communities the manifestation of distorted cures of all
kinds of neuroses. All of this is bound up with the contrast between directly
sexual tendencies and those which are inhibited in their aims.
If he is left to himself, a neurotic is obliged to replace by his own
symptom formations the great group formations from which he is excluded.
He creates his own world of imagination for himself, his religion, his own
system of delusions, and thus recapitulates the institutions of humanity in a
distorted way which is clear evidence of the dominating part played by the
directly sexual tendencies.74
E. In conclusion, we will add a comparative estimate, from the
standpoint of the libido theory, of the states with which we have been
concerned, of being in love, of hypnosis, of group formation, and of the
neurosis.
Being in love is based upon the simultaneous presence of directly sexual
tendencies and of sexual tendencies that are inhibited in their aims, so that
the object draws a part of the narcissistic ego-libido to itself. It is a
condition in which there is only room for the ego and the object.
Hypnosis resembles being in love in being limited to these two persons,
but it is based entirely upon sexual tendencies that are inhibited in their
aims and substitutes the object for the ego ideal.
The group multiplies this process; it agrees with hypnosis in the nature
of the instincts which hold it together, and in the replacement of the ego
ideal by the object; but to this it adds identification with other individuals,
which was perhaps originally made possible by their having the same
relation to the object.
Both states, hypnosis and group formation, are an inherited deposit from
the phylogenesis of the human libido—hypnosis in the form of a
predisposition, and the group, besides this, as a direct survival. The
replacement of the directly sexual tendencies by those that are inhibited in
their aims promotes in both states a separation between the ego and the ego
ideal, a separation with which a beginning has already been made in the
state of being in love.
The neurosis stands outside this series. It also is based upon a
peculiarity in the development of the human libido—the twice repeated
start made by the directly sexual function, with an intervening period of
latency. 75 To this extent it resembles hypnosis and group formation in
having the character of a regression, which is absent from being in love. It
makes its appearance wherever the advance from directly sexual instincts to
those that are inhibited in their aims has not been completely successful;
and it represents a conflict between those instincts which have been
received into the ego after having passed through this development and
those portions of the same instincts which, like other instinctive desires that
have been completely repressed, strive, from the repressed unconscious, to
attain direct satisfaction. The neurosis is extraordinarily rich in content, for
it embraces all possible relations between the ego and the object—both
those in which the object is retained and others in which it is abandoned or
erected inside the ego itself—and also the conflicting relations between the
ego and its ego ideal.
Footnotes:
1. 'Group' is used throughout this translation as equivalent to the rather more comprehensive
German 'Masse'. The author uses this latter word to render both McDougall's 'group', and also
Le Bon's 'foule', which would more naturally be translated 'crowd' in English. For the sake of
uniformity, however, 'group' has been preferred in this case as well, and has been substituted for
'crowd' even in the extracts from the English translation of Le Bon.—Translator..
2. The Crowd: a Study of the Popular Mind. Fisher Unwin 12th. Impression, 1920.
3. See footnote page 1.
4. References are to the English translation.—Translator.
5. The German translation of Le Bon, quoted by the author, reads 'bewusster'; the English
translation has 'unconscious'; and the original French text 'inconscients'.—Translator.
6. The English translation reads 'which we ourselves ignore'—a misunderstanding of the French
word 'ignorées'.—Translator.
7. There is some difference between Le Bon's view and ours owing to his concept of the
unconscious not quite coinciding with the one adopted by psycho-analysis. Le Bon's
unconscious more especially contains the most deeply buried features of the racial mind, which
as a matter of fact lies outside the scope of psycho-analysis. We do not fail to recognize, indeed,
that the ego's nucleus, which comprises the 'archaic inheritance' of the human mind, is
unconscious; but in addition to this we distinguish the 'unconscious repressed', which arose from
a portion of that inheritance. This concept of the repressed is not to be found in Le Bon.
8. Compare Schiller's couplet:
Jeder, sieht man ihn einzeln, ist leidlich klug und verständig;
Sind sie in corpore, gleich wird euch ein Dummkopf daraus.
[Everyone, seen by himself, is passably shrewd and
discerning;
When they're in corpore, then straightway you'll find he's an
ass.]
9. 'Unconscious' is used here correctly by Le Bon in the descriptive sense, where it does not only
mean the 'repressed'.
10. Compare Totem und Tabu, III., 'Animismus, Magie, und Allmacht der Gedanken.' [Totem and
Taboo. New York, Moffat, 1918. London, Kegan Paul, 1919.]
11. See footnote p. 69.
12. In the interpretation of dreams, to which, indeed, we owe our best knowledge of unconscious
mental life, we follow a technical rule of disregarding doubt and uncertainty in the narrative of
the dream, and of treating every element of the manifest dream as being quite certain. We
attribute doubt and uncertainty to the influence of the censorship to which the dream-work is
subjected, and we assume that the primary dream-thoughts are not acquainted with doubt and
uncertainty as critical processes. They may naturally be present, like everything else, as part of
the content of the day's residue which leads to the dream. (See Die Traumdeutung, 6. Auflage,
1921, S. 386. [The Interpretation of Dreams. Allen and Unwin, 3rd. Edition, 1913, p. 409.])
13. The same extreme and unmeasured intensification of every emotion is also a feature of the
affective life of children, and it is present as well in dream life. Thanks to the isolation of the
single emotions in the unconscious, a slight annoyance during the day will express itself in a
dream as a wish for the offending person's death, or a breath of temptation may give the impetus
to the portrayal in the dream of a criminal action. Hanns Sachs has made an appropriate remark
on this point: 'If we try to discover in consciousness all that the dream has made known to us of
its bearing upon the present (upon reality), we need not be surprised that what we saw as a
monster under the microscope of analysis now reappears as an infusorium.' (Die Traumdeutung,
S. 457. [Translation p. 493.])
14. In young children, for instance, ambivalent emotional attitudes towards those who are nearest to
them exist side by side for a long time, without either of them interfering with the expression of
the other and contrary one. If eventually a conflict breaks out between the two, it often settled
by the child making a change of object and displacing one of the ambivalent emotions on to a
substitute. The history of the development of a neurosis in an adult will also show that a
suppressed emotion may frequently persist for a long time in unconscious or even in conscious
phantasies, the content of which naturally runs directly counter to some predominant tendency,
and yet that this antagonism does not result in any proceedings on the part of the ego against
what it has repudiated. The phantasy is tolerated for quite a long time, until suddenly one day,
usually as a result of an increase in the affective cathexis [see footnote page 48] of the phantasy,
a conflict breaks out between it and the ego with all the usual consequences. In the process of a
child's development into a mature adult there is a more and more extensive integration of its
personality, a co-ordination of the separate instinctive feelings and desires which have grown up
in him independently of one another. The analogous process in the domain of sexual life has
long been known to us as the co-ordination of all the sexual instincts into a definitive genital
organisation. (Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, 1905. [Three Contributions to the Sexual
Theory. Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph Series, No. 7, 1910.]) Moreover, that the
unification of the ego is liable to the same interferences as that of the libido is shown by
numerous familiar instances, such as that of men of science who have preserved their faith in the
Bible, and the like.
15. See Totem and Tabu.
16. See footnote p. 48.
17. B. Kraškovič jun.: Die Psychologie der Kollektivitäten. Translated [into German] from the
Croatian by Siegmund von Posavec. Vukovar, 1915. See the body of the work as well as the
bibliography.
18. See Walter Moede: 'Die Massen-und Sozialpsychologie im kritischen Überblick.' Meumann and
Scheibner's Zeitschrift für pädagogische Psychologie und experimentelle Pädagogik. 1915,
XVI.
19. Cambridge University Press, 1920.
20. Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War. Fisher Unwin, 1916.
21. Brugeilles: 'L'essence du phénomèna social: la suggestion.' Revue philosophique, 1913, XXV.
22. Konrad Richter: 'Der deutsche S. Christoph.' Berlin, 1896, Acta Germanica, V, I.
23. Literally:"Christopher bore Christ; Christ bore the whole world; Say, where did Christopher then
put his foot?'
24. Thus, McDougall: 'A Note on Suggestion.' Journal of Neurology and Psychopathology, 1920,
Vol. I, No. I.
25. Nachmansohn: 'Freuds Libidotheorie verglichen mit der Eroslehre Platos'. Internationale
Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1915, Bd. III; Pfister: 'Plato als Vorläufer der Psychoanalyse',
ibid., 1921, Bd. VII. ['Plato: a Fore-Runner of Psycho-Analysis'. International Journal of
Psycho-Analysis, 1922, Vol. III.]
26. 'Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.'
27. An idiom meaning 'for their sake'. Literally: 'for love of them'.—Translator.
28. An objection will justly be raised against this conception of the libidinal [see next foot-note]
structure of an army on the ground that no place has been found in it for such ideas as those of
one's country, of national glory, etc., which are of such importance in holding an army together.
The answer is that that is a different instance of a group tie, and no longer such a simple one; for
the examples of great generals, like Caesar, Wallenstein, or Napoleon, show that such ideas are
not indispensable to the existence of an army. We shall presently touch upon the possibility of a
leading idea being substituted for a leader and upon the relations between the two. The neglect
of this libidinal factor in an army, even when it is not the only factor operative, seems to be not
merely a theoretical omission but also a practical danger. Prussian militarism, which was just as
unpsychological as German science, may have had to suffer the consequences of this in the great
war. We know that the war neuroses which ravaged the German army have been recognized as
being a protest of the individual against the part he was expected to play in the army; and
according to the communication of E. Simmel (Kriegsneurosen and 'Psychisches Trauma'.
Munich, 1918), the hard treatment of the men by their superiors may be considered as foremost
among the motive forces of the disease. If the importance of the libido's claims on this score had
been better appreciated, the fantastic promises of the American President's fourteen points
would probably not have been believed so easily, and the splendid instrument would not have
broken in the hands of the German leaders.
29. Here and elsewhere the German 'libidinös' is used simply as an adjectival derivative from the
technical term 'Libido'; 'libidinal' is accordingly introduced in the translation in order to avoid
the highly-coloured connotation of the English 'libidinous'.—Translator.
30. 'Cathexis', from the Greek 'κατἑχω', 'I occupy'. The German word 'Besetzung' has become of
fundamental importance in the exposition of psycho-analytical theory. Any attempt at a short
definition or description is likely to be misleading, but speaking very loosely, we may say that
'cathexis' is used on the analogy of an electric charge, and that it means the concentration or
accumulation of mental energy in some particular channel. Thus, when we speak of the
existence in someone of a libidinal cathexis of an object, or, more shortly, of an object-cathexis,
we mean that the libidinal energy is directed towards, or rather infused into, the idea
(Vorstellung) of some object in the outer world. Readers who desire to obtain a more precise
knowledge of the term are referred to the discussions in 'Zur Einführung des Narzissmus' and
the essays on metapsychology in Kleine Schriften zur Neurosenlehre, Vierte Folge.—Translator.
31. See Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse. XXV, 3. Auflage, 1920. [Introductory
Lectures on Psycho-Analysis. Lecture XXV. George Allen and Unwin, 1922.]
32. Compare Bela v. Felszeghy's interesting though somewhat fantastic paper 'Panik und
Pankomplex'. Imago, 1920, Bd. VI.
33. Compare the explanation of similar phenomena after the abolition of the paternal authority of
the sovereign given in P. Federn's Die vaterlose Gesellschaft. Vienna, Anzengruber-Verlag,
1919.
34. 'A company of porcupines crowded themselves very close together one cold winter's day so as to
profit by one another's warmth and so save themselves from being frozen to death. But soon
they felt one another's quills, which induced them to separate again. And now, when the need for
warmth brought them nearer together again, the second evil arose once more. So that they were
driven backwards and forwards from one trouble to the other, until they had discovered a mean
distance at which they could most tolerably exist.' (Parerga und Paralipomena, II. Teil, XXXI.,
'Gleichnisse und Parabeln'.)
35. Perhaps with the solitary exception of the relation of a mother to her son, which is based upon
narcissism, is not disturbed by subsequent rivalry, and is reinforced by a rudimentary attempt at
sexual object-choice.
36. In a recently published study, Jenseits des Lustprinzips (1920) [Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
International Psycho-Analytical Library, No. 4], I have attempted to connect the polarity of love
and hatred with a hypothetical opposition between instincts of life and death, and to establish the
sexual instincts as the purest examples of the former, the instincts of life.
37. See 'Zur Einführung des Narzissmus', 1914. Kleine Schriften zur Neurosenlehre, Vierte Folge,
1918.
38. Literally, 'leaning-up-against type'; from the Greek 'ἁνακλἱνω' 'I lean up against'. In the first
phase of their development the sexual instincts have no independent means of finding
satisfaction; they do so by propping themselves upon or 'leaning up against' the self-preservative
instincts. The individual's first choice of a sexual object is said to be of the 'anaclitic type' when
it follows this path; that is, when he choses as his first sexual object the same person who has
satisfied his early non-sexual needs. For a full discussion of the anaclitic and narcissistic types
of object-choice compare 'Zur Einführung des Narzissmus.—Translator.
39. See Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, and Abraham's 'Untersuchungen über die früheste
prägenitale Entwicklungsstufe der Libido', Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1916,
Bd, IV; also included in his Klinische Beiträge zur Psychoanalyse (Internationale
psychoanalytische Bibliothek. Nr. 10, 1921).
40. Kleine Schriften zur Neurosenlehre. Zweite Folge.
41. Marcuszewicz: 'Beitrag zum autistischen Denken bei Kindern.' Internationale Zeitschrift für
Psychoanalyse, 1920, Bd. VI.
42. 'Trauer und Melancholie.' Kleine Schriften zur Neurosenlehre, Vierte Folge, 1918.
43. 'Instanz'—like 'instance' in the phrase 'court of first instance'—was originally a legal term. It is
now used in the sense of one of a hierarchy of authorities or functions.—Translator.
44. 'Zur Einführung des Narzissmus', 'Trauer und Melancholie.'
45. 'Zur Einführung des Narzissmus.'
46. We are very well aware that we have not exhausted the nature of identification with these
samples taken from pathology, and that we have consequently left part of the riddle of group
formations untouched. A far more fundamental and comprehensive psychological analysis
would have to intervene at this point. A path leads from identification by way of imitation to
empathy, that is, to the comprehension of the mechanism by means of which we are enabled to
take up any attitude at all towards another mental life. Moreover there is still much to be
explained in the manifestations of existing identifications. These result among other things in a
person limiting his aggressiveness towards those with whom he has identified himself, and in
his sparing them and giving them help. The study of such identifications, like those, for
instance, which lie at the root of clan feeling, led Robertson Smith to the surprising result that
they rest upon the recognition of a common substance (Kinship and Marriage, 1885), and may
even therefore be brought about by a meal eaten in common. This feature makes it possible to
connect this kind of identification with the early history of the human family which I
constructed in Totem und Tabu.
47. Cf. Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, l.c.
48. 'Über die allgemeinste Erniedrigung des Liebeslebens.' Kleine Schriften zur Neurosenlehre,
Vierte Folge, 1918.
49. Cf. 'Metapsychologische Ergänzung zur Traumlehre.' Kleine Schriften zur Neurosenlehre, Vierte
Folge, 1918.
50. W. Trotter: Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War. Fisher Unwin, 1916.
51. See my essay Jenseits des Lustprinzips.
52. See the remarks upon Dread in Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse. XXV.
53. Totem und Tabu.
54. What we have just described in our general characterisation of mankind must apply especially to
the primal horde. The will of the individual was too weak; he did not venture upon action. No
impulses whatever came into play except collective ones; there was only a common will, there
were no single ones. An idea did not dare to turn itself into a volition unless it felt itself
reinforced by a perception of its general diffusion. This weakness of the idea is to be explained
by the strength of the emotional tie which is shared by all the members of the horde; but the
similarity in the circumstances of their life and the absence of any private property assist in
determining the uniformity of their individual mental acts. As we may observe with children and
soldiers, common activity is not excluded even in the excremental functions. The one great
exception is provided by the sexual act, in which a third person is at the best superfluous and in
the extreme case is condemned to a state of painful expectancy. As to the reaction of the sexual
need (for genital gratification) towards gregariousness, see below.
55. It may perhaps also be assumed that the sons, when they were driven out and separated from
their father, advanced from identification with one another to homosexual object love, and in
this way won freedom to kill their father.
56. 'Das Unheimliche.' Imago, 1919, Bd. V.
57. See Totem und Tabu and the sources there quoted.
58. This situation, in which the subject's attitude is unconsciously directed towards the hypnotist,
while he is consciously occupied with the monotonous and uninteresting perceptions, finds a
parallel among the events of psycho-analytic treatment, which deserves to be mentioned here. At
least once in the course of every analysis a moment comes when the patient obstinately
maintains that just now positively nothing whatever occurs to his mind. His free associations
come to a stop and the usual incentives for putting them in motion fail in their effect. As a result
of pressure the patient is at last induced to admit that he is thinking of the view from the
consulting-room window, of the wall-paper that he sees before him, or of the gas-lamp hanging
from the ceiling. Then one knows at once that he has gone off into the transference and that he is
engaged upon what are still unconscious thoughts relating to the physician; and one sees the
stoppage in the patient's associations disappear, as soon as he has been given this explanation.
59. Ferenczi: 'Introjektion und Übertragung.' Jahrbuch der Psychoanalyse, 1909, Bd. I
[Contributions to Psycho-Analysis. Boston, Badger, 1916, Chapter II.]
60. It seems to me worth emphasizing the fact that the discussions in this section have induced us to
give up Bernheim's conception of hypnosis and go back to the naïf earlier one. According to
Bernheim all hypnotic phenomena are to be traced to the factor of suggestion, which is not itself
capable of further explanation. We have come to the conclusion that suggestion is a partial
manifestation of the state of hypnosis, and that hypnosis is solidly founded upon a
predisposition which has survived in the unconscious from the early history of the human
family.
61. 'Trauer und Melancholie.'
62. Totem und Tabu.
63. Trotter traces repression back to the herd instinct. It is a translation of this into another form of
expression rather than a contradiction when I say in my 'Einführung des Narzissmus' that on the
part of the ego the construction of an ideal is the condition of repression.
64. Cf. Abraham: 'Ansätze zur psychoanalytischen Erforschung und Behandlung des manisch-
depressiven Irreseins', 1912, in Klinische Beiträge zur Psychoanalyse, 1921.
65. To speak more accurately, they conceal themselves behind the reproaches directed towards the
person's own ego, and lend them the fixity, tenacity, and imperativeness which characterize the
self-reproaches of a melancholiac.
66. Literally: 'How he clears his throat and how he spits, that you have cleverly copied from him.'
67. What follows at this point was written under the influence of an exchange of ideas with Otto
Rank.
68. Cf. Hanns Sachs: 'Gemeinsame Tagträume', a summary made by the lecturer himself of a paper
read at the Sixth Psycho-analytical Congress, held at the Hague in 1920. Internationale
Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1920, Bd. VI. ['Day-Dreams in Common'. International Journal
of Psycho-Analysis, 1920, Vol. I.]
69. In this brief exposition I have made no attempt to bring forward any of the material existing in
legends, myths, fairy tales, the history of manners, etc., in support of the construction.
70. Cf. Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie.
71. Hostile feelings, which are a little more complicated in their construction, offer no exception to
this rule.
72. Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde. Heft 8. Vienna, Deuticke, 1910.
73. See 'Über die allgemeinste Erniedrigung des Liebeslebens.'
74. See Totem und Tabu, towards the end of Part II, 'Das Tabu und die Ambivalenz'.
75. See Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, 4. Auflage, 1920, S. 96.
THE MISSISSIPPI SCHEME: GARDENS OF THE HOTEL DE SOISSONS, 1720.
Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the
Madness of Crowds
(Charles Mackay)
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Preface
Volume 1
The Mississippi Scheme
The South-Sea Bubble
The Tulipomania
The Alchymists
Modern Prophecies
Fortune-Telling
The Magnetisers
Influence of Politics and Religion on the Hair and Beard
Volume 2
The Crusades
The Witch Mania
The Slow Poisoners
Haunted Houses
Popular Follies of Great Cities
Popular Admiration of Great Thieves
Duels and Ordeals
Relics
Preface
Table of Contents
In reading the history of nations, we find that, like individuals, they have
their whims and their peculiarities; their seasons of excitement and
recklessness, when they care not what they do. We find that whole
communities suddenly fix their minds upon one object, and go mad in its
pursuit; that millions of people become simultaneously impressed with one
delusion, and run after it, till their attention is caught by some new folly
more captivating than the first. We see one nation suddenly seized, from its
highest to its lowest members, with a fierce desire of military glory; another
as suddenly becoming crazed upon a religious scruple; and neither of them
recovering its senses until it has shed rivers of blood and sowed a harvest of
groans and tears, to be reaped by its posterity. At an early age in the annals
of Europe its population lost their wits about the sepulchre of Jesus, and
crowded in frenzied multitudes to the Holy Land; another age went mad for
fear of the devil, and offered up hundreds of thousands of victims to the
delusion of witchcraft. At another time, the many became crazed on the
subject of the philosopher’s stone, and committed follies till then unheard of
in the pursuit. It was once thought a venial offence, in very many countries
of Europe, to destroy an enemy by slow poison. Persons who would have
revolted at the idea of stabbing a man to the heart, drugged his pottage
without scruple. Ladies of gentle birth and manners caught the contagion of
murder, until poisoning, under their auspices, became quite fashionable.
Some delusions, though notorious to all the world, have subsisted for ages,
flourishing as widely among civilised and polished nations as among the
early barbarians with whom they originated,—that of duelling, for instance,
and the belief in omens and divination of the future, which seem to defy the
progress of knowledge to eradicate them entirely from the popular mind.
Money, again, has often been a cause of the delusion of multitudes. Sober
nations have all at once become desperate gamblers, and risked almost their
existence upon the turn of a piece of paper. To trace the history of the most
prominent of these delusions is the object of the present pages. Men, it has
been well said, think in herds; it will be seen that they go mad in herds,
while they only recover their senses slowly, and one by one.
Some of the subjects introduced may be familiar to the reader; but the
Author hopes that sufficient novelty of detail will be found even in these, to
render them acceptable, while they could not be wholly omitted in justice to
the subject of which it was proposed to treat. The memoirs of the South-Sea
madness and the Mississippi delusion are more complete and copious than
are to be found elsewhere; and the same may be said of the history of the
Witch Mania, which contains an account of its terrific progress in Germany,
a part of the subject which has been left comparatively untouched by Sir
Walter Scott in his Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, the most
important that have yet appeared on this fearful but most interesting subject.
Popular delusions began so early, spread so widely, and have lasted so
long, that instead of two or three volumes, fifty would scarcely suffice to
detail their history. The present may be considered more of a miscellany of
delusions than a history—a chapter only in the great and awful book of
human folly which yet remains to be written, and which Porson once
jestingly said he would write in five hundred volumes! Interspersed are
sketches of some lighter matters,—amusing instances of the imitativeness
and wrongheadedness of the people, rather than examples of folly and
delusion.
Religious matters have been purposely excluded as incompatible with
the limits prescribed to the present work; a mere list of them would alone be
sufficient to occupy a volume.
Volume 1
Table of Contents
THE BUBBLERS’ ARMS—PROSPERITY.
N’en déplaise à ces fous nommés sages de Grèce,
En ce monde il n’est point de parfaite sagesse;
Tous les hommes sont fous, et malgré tous leurs soîns
Ne diffèrent entre eux que du plus ou du moins.
BOILEAU.
JOHN LAW.
The Mississippi Scheme
Table of Contents
Some in clandestine companies combine;
Erect new stocks to trade beyond the line;
With air and empty names beguile the town,
And raise new credits first, then cry ’em down;
Divide the empty nothing into shares,
And set the crowd together by the ears.—Defoe.
The personal character and career of one man are so intimately connected
with the great scheme of the years 1719 and 1720, that a history of the
Mississippi madness can have no fitter introduction than a sketch of the life
of its great author John Law. Historians are divided in opinion as to whether
they should designate him a knave or a madman. Both epithets were
unsparingly applied to him in his lifetime, and while the unhappy
consequences of his projects were still deeply felt. Posterity, however, has
found reason to doubt the justice of the accusation, and to confess that John
Law was neither knave nor madman, but one more deceived than deceiving,
more sinned against than sinning. He was thoroughly acquainted with the
philosophy and true principles of credit. He understood the monetary
question better than any man of his day; and if his system fell with a crash
so tremendous, it was not so much his fault as that of the people amongst
whom he had erected it. He did not calculate upon the avaricious frenzy of a
whole nation; he did not see that confidence, like mistrust, could be
increased almost ad infinitum, and that hope was as extravagant as fear.
How was he to foretell that the French people, like the man in the fable,
would kill, in their frantic eagerness, the fine goose he had brought to lay
them so many golden eggs? His fate was like that which may be supposed
to have overtaken the first adventurous boatman who rowed from Erie to
Ontario. Broad and smooth was the river on which he embarked; rapid and
pleasant was his progress; and who was to stay him in his career? Alas for
him! the cataract was nigh. He saw, when it was too late, that the tide which
wafted him so joyously along was a tide of destruction; and when he
endeavoured to retrace his way, he found that the current was too strong for
his weak efforts to stem, and that he drew nearer every instant to the
tremendous falls. Down he went over the sharp rocks, and the waters with
him. He was dashed to pieces with his bark, but the waters, maddened and
turned to foam by the rough descent, only boiled and bubbled for a time,
and then flowed on again as smoothly as ever. Just so it was with Law and
the French people. He was the boatman, and they were the waters.
John Law was born at Edinburgh in the year 1671. His father was the
younger son of an ancient family in Fife, and carried on the business of a
goldsmith and banker. He amassed considerable wealth in his trade,
sufficient to enable him to gratify the wish, so common among his
countrymen, of adding a territorial designation to his name. He purchased
with this view the estates of Lauriston and Randleston, on the Frith of
Forth, on the borders of West and Mid Lothian, and was thenceforth known
as Law of Lauriston. The subject of our memoir, being the eldest son, was
received into his father’s counting-house at the age of fourteen, and for
three years laboured hard to acquire an insight into the principles of
banking as then carried on in Scotland. He had always manifested great
love for the study of numbers, and his proficiency in the mathematics was
considered extraordinary in one of his tender years. At the age of seventeen
he was tall, strong, and well made; and his face, although deeply scarred
with the small-pox, was agreeable in its expression, and full of intelligence.
At this time he began to neglect his business, and becoming vain of his
person, indulged in considerable extravagance of attire. He was a great
favourite with the ladies, by whom he was called Beau Law; while the other
sex, despising his foppery, nicknamed him Jessamy John. At the death of
his father, which happened in 1688, he withdrew entirely from the desk,
which had become so irksome, and being possessed of the revenues of the
paternal estate of Lauriston, he proceeded to London, to see the world.
He was now very young, very vain, good-looking, tolerably rich, and
quite uncontrolled. It is no wonder that, on his arrival in the capital, he
should launch out into extravagance. He soon became a regular frequenter
of the gaming-houses, and by pursuing a certain plan, based upon some
abstruse calculation of chances, he contrived to gain considerable sums. All
the gamblers envied him his luck, and many made it a point to watch his
play, and stake their money on the same chances. In affairs of gallantry he
was equally fortunate; ladies of the first rank smiled graciously upon the
handsome Scotchman—the young, the rich, the witty, and the obliging. But
all these successes only paved the way for reverses. After he had been for
nine years exposed to the dangerous attractions of the gay life he was
leading, he became an irrecoverable gambler. As his love of play increased
in violence, it diminished in prudence. Great losses were only to be repaired
by still greater ventures, and one unhappy day he lost more than he could
repay without mortgaging his family estate. To that step he was driven at
last. At the same time his gallantry brought him into trouble. A love affair,
or slight flirtation, with a lady of the name of Villiers,1 exposed him to the
resentment of a Mr. Wilson, by whom he was challenged to fight a duel.
Law accepted, and had the ill fortune to shoot his antagonist dead upon the
spot. He was arrested the same day, and brought to trial for murder by the
relatives of Mr. Wilson. He was afterwards found guilty, and sentenced to
death. The sentence was commuted to a fine, upon the ground that the
offence only amounted to manslaughter. An appeal being lodged by a
brother of the deceased, Law was detained in the King’s Bench, whence, by
some means or other, which he never explained, he contrived to escape; and
an action being instituted against the sheriffs, he was advertised in the
Gazette, and a reward offered for his apprehension. He was described as
“Captain John Law, a Scotchman, aged twenty-six; a very tall, black, lean
man; well shaped, above six feet high, with large pock-holes in his face; big
nosed, and speaking broad and loud.” As this was rather a caricature than a
description of him, it has been supposed that it was drawn up with a view to
favour his escape. He succeeded in reaching the Continent, where he
travelled for three years, and devoted much of his attention to the monetary
and banking affairs of the countries through which he passed. He stayed a
few months in Amsterdam, and speculated to some extent in the funds. His
mornings were devoted to the study of finance and the principles of trade,
and his evenings to the gaming-house. It is generally believed that he
returned to Edinburgh in the year 1700. It is certain that he published in that
city his Proposals and Reasons for constituting a Council of Trade. This
pamphlet did not excite much attention.
In a short time afterwards he published a project for establishing what
he called a Land-bank,2 the notes issued by which were never to exceed the
value of the entire lands of the state, upon ordinary interest, or were to be
equal in value to the land, with the right to enter into possession at a certain
time. The project excited a good deal of discussion in the Scottish
Parliament, and a motion for the establishment of such a bank was brought
forward by a neutral party, called the Squadrone, whom Law had interested
in his favour. The Parliament ultimately passed a resolution to the effect,
that, to establish any kind of paper credit, so as to force it to pass, was an
improper expedient for the nation.
Upon the failure of this project, and of his efforts to procure a pardon
for the murder of Mr. Wilson, Law withdrew to the Continent, and resumed
his old habits of gaming. For fourteen years he continued to roam about, in
Flanders, Holland, Germany, Hungary, Italy, and France. He soon became
intimately acquainted with the extent of the trade and resources of each, and
daily more confirmed in his opinion that no country could prosper without a
paper currency. During the whole of this time he appears to have chiefly
supported himself by successful play. At every gambling-house of note in
the capitals of Europe he was known and appreciated as one better skilled in
the intricacies of chance than any other man of the day. It is stated in the
Biographie Universelle that he was expelled, first from Venice, and
afterwards from Genoa, by the magistrates, who thought him a visitor too
dangerous for the youth of those cities. During his residence in Paris he
rendered himself obnoxious to D’Argenson, the lieutenant-general of the
police, by whom he was ordered to quit the capital. This did not take place,
however, before he had made the acquaintance, in the saloons, of the Duke
de Vendôme, the Prince de Conti, and of the gay Duke of Orleans, the latter
of whom was destined afterwards to exercise so much influence over his
fate. The Duke of Orleans was pleased with the vivacity and good sense of
the Scottish adventurer, while the latter was no less pleased with the wit and
amiability of a prince who promised to become his patron. They were often
thrown into each other’s society, and Law seized every opportunity to instil
his financial doctrines into the mind of one whose proximity to the throne
pointed him out as destined, at no very distant date, to play an important
part in the government.
THE REGENT OF FRANCE.
Shortly before the death of Louis XIV., or, as some say, in 1708, Law
proposed a scheme of finance to Desmarets, the comptroller. Louis is
reported to have inquired whether the projector were a Catholic, and on
being answered in the negative, to have declined having any thing to do
with him.3
It was after this repulse that he visited Italy. His mind being still
occupied with schemes of finance, he proposed to Victor Amadeus, duke of
Savoy, to establish his land-bank in that country. The duke replied that his
dominions were too circumscribed for the execution of so great a project,
and that he was by far too poor a potentate to be ruined. He advised him,
however, to try the king of France once more; for he was sure, if he knew
any thing of the French character, that the people would be delighted with a
plan, not only so new, but so plausible.
Louis XIV. died in 1715, and the heir to the throne being an infant only
seven years of age, the Duke of Orleans assumed the reins of government,
as regent, during his minority. Law now found himself in a more favourable
position. The tide in his affairs had come, which, taken at the flood, was to
waft him on to fortune. The regent was his friend, already acquainted with
his theory and pretensions, and inclined, moreover, to aid him in any efforts
to restore the wounded credit of France, bowed down to the earth by the
extravagance of the long reign of Louis XIV.
Hardly was that monarch laid in his grave ere the popular hatred,
suppressed so long, burst forth against his memory. He who, during his life,
had been flattered with an excess of adulation, to which history scarcely
offers a parallel, was now cursed as a tyrant, a bigot, and a plunderer. His
statues were pelted and disfigured; his effigies torn down, amid the
execrations of the populace, and his name rendered synonymous with
selfishness and oppression. The glory of his arms was forgotten, and
nothing was remembered but his reverses, his extravagance, and his cruelty.
The finances of the country were in a state of the utmost disorder. A
profuse and corrupt monarch, whose profuseness and corruption were
imitated by almost every functionary, from the highest to the lowest grade,
had brought France to the verge of ruin. The national debt amounted to
3000 millions of livres, the revenue to 145 millions, and the expenses of
government to 142 millions per annum; leaving only three millions to pay
the interest upon 3000 millions. The first care of the regent was to discover
a remedy for an evil of such magnitude, and a council was early summoned
to take the matter into consideration. The Duke de St. Simon was of opinion
that nothing could save the country from revolution but a remedy at once
bold and dangerous. He advised the regent to convoke the states-general,
and declare a national bankruptcy. The Duke de Noailles, a man of
accommodating principles, an accomplished courtier, and totally averse
from giving himself any trouble or annoyance that ingenuity could escape
from, opposed the project of St. Simon with all his influence. He
represented the expedient as alike dishonest and ruinous. The regent was of
the same opinion, and this desperate remedy fell to the ground.
The measures ultimately adopted, though they promised fair, only
aggravated the evil. The first, and most dishonest measure was of no
advantage to the state. A recoinage was ordered, by which the currency was
depreciated one-fifth; those who took a thousand pieces of gold or silver to
the mint received back an amount of coin of the same nominal value, but
only four-fifths of the weight of metal. By this contrivance the treasury
gained seventy-two millions of livres, and all the commercial operations of
the country were disordered. A trifling diminution of the taxes silenced the
clamours of the people, and for the slight present advantage the great
prospective evil was forgotten.
A Chamber of Justice was next instituted to inquire into the
malversations of the loan-contractors and the farmers of the revenues. Tax-
collectors are never very popular in any country, but those of France at this
period deserved all the odium with which they were loaded. As soon as
these farmers-general, with all their hosts of subordinate agents, called
maltôtiers,4 were called to account for their misdeeds, the most extravagant
joy took possession of the nation. The Chamber of Justice, instituted chiefly
for this purpose, was endowed with very extensive powers. It was
composed of the presidents and councils of the parliament, the judges of the
Courts of Aid and of Requests, and the officers of the Chamber of Account,
under the general presidence of the minister of finance. Informers were
encouraged to give evidence against the offenders by the promise of one-
fifth part of the fines and confiscations. A tenth of all concealed effects
belonging to the guilty was promised to such as should furnish the means of
discovering them.
The promulgation of the edict constituting this court caused a degree of
consternation among those principally concerned, which can only be
accounted for on the supposition that their peculation had been enormous.
But they met with no sympathy. The proceedings against them justified
their terror. The Bastille was soon unable to contain the prisoners that were
sent to it, and the gaols all over the country teemed with guilty or suspected
persons. An order was issued to all innkeepers and postmasters to refuse
horses to such as endeavoured to seek safety in flight; and all persons were
forbidden, under heavy fines, to harbour them or favour their evasion. Some
were condemned to the pillory, others to the galleys, and the least guilty to
fine and imprisonment. One only, Samuel Bernard, a rich banker and
farmer-general of a province remote from the capital, was sentenced to
death. So great had been the illegal profits of this man,—looked upon as the
tyrant and oppressor of his district,—that he offered six millions of livres,
or 250,000l. sterling, to be allowed to escape.
His bribe was refused, and he suffered the penalty of death. Others,
perhaps more guilty, were more fortunate. Confiscation, owing to the
concealment of their treasures by the delinquents, often produced less
money than a fine. The severity of the government relaxed, and fines, under
the denomination of taxes, were indiscriminately levied upon all offenders;
but so corrupt was every department of the administration, that the country
benefited but little by the sums which thus flowed into the treasury.
Courtiers and courtiers’ wives and mistresses came in for the chief share of
the spoils. One contractor had been taxed, in proportion to his wealth and
guilt, at the sum of twelve millions of livres. The Count * * *, a man of
some weight in the government, called upon him, and offered to procure a
remission of the fine if he would give him a hundred thousand crowns.
“Vous êtes trop tard, mon ami,” replied the financier; “I have already made
a bargain with your wife for fifty thousand.”5
About a hundred and eighty millions of livres were levied in this
manner, of which eighty were applied in payment of the debts contracted by
the government. The remainder found its way into the pockets of the
courtiers. Madame de Maintenon, writing on this subject, says,—“We hear
every day of some new grant of the regent. The people murmur very much
at this mode of employing the money taken from the peculators.” The
people, who, after the first burst of their resentment is over, generally
express a sympathy for the weak, were indignant that so much severity
should be used to so little purpose. They did not see the justice of robbing
one set of rogues to fatten another. In a few months all the more guilty had
been brought to punishment, and the Chamber of Justice looked for victims
in humbler walks of life. Charges of fraud and extortion were brought
against tradesmen of good character in consequence of the great
inducements held out to common informers. They were compelled to lay
open their affairs before this tribunal in order to establish their innocence.
The voice of complaint resounded from every side; and at the expiration of
a year the government found it advisable to discontinue further proceedings.
The Chamber of Justice was suppressed, and a general amnesty granted to
all against whom no charges had yet been preferred.
In the midst of this financial confusion Law appeared upon the scene.
No man felt more deeply than the regent the deplorable state of the country,
but no man could be more averse from putting his shoulders manfully to the
wheel. He disliked business; he signed official documents without proper
examination, and trusted to others what he should have undertaken himself.
The cares inseparable from his high office were burdensome to him. He saw
that something was necessary to be done; but he lacked the energy to do it,
and had not virtue enough to sacrifice his ease and his pleasures in the
attempt. No wonder that, with this character, he listened favourably to the
mighty projects, so easy of execution, of the clever adventurer whom he
had formerly known, and whose talents he appreciated.
When Law presented himself at court he was most cordially received.
He offered two memorials to the regent, in which he set forth the evils that
had befallen France, owing to an insufficient currency, at different times
depreciated. He asserted that a metallic currency, unaided by a paper
money, was wholly inadequate to the wants of a commercial country, and
particularly cited the examples of Great Britain and Holland to shew the
advantages of paper. He used many sound arguments on the subject of
credit, and proposed as a means of restoring that of Prance, then at so low
an ebb among the nations, that he should be allowed to set up a bank, which
should have the management of the royal revenues, and issue notes both on
that and on landed security. He further proposed that this bank should be
administered in the king’s name, but subject to the control of
commissioners to be named by the States-General.
While these memorials were under consideration, Law translated into
French his essay on money and trade, and used every means to extend
through the nation his renown as a financier. He soon became talked of. The
confidants of the regent spread abroad his praise, and every one expected
great things of Monsieur Lass.6
On the 5th of May, 1716, a royal edict was published, by which Law
was authorised, in conjunction with his brother, to establish a bank under
the name of Law and Company, the notes of which should be received in
payment of the taxes. The capital was fixed at six millions of livres, in
twelve thousand shares of five hundred livres each, purchasable one fourth
in specie, and the remainder in billets d’état. It was not thought expedient to
grant him the whole of the privileges prayed for in his memorials until
experience should have shewn their safety and advantage.
Law was now on the high road to fortune. The study of thirty years was
brought to guide him in the management of his bank. He made all his notes
payable at sight, and in the coin current at the time they were issued. This
last was a master-stroke of policy, and immediately rendered his notes more
valuable than the precious metals. The latter were constantly liable to
depreciation by the unwise tampering of the government. A thousand livres
of silver might be worth their nominal value one day, and be reduced one-
sixth the next, but a note of Law’s bank retained its original value. He
publicly declared at the same time, that a banker deserved death if he made
issues without having sufficient security to answer all demands. The
consequence was, that his notes advanced rapidly in public estimation, and
were received at one per cent more than specie. It was not long before the
trade of the country felt the benefit. Languishing commerce began to lift up
her head; the taxes were paid with greater regularity and less murmuring;
and a degree of confidence was established that could not fail, if it
continued, to become still more advantageous. In the course of a year,
Law’s notes rose to fifteen per cent premium, while the billets d’état, or
notes issued by the government as security for the debts contracted by the
extravagant Louis XIV., were at a discount of no less than seventy-eight and
a half per cent. The comparison was too great in favour of Law not to attract
the attention of the whole kingdom, and his credit extended itself day by
day. Branches of his bank were almost simultaneously established at Lyons,
Rochelle, Tours, Amiens, and Orleans.
The regent appears to have been utterly astonished at his success, and
gradually to have conceived the idea that paper, which could so aid a
metallic currency, could entirely supersede it. Upon this fundamental error
he afterwards acted. In the mean time, Law commenced the famous project
which has handed his name down to posterity. He proposed to the regent
(who could refuse him nothing) to establish a company that should have the
exclusive privilege of trading to the great river Mississippi and the province
of Louisiana, on its western bank. The country was supposed to abound in
the precious metals; and the company, supported by the profits of their
exclusive commerce, were to be the sole farmers of the taxes and sole
coiners of money. Letters patent were issued, incorporating the company, in
August 1717. The capital was divided into two hundred thousand shares of
five hundred livres each, the whole of which might be paid in billets d’état,
at their nominal value, although worth no more than a hundred and sixty
livres in the market.
It was now that the frenzy of speculating began to seize upon the nation.
Law’s bank had effected so much good, that any promises for the future
which he thought proper to make were readily believed. The regent every
day conferred new privileges upon the fortunate projector. The bank
obtained the monopoly of the sale of tobacco, the sole right of refinage of
gold and silver, and was finally erected into the Royal Bank of France.
Amid the intoxication of success, both Law and the regent forgot the maxim
so loudly proclaimed by the former, that a banker deserved death who made
issues of paper without the necessary funds to provide for them. As soon as
the bank, from a private, became a public institution, the regent caused a
fabrication of notes to the amount of one thousand millions of livres. This
was the first departure from sound principles, and one for which Law is not
justly blameable. While the affairs of the bank were under his control, the
issues had never exceeded sixty millions. Whether Law opposed the
inordinate increase is not known; but as it took place as soon as the bank
was made a royal establishment, it is but fair to lay the blame of the change
of system upon the regent.
Law found that he lived under a despotic government; but he was not
yet aware of the pernicious influence which such a government could
exercise upon so delicate a framework as that of credit. He discovered it
afterwards to his cost, but in the meantime suffered himself to be impelled
by the regent into courses which his own reason must have disapproved.
With a weakness most culpable, he lent his aid in inundating the country
with paper money, which, based upon no solid foundation, was sure to fall,
sooner or later. The extraordinary present fortune dazzled his eyes, and
prevented him from seeing the evil day that would burst over his head,
when once, from any cause or other, the alarm was sounded. The parliament
were from the first jealous of his influence as a foreigner, and had, besides,
their misgivings as to the safety of his projects. As his influence extended,
their 
animosity 
increased. 
D’Aguesseau, 
the 
chancellor, 
was
unceremoniously dismissed by the regent for his opposition to the vast
increase of paper money, and the constant depreciation of the gold and
silver coin of the realm. This only served to augment the enmity of the
parliament, and when D’Argenson, a man devoted to the interests of the
regent, was appointed to the vacant chancellorship, and made at the same
time minister of finance, they became more violent than ever. The first
measure of the new minister caused a further depreciation of the coin. In
order to extinguish the billets d’état, it was ordered that persons bringing to
the mint four thousand livres in specie and one thousand livres in billets
d’état, should receive back coin to the amount of five thousand livres.
D’Argenson plumed himself mightily upon thus creating five thousand new
and smaller livres out of the four thousand old and larger ones, being too
ignorant of the true principles of trade and credit to be aware of the
immense injury he was inflicting upon both.
The parliament saw at once the impolicy and danger of such a system,
and made repeated remonstrances to the regent. The latter refused to
entertain their petitions, when the parliament, by a bold and very unusual
stretch of authority, commanded that no money should be received in
payment but that of the old standard. The regent summoned a lit de justice,
and annulled the decree. The parliament resisted, and issued another. Again
the regent exercised his privilege, and annulled it, till the parliament, stung
to fiercer opposition, passed another decree, dated August 12th, 1718, by
which they forbade the bank of Law to have any concern, either direct or
indirect, in the administration of the revenue; and prohibited all foreigners,
under heavy penalties, from interfering, either in their own names, or in that
of others, in the management of the finances of the state. The parliament
considered Law to be the author of all the evil, and some of the councillors,
in the virulence of their enmity, proposed that he should be brought to trial,
and, if found guilty, be hung at the gates of the Palais de Justice.
PALAIS ROYAL FROM THE GARDEN.
Law, in great alarm, fled to the Palais Royal, and threw himself on the
protection of the regent, praying that measures might be taken to reduce the
parliament to obedience. The regent had nothing so much at heart, both on
that account and because of the disputes that had arisen relative to the
legitimation of the Duke of Maine and the Count of Thoulouse, the sons of
the late king. The parliament was ultimately overawed by the arrest of their
president and two of the councillors, who were sent to distant prisons.
Thus the first cloud upon Law’s prospects blew over: freed from
apprehension of personal danger, he devoted his attention to his famous
Mississippi project, the shares of which were rapidly rising, in spite of the
parliament. At the commencement of the year 1719, an edict was published,
granting to the Mississippi Company the exclusive privilege of trading to
the East Indies, China, and the South Seas, and to all the possessions of the
French East India Company, established by Colbert. The Company, in
consequence of this great increase of their business, assumed, as more
appropriate, the title of Company of the Indies, and created fifty thousand
new shares. The prospects now held out by Law were most magnificent. He
promised a yearly dividend of two hundred livres upon each share of five
hundred, which, as the shares were paid for in billets d’étatat their nominal
value, but worth only 100 livres, was at the rate of about 120 per cent profit.
LAW’S HOUSE; RUE DE QUINCAMPOIX.
The public enthusiasm, which had been so long rising, could not resist a
vision so splendid. At least three hundred thousand applications were made
for the fifty thousand new shares, and Law’s house in the Rue de
Quincampoix was beset from morning to night by the eager applicants. As it
was impossible to satisfy them all, it was several weeks before a list of the
fortunate new stockholders could be made out, during which time the public
impatience rose to a pitch of frenzy. Dukes, marquises, counts, with their
duchesses, marchionesses, and countesses, waited in the streets for hours
every day before Mr. Law’s door to know the result. At last, to avoid the
jostling of the plebeian crowd, which, to the number of thousands, filled the
whole thoroughfare, they took apartments in the adjoining houses, that they
might be continually near the temple whence the new Plutus was diffusing
wealth. Every day the value of the old shares increased, and the fresh
applications, induced by the golden dreams of the whole nation, became so
numerous that it was deemed advisable to create no less than three hundred
thousand new shares, at five thousand livres each, in order that the regent
might take advantage of the popular enthusiasm to pay off the national debt.
For this purpose, the sum of fifteen hundred millions of livres was
necessary. Such was the eagerness of the nation, that thrice the sum would
have been subscribed if the government had authorised it.
Law was now at the zenith of his prosperity, and the people were
rapidly approaching the zenith of their infatuation. The highest and the
lowest classes were alike filled with a vision of boundless wealth. There
was not a person of note among the aristocracy, with the exception of the
Duke of St. Simon and Marshal Villars, who was not engaged in buying or
selling stock. People of every age and sex and condition in life speculated
in the rise and fall of the Mississippi bonds. The Rue de Quincampoix was
the grand resort of the jobbers, and it being a narrow, inconvenient street,
accidents continually occurred in it, from the tremendous pressure of the
crowd. Houses in it, worth, in ordinary times, a thousand livres of yearly
rent, yielded as much as twelve or sixteen thousand. A cobbler, who had a
stall in it, gained about two hundred livres a day by letting it out, and
furnishing writing materials to brokers and their clients. The story goes, that
a hunchbacked man who stood in the street gained considerable sums by
lending his hump as a writing-desk to the eager speculators! The great
concourse of persons who assembled to do business brought a still greater
concourse of spectators. These again drew all the thieves and immoral
characters of Paris to the spot, and constant riots and disturbances took
place. At nightfall, it was often found necessary to send a troop of soldiers
to clear the street.
THE HUNCHBACK.
Law, finding the inconvenience of his residence, removed to the Place
Vendôme, whither the crowd of agioteurs followed him. That spacious
square soon became as thronged as the Rue de Quincampoix: from morning
to night it presented the appearance of a fair. Booths and tents were erected
for the transaction of business and the sale of refreshments, and gamblers
with their roulette tables stationed themselves in the very middle of the
place, and reaped a golden, or rather a paper, harvest from the throng. The
boulevards and public gardens were forsaken; parties of pleasure took their
walks in preference in the Place Vendôme, which became the fashionable
lounge of the idle, as well as the general rendezvous of the busy. The noise
was so great all day, that the chancellor, whose court was situated in the
square, complained to the regent and the municipality, that he could not
hear the advocates. Law, when applied to, expressed his willingness to aid
in the removal of the nuisance, and for this purpose entered into a treaty
with the Prince de Carignan for the Hôtel de Soissons, which had a garden
of several acres in the rear. A bargain was concluded, by which Law became
the purchaser of the hotel at an enormous price, the prince reserving to
himself the magnificent gardens as a new source of profit. They contained
some fine statues and several fountains, and were altogether laid out with
much taste. As soon as Law was installed in his new abode, an edict was
published, forbidding all persons to buy or sell stock any where but in the
gardens of the Hôtel de Soissons. In the midst, among the trees, about five
hundred small tents and pavilions were erected, for the convenience of the
stock-jobbers. Their various colours, the gay ribands and banners which
floated from them, the busy crowds which passed continually in and out—
the incessant hum of voices, the noise, the music, and the strange mixture of
business and pleasure on the countenances of the throng, all combined to
give the place an air of enchantment that quite enraptured the Parisians. The
Prince de Carignan made enormous profits while the delusion lasted. Each
tent was let at the rate of five hundred livres a month; and, as there were at
least five hundred of them, his monthly revenue from this source alone must
have amounted to 250,000 livres, or upwards of 10,000l. sterling.
HOTEL DE SOISSONS.
The honest old soldier, Marshal Villars, was so vexed to see the folly
which had smitten his countrymen, that he never could speak with temper
on the subject. Passing one day through the Place Vendôme in his carriage,
the choleric gentleman was so annoyed at the infatuation of the people, that
he abruptly ordered his coachman to stop, and, putting his head out of the
carriage window, harangued them for full half an hour on their “disgusting
avarice.” This was not a very wise proceeding on his part. Hisses and shouts
of laughter resounded from every side, and jokes without number were
aimed at him. There being at last strong symptoms that something more
tangible was flying through the air in the direction of his head, the marshal
was glad to drive on. He never again repeated the experiment.
Two sober, quiet, and philosophic men of letters, M. de la Motte and the
Abbé Terrason, congratulated each other, that they, at least, were free from
this strange infatuation. A few days afterwards, as the worthy abbé was
coming out of the Hôtel de Soissons, whither he had gone to buy shares in
the Mississippi, whom should he see but his friend La Motte entering for
the same purpose. “Ha!” said the abbé smiling, “is that you?” “Yes,” said La
Motte, pushing past him as fast as he was able; “and can that be you?” The
next time the two scholars met, they talked of philosophy, of science, and of
religion, but neither had courage for a long time to breathe one syllable
about the Mississippi. At last, when it was mentioned, they agreed that a
man ought never to swear against his doing any one thing, and that there
was no sort of extravagance of which even a wise man was not capable.
During this time, Law, the new Plutus, had become all at once the most
important personage of the state. The ante-chambers of the regent were
forsaken by the courtiers, Peers, judges, and bishops thronged to the Hôtel
de Soissons; officers of the army and navy, ladies of title and fashion, and
every one to whom hereditary rank or public employ gave a claim to
precedence, were to be found waiting in his ante-chambers to beg for a
portion of his India stock. Law was so pestered that he was unable to see
one-tenth part of the applicants, and every manœuvre that ingenuity could
suggest was employed to gain access to him. Peers, whose dignity would
have been outraged if the regent had made them wait half an hour for an
interview, were content to wait six hours for the chance of seeing Monsieur
Law. Enormous fees were paid to his servants, if they would merely
announce their names. Ladies of rank employed the blandishments of their
smiles for the same object; but many of them came day after day for a
fortnight before they could obtain an audience. When Law accepted an
invitation, he was sometimes so surrounded by ladies, all asking to have
their names put down in his lists as shareholders in the new stock, that, in
spite of his well-known and habitual gallantry, he was obliged to tear
himself away par force. The most ludicrous stratagems were employed to
have an opportunity of speaking to him. One lady, who had striven in vain
during several days, gave up in despair all attempts to see him at his own
house, but ordered her coachman to keep a strict watch whenever she was
out in her carriage, and if he saw Mr. Law coming, to drive against a post
and upset her. The coachman promised obedience, and for three days the
lady was driven incessantly through the town, praying inwardly for the
opportunity to be overturned. At last she espied Mr. Law, and, pulling the
string, called out to the coachman, “Upset us now! for God’s sake, upset us
now!” The coachman drove against a post, the lady screamed, the coach
was overturned, and Law, who had seen the accident, hastened to the spot
to render assistance. The cunning dame was led into the Hôtel de Soissons,
where she soon thought it advisable to recover from her fright, and, after
apologising to Mr. Law, confessed her stratagem. Law smiled, and entered
the lady in his books as the purchaser of a quantity of India stock. Another
story is told of a Madame de Boucha, who, knowing that Mr. Law was at
dinner at a certain house, proceeded thither in her carriage, and gave the
alarm of fire. The company started from table, and Law among the rest; but,
seeing one lady making all haste into the house towards him, while every
body else was scampering away, he suspected the trick, and ran off in
another direction.
Many other anecdotes are related, which even though they may be a
little exaggerated, are nevertheless worth preserving, as shewing the spirit
of that singular period.7 The regent was one day mentioning, in the presence
of D’Argenson, the Abbé Dubois, and some other persons, that he was
desirous of deputing some lady, of the rank at least of a duchess, to attend
upon his daughter at Modena; “but,” added he, “I do not exactly know
where to find one.” “No!” replied one, in affected surprise; “I can tell you
where to find every duchess in France: you have only to go to Mr. Law’s;
you will see them every one in his ante-chamber.”
M. de Chirac, a celebrated physician, had bought stock at an unlucky
period, and was very anxious to sell out. Stock, however, continued to fall
for two or three days, much to his alarm. His mind was filled with the
subject, when he was suddenly called upon to attend a lady who imagined
herself unwell. He arrived, was shewn up stairs, and felt the lady’s pulse. “It
falls! it falls! good God! it falls continually!” said he musingly, while the
lady looked up in his face all anxiety for his opinion. “Oh, M. de Chirac,”
said she, starting to her feet and ringing the bell for assistance; “I am dying!
I am dying! it falls! it falls! it falls!” “What falls?” inquired the doctor in
amazement. “My pulse! my pulse!” said the lady; “I must be dying.” “Calm
your apprehensions, my dear madam,” said M. de Chirac; “I was speaking
of the stocks. The truth is, I have been a great loser, and my mind is so
disturbed, I hardly know what I have been saying.”
The price of shares sometimes rose ten or twenty per cent in the course
of a few hours, and many persons in the humbler walks of life, who had
risen poor in the morning, went to bed in affluence. An extensive holder of
stock, being taken ill, sent his servant to sell two hundred and fifty shares,
at eight thousand livres each, the price at which they were then quoted. The
servant went, and, on his arrival in the Jardin de Soissons, found that in the
interval the price had risen to ten thousand livres. The difference of two
thousand livres on the two hundred and fifty shares, amounting to 500,000
livres, or 20,000l. sterling, he very coolly transferred to his own use, and
giving the remainder to his master, set out the same evening for another
country. Law’s coachman in a very short time made money enough to set up
a carriage of his own, and requested permission to leave his service. Law,
who esteemed the man, begged of him as a favour, that he would
endeavour, before he went, to find a substitute as good as himself. The
coachman consented, and in the evening brought two of his former
comrades, telling Mr. Law to choose between them, and he would take the
other. Cookmaids and footmen were now and then as lucky, and, in the full-
blown pride of their easily-acquired wealth, made the most ridiculous
mistakes. Preserving the language and manners of their old, with the finery
of their new station, they afforded continual subjects for the pity of the
sensible, the contempt of the sober, and the laughter of every body. But the
folly and meanness of the higher ranks of society were still more disgusting.
One instance alone, related by the Duke de St. Simon, will shew the
unworthy avarice which infected the whole of society. A man of the name
of André, without character or education, had, by a series of well-timed
speculations in Mississippi bonds, gained enormous wealth in an incredibly
short space of time. As St. Simon expresses it, “he had amassed mountains
of gold.” As he became rich, he grew ashamed of the lowness of his birth,
and anxious above all things to be allied to nobility. He had a daughter, an
infant only three years of age, and he opened a negotiation with the
aristocratic and needy family of D’Oyse, that this child should, upon certain
conditions, marry a member of that house. The Marquis D’Oyse, to his
shame, consented, and promised to marry her himself on her attaining the
age of twelve, if the father would pay him down the sum of a hundred
thousand crowns, and twenty thousand livres every year until the
celebration of the marriage. The marquis was himself in his thirty-third
year. This scandalous bargain was duly signed and sealed, the stockjobber
furthermore agreeing to settle upon his daughter, on the marriage-day, a
fortune of several millions. The Duke of Brancas, the head of the family,
was present throughout the negotiation, and shared in all the profits. St.
Simon, who treats the matter with the levity becoming what he thought so
good a joke, adds, “that people did not spare their animadversions on this
beautiful marriage,” and further informs us, “that the project fell to the
ground some months afterwards by the overthrow of Law, and the ruin of
the ambitious Monsieur André.” It would appear, however, that the noble
family never had the honesty to return the hundred thousand crowns.
Amid events like these, which, humiliating though they be, partake
largely of the ludicrous, others occurred of a more serious nature. Robberies
in the streets were of daily occurrence, in consequence of the immense
sums, in paper, which people carried about with them. Assassinations were
also frequent. One case in particular fixed the attention of the whole of
France, not only on account of the enormity of the offence, but of the rank
and high connexions of the criminal.
The Count d’Horn, a younger brother of the Prince d’Horn, and related
to the noble families of D’Aremberg, De Ligne, and De Montmorency, was
a young man of dissipated character, extravagant to a degree, and
unprincipled as he was extravagant. In connexion with two other young
men as reckless as himself, named Mille, a Piedmontese captain, and one
Destampes, or Lestang, a Fleming, he formed a design to rob a very rich
broker, who was known, unfortunately for himself, to carry great sums
about his person. The count pretended a desire to purchase of him a number
of shares in the Company of the Indies, and for that purpose appointed to
meet him in a cabaret, or low public-house, in the neighbourhood of the
Place Vendôme. The unsuspecting broker was punctual to his appointment;
so were the Count d’Horn and his two associates, whom he introduced as
his particular friends. After a few moments’ conversation, the Count d’Horn
suddenly sprang upon his victim, and stabbed him three times in the breast
with a poniard. The man fell heavily to the ground, and, while the count
was employed in rifling his portfolio of bonds in the Mississippi and Indian
schemes to the amount of one hundred thousand crowns, Mille, the
Piedmontese, stabbed the unfortunate broker again and again, to make sure
of his death, But the broker did not fall without a struggle, and his cries
brought the people of the cabaret to his assistance. Lestang, the other
assassin, who had been set to keep watch at a staircase, sprang from a
window and escaped; but Mille and the Count d’Horn were seized in the
very act.
This crime, committed in open day, and in so public a place as a
cabaret, filled Paris with consternation. The trial of the assassins
commenced on the following day; and the evidence being so clear, they
were both found guilty, and condemned, to be broken alive on the wheel.
The noble relatives of the Count d’Horn absolutely blocked up the ante-
chambers of the regent, praying for mercy on the misguided youth, and
alleging that he was insane. The regent avoided them as long as possible,
being determined that, in a case so atrocious, justice should take its course.
But the importunity of these influential suitors was not to be overcome so
silently; and they at last forced themselves into the presence of the regent,
and prayed him to save their house the shame of a public execution. They
hinted that the Princes d’Horn were allied to the illustrious family of
Orleans; and added, that the regent himself would be disgraced if a kinsman
of his should die by the hands of a common executioner. The regent, to his
credit, was proof against all their solicitations, and replied to their last
argument in the words of Corneille:
“Le crime fait la honte, et non pas l’échafaud:”
adding, that whatever shame there might be in the punishment he would
very willingly share with the other relatives. Day after day they renewed
their entreaties, but always with the same result. At last they thought, that if
they could interest the Duke de St. Simon in their favour—a man, for whom
the regent felt sincere esteem—they might succeed in their object. The
duke, a thorough aristocrat, was as shocked as they were that a noble
assassin should die by the same death as a plebeian felon, and represented
to the regent the impolicy of making enemies of so numerous, wealthy, and
powerful a family. He urged, too, that in Germany, where the family of
D’Aremberg had large possessions, it was the law, that no relative of a
person broken on the wheel could succeed to any public office or employ
until a whole generation had passed away. For this reason, he thought the
punishment of the guilty count might be transmuted into beheading, which
was considered all over Europe as much less infamous. The regent was
moved by this argument, and was about to consent, when Law, who felt
peculiarly interested in the fate of the murdered man, confirmed him in his
former resolution to let the law take its course.
The relatives of D’Horn were now reduced to the last extremity. The
Prince de Robec Montmorency, despairing of other methods, found means
to penetrate into the dungeon of the criminal, and offering him a cup of
poison, implored him to save them from disgrace. The Count d’Horn turned
away his head, and refused to take it. Montmorency pressed him once more;
and losing all patience at his continued refusal, turned on his heel, and
exclaiming, “Die, then, as thou wilt, mean-spirited wretch! thou art fit only
to perish by the hands of the hangman!” left him to his fate.
D’Horn himself petitioned the regent that he might be beheaded; but
Law, who exercised more influence over his mind than any other person,
with the exception of the notorious Abbé Dubois, his tutor, insisted that he
could not in justice succumb to the self-interested views of the D’Horns.
The regent had from the first been of the same opinion; and within six days
after the commission of their crime, D’Horn and Mille were broken on the
wheel in the Place de Grève. The other assassin, Lestang, was never
apprehended.
This prompt and severe justice was highly pleasing to the populace of
Paris. Even M. de Quincampoix, as they called Law, came in for a share of
their approbation for having induced the regent to shew no favour to a
patrician. But the number of robberies and assassinations did not diminish;
no sympathy was shewn for rich jobbers when they were plundered. The
general laxity of public morals, conspicuous enough before, was rendered
still more so by its rapid pervasion of the middle classes, who had hitherto
remained comparatively pure between the open vices of the class above and
the hidden crimes of the class below them. The pernicious love of gambling
diffused itself through society, and bore all public and nearly all private
virtue before it.
For a time, while confidence lasted, an impetus was given to trade
which could not fail to be beneficial. In Paris especially the good results
were felt. Strangers flocked into the capital from every part, bent not only
upon making money, but on spending it. The Duchess of Orleans, mother of
the regent, computes the increase of the population during this time, from
the great influx of strangers from all parts of the world, at 305,000 souls.
The housekeepers were obliged to make up beds in garrets, kitchens, and
even stables, for the accommodation of lodgers; and the town was so full of
carriages and vehicles of every description, that they were obliged, in the
principal streets, to drive at a foot-pace for fear of accidents. The looms of
the country worked with unusual activity to supply rich laces, silks, broad-
cloth, and velvets, which being paid for in abundant paper, increased in
price four-fold. Provisions shared the general advance. Bread, meat, and
vegetables were sold at prices greater than had ever before been known;
while the wages of labour rose in exactly the same proportion. The artisan
who formerly gained fifteen sous per diem now gained sixty. New houses
were built in every direction; an illusory prosperity shone over the land, and
so dazzled the eyes of the whole nation, that none could see the dark cloud
on the horizon announcing the storm that was too rapidly approaching.
Law himself, the magician whose wand had wrought so surprising a
change, shared, of course, in the general prosperity. His wife and daughter
were courted by the highest nobility, and their alliance sought by the heirs
of ducal and princely houses. He bought two splendid estates in different
parts of France, and entered into a negotiation with the family of the Duke
de Sully for the purchase of the marquisate of Rosny. His religion being an
obstacle to his advancement, the regent promised, if he would publicly
conform to the Catholic faith, to make him comptroller-general of the
finances. Law, who had no more real religion than any other professed
gambler, readily agreed, and was confirmed by the Abbé de Tencin in the
cathedral of Melun, in presence of a great crowd of spectators8. On the
following day he was elected honorary churchwarden of the parish of St.
Roch, upon which occasion he made it a present of the sum of five hundred
thousand livres. His charities, always magnificent, were not always so
ostentatious. He gave away great sums privately, and no tale of real distress
ever reached his ears in vain.
At this time he was by far the most influential person of the state. The
Duke of Orleans had so much confidence in his sagacity and the success of
his plans, that he always consulted him upon every matter of moment. He
was by no means unduly elevated by his prosperity, but remained the same
simple, affable, sensible man that he had shewn himself in adversity. His
gallantry, which was always delightful to the fair objects of it, was of a
nature so kind, so gentlemanly, and so respectful, that not even a lover
could have taken offence at it. If upon any occasion he shewed any
symptoms of haughtiness, it was to the cringing nobles who lavished their
adulation upon him till it became fulsome. He often took pleasure in seeing
how long he could make them dance attendance upon him for a single
favour. To such of his own countrymen as by chance visited Paris, and
sought an interview with him, he was, on the contrary, all politeness and
attention. When Archibald Campbell, Earl of Islay, and afterwards Duke of
Argyle, called upon him in the Place Vendôme, he had to pass through an
ante-chamber crowded with persons of the first distinction, all anxious to
see the great financier, and have their names put down as first on the list of
some new subscription. Law himself was quietly sitting in his library,
writing a letter to the gardener at his paternal estate of Lauriston about the
planting of some cabbages! The earl stayed for a considerable time, played
a game of piquet with his countryman, and left him, charmed with his ease,
good sense, and good breeding.
LAW AS ATLAS.9
Among the nobles who, by means of the public credulity at this time,
gained sums sufficient to repair their ruined fortunes, may be mentioned the
names of the Dukes de Bourbon, de Guiche, de la Force,10 de Chaulnes, and
d’Antin; the Marechal d’Estrées; the Princes de Rohan, de Poix, and de
Léon. The Duke de Bourbon, son of Louis XIV. by Madame de Montespan,
was peculiarly fortunate in his speculations in Mississippi paper. He rebuilt
the royal residence of Chantilly in a style of unwonted magnificence; and
being passionately fond of horses, he erected a range of stables, which were
long renowned throughout Europe, and imported a hundred and fifty of the
finest racers from England to improve the breed in France. He bought a
large extent of country in Picardy, and became possessed of nearly all the
valuable lands lying between the Oise and the Somme.
When fortunes such as these were gained, it is no wonder that Law
should have been almost worshipped by the mercurial population. Never
was monarch more flattered than he was. All the small poets and littérateurs
of the day poured floods of adulation upon him. According to them, he was
the saviour of the country, the tutelary divinity of France; wit was in all his
words, goodness in all his looks, and wisdom in all his actions. So great a
crowd followed his carriage whenever he went abroad, that the regent sent
him a troop of horse as his permanent escort to clear the streets before him.
It was remarked at this time that Paris had never before been so full of
objects of elegance and luxury. Statues, pictures, and tapestries were
imported in great quantities from foreign countries, and found a ready
market. All those pretty trifles in the way of furniture and ornament which
the French excel in manufacturing were no longer the exclusive playthings
of the aristocracy, but were to be found in abundance in the houses of
traders and the middle classes in general. Jewellery of the most costly
description was brought to Paris as the most favourable mart; among the
rest, the famous diamond bought by the regent, and called by his name, and
which long adorned the crown of France. It was purchased for the sum of
two millions of livres, under circumstances which shew that the regent was
not so great a gainer as some of his subjects by the impetus which trade had
received. When the diamond was first offered to him, he refused to buy it,
although he desired above all things to possess it, alleging as his reason,
that his duty to the country he governed would not allow him to spend so
large a sum of the public money for a mere jewel. This valid and
honourable excuse threw all the ladies of the court into alarm, and nothing
was heard for some days but expressions of regret that so rare a gem should
be allowed to go out of France, no private individual being rich enough to
buy it. The regent was continually importuned about it, but all in vain, until
the Duke de St. Simon, who with all his ability was something of a
twaddler, undertook the weighty business. His entreaties being seconded by
Law, the good-natured regent gave his consent, leaving to Law’s ingenuity
to find the means to pay for it. The owner took security for the payment of
the sum of two millions of livres within a stated period, receiving in the
mean time the interest of five per cent upon that amount, and being allowed,
besides, all the valuable clippings of the gem. St. Simon, in his Memoirs,
relates with no little complacency his share in this transaction. After
describing the diamond to be as large as a greengage, of a form nearly
round, perfectly white, and without flaw, and weighing more than five
hundred grains, he concludes with a chuckle, by telling the world “that he
takes great credit to himself for having induced the regent to make so
illustrious a purchase.” In other words, he was proud that he had induced
him to sacrifice his duty, and buy a bauble for himself at an extravagant
price out of the public money.
Thus the system continued to flourish till the commencement of the year
1720. The warnings of the parliament, that too great a creation of paper
money would, sooner or later, bring the country to bankruptcy, were
disregarded. The regent, who knew nothing whatever of the philosophy of
finance, thought that a system which had produced such good effects could
never be carried to excess. If five hundred millions of paper had been of
such advantage, five hundred millions additional would be of still greater
advantage. This was the grand error of the regent, and which Law did not
attempt to dispel. The extraordinary avidity of the people kept up the
delusion; and the higher the price of Indian and Mississippi stock, the more
billets de banque were issued to keep pace with it. The edifice thus reared
might not unaptly be compared to the gorgeous palace erected by Potemkin,
that princely barbarian of Russia, to surprise and please his imperial
mistress: huge blocks of ice were piled one upon another; ionic pillars, of
chastest workmanship, in ice, formed a noble portico; and a dome, of the
same material, shone in the sun, which had just strength enough to gild, but
not to melt it. It glittered afar, like a palace of crystals and diamonds; but
there came one warm breeze from the south, and the stately building
dissolved away, till none were able even to gather up the fragments. So with
Law and his paper system. No sooner did the breath of popular mistrust
blow steadily upon it, than it fell to ruins, and none could raise it up again.
The first slight alarm that was occasioned was early in 1720. The Prince
de Conti, offended that Law should have denied him fresh shares in India
stock, at his own price, sent to his bank to demand payment in specie of so
enormous a quantity of notes, that three wagons were required for its
transport. Law complained to the regent, and urged on his attention the
mischief that would be done, if such an example found many imitators. The
regent was but too well aware of it, and, sending for the Prince de Conti,
ordered him, under penalty of his high displeasure, to refund to the bank
two-thirds of the specie which he had withdrawn from it. The prince was
forced to obey the despotic mandate. Happily for Law’s credit, De Conti
was an unpopular man: every body condemned his meanness and cupidity,
and agreed that Law had been hardly treated. It is strange, however, that so
narrow an escape should not have made both Law and the regent more
anxious to restrict their issues. Others were soon found who imitated, from
motives of distrust, the example which had been set by De Conti in revenge.
The more acute stockjobbers imagined justly that prices could not continue
to rise for ever. Bourdon and La Richardière, renowned for their extensive
operations in the funds, quietly and in small quantities at a time, converted
their notes into specie, and sent it away to foreign countries. They also
bought as much as they could conveniently carry of plate and expensive
jewellery, and sent it secretly away to England or to Holland. Vermalet, a
jobber, who sniffed the coming storm, procured gold and silver coin to the
amount of nearly a million of livres, which he packed in a farmer’s cart, and
covered over with hay and cow-dung. He then disguised himself in the dirty
smock-frock, or blouse, of a peasant, and drove his precious load in safety
into Belgium. From thence he soon found means to transport it to
Amsterdam.
Hitherto no difficulty had been experienced by any class in procuring
specie for their wants. But this system could not long be carried on without
causing a scarcity. The voice of complaint was heard on every side, and
inquiries being instituted, the cause was soon discovered. The council
debated long on the remedies to be taken, and Law, being called on for his
advice, was of opinion, that an edict should be published, depreciating the
value of coin five per cent below that of paper. The edict was published
accordingly; but failing of its intended effect, was followed by another, in
which the depreciation was increased to ten per cent. The payments of the
bank were at the same time restricted to one hundred livres in gold, and ten
in silver. All these measures were nugatory to restore confidence in the
paper, though the restriction of cash payments within limits so extremely
narrow kept up the credit of the bank.
LUCIFER’S NEW ROW-BARGE.11
Notwithstanding every effort to the contrary, the precious metals
continued to be conveyed to England and Holland. The little coin that was
left in the country was carefully treasured, or hidden until the scarcity
became so great, that the operations of trade could no longer be carried on.
In this emergency, Law hazarded the bold experiment of forbidding the use
of specie altogether. In February 1720 an edict was published, which,
instead of restoring the credit of the paper, as was intended, destroyed it
irrecoverably, and drove the country to the very brink of revolution. By this
famous edict it was forbidden to any person whatever to have more than
five hundred livres (20l.) of coin in his possession, under pain of a heavy
fine, and confiscation of the sums found. It was also forbidden to buy up
jewellery, plate, and precious stones, and informers were encouraged to
make search for offenders, by the promise of one-half the amount they
might discover. The whole country sent up a cry of distress at this unheard-
of tyranny. The most odious persecution daily took place. The privacy of
families was violated by the intrusion of informers and their agents. The
most virtuous and honest were denounced for the crime of having been seen
with a louis d’or in their possession. Servants betrayed their masters, one
citizen became a spy upon his neighbour, and arrests and confiscations so
multiplied, that the courts found a difficulty in getting through the immense
increase of business thus occasioned. It was sufficient for an informer to say
that he suspected any person of concealing money in his house, and
immediately a search-warrant was granted. Lord Stair, the English
ambassador, said, that it was now impossible to doubt of the sincerity of
Law’s conversion to the Catholic religion; he had established the
inquisition, after having given abundant evidence of his faith in
transubstantiation, by turning so much gold into paper.
Every epithet that popular hatred could suggest was showered upon the
regent and the unhappy Law. Coin, to any amount above five hundred
livres, was an illegal tender, and nobody would take paper if he could help
it. No one knew to-day what his notes would be worth to-morrow. “Never,”
says Duclos, in his Secret Memoirs of the Regency, “was seen a more
capricious government—never was a more frantic tyranny exercised by
hands less firm. It is inconceivable to those who were witnesses of the
horrors of those times, and who look back upon them now as on a dream,
that a sudden revolution did not break out—that Law and the regent did not
perish by a tragical death. They were both held in horror, but the people
confined themselves to complaints; a sombre and timid despair, a stupid
consternation, had seized upon all, and men’s minds were too vile even to
be capable of a courageous crime.” It would appear that, a one time, a
movement of the people was organised. Seditious writings were posted up
against the walls, and were sent, in hand-bills, to the houses of the most
conspicuous people. One of them, given in the Mémoires de la Régence,
was to the following effect:—“Sir and madam,—This is to give you notice
that a St. Bartholomew’s Day will be enacted again on Saturday and
Sunday, if affairs do not alter. You are desired not to stir out, nor you, nor
your servants. God preserve you from the flames! Give notice to your
neighbours. Dated, Saturday, May 25th, 1720.” The immense number of
spies with which the city was infested rendered the people mistrustful of
one another, and beyond some trifling disturbances made in the evening by
an insignificant group, which was soon dispersed, the peace of the capital
was not compromised.
The value of shares in the Louisiana, or Mississippi stock, had fallen
very rapidly, and few indeed were found to believe the tales that had once
been told of the immense wealth of that region. A last effort was therefore
tried to restore the public confidence in the Mississippi project. For this
purpose, a general conscription of all the poor wretches in Paris was made
by order of government. Upwards of six thousand of the very refuse of the
population were impressed, as if in time of war, and were provided with
clothes and tools to be embarked for New Orleans, to work in the gold
mines alleged to abound there. They were paraded day after day through the
streets with their pikes and shovels, and then sent off in small detachments
to the out-ports to be shipped for America. Two-thirds of them never
reached their destination, but dispersed themselves over the country, sold
their tools for what they could get, and returned to their old course of life.
In less than three weeks afterwards, one-half of them were to be found
again in Paris. The manœuvre, however, caused a trifling advance in
Mississippi stock. Many persons of superabundant gullibility believed that
operations had begun in earnest in the new Golconda, and that gold and
silver ingots would again be found in France.
In a constitutional monarchy some surer means would have been found
for the restoration of public credit. In England, at a subsequent period, when
a similar delusion had brought on similar distress, how different were the
measures taken to repair the evil; but in France, unfortunately, the remedy
was left to the authors of the mischief. The arbitrary will of the regent,
which endeavoured to extricate the country, only plunged it deeper into the
mire. All payments were ordered to be made in paper, and between the 1st
of February and the end of May, notes were fabricated to the amount of
upwards of 1500 millions of livres, or 60,000,000l. sterling. But the alarm
once sounded, no art could make the people feel the slightest confidence in
paper which was not exchangeable into metal. M. Lambert, the president of
the parliament of Paris, told the regent to his face that he would rather have
a hundred thousand livres in gold or silver than five millions in the notes of
his bank. When such was the general feeling, the superabundant issues of
paper but increased the evil, by rendering still more enormous the disparity
between the amount of specie and notes in circulation. Coin, which it was
the object of the regent to depreciate, rose in value on every fresh attempt to
diminish it. In February, it was judged advisable that the Royal Bank should
be incorporated with the Company of the Indies. An edict to that effect was
published and registered by the parliament. The state remained the
guarantee for the notes of the bank, and no more were to be issued without
an order in council. All the profits of the bank, since the time it had been
taken out of Law’s hands and made a national institution, were given over
by the regent to the Company of the Indies. This measure had the effect of
raising for a short time the value of the Louisiana and other shares of the
company, but it failed in placing public credit on any permanent basis.
A council of state was held in the beginning of May, at which Law,
D’Argenson (his colleague in the administration of the finances), and all the
ministers were present. It was then computed that the total amount of notes
in circulation was 2600 millions of livres, while the coin in the country was
not quite equal to half that amount. It was evident to the majority of the
council that some plan must be adopted to equalise the currency. Some
proposed that the notes should be reduced to the value of the specie, while
others proposed that the nominal value of the specie should be raised till it
was on an equality with the paper. Law is said to have opposed both these
projects, but failing in suggesting any other, it was agreed that the notes
should be depreciated one half. On the 21st of May, an edict was
accordingly issued, by which it was decreed that the shares of the Company
of the Indies, and the notes of the bank, should gradually diminish in value,
till at the end of a year they should only pass current for one-half of their
nominal worth. The parliament refused to register the edict—the greatest
outcry was excited, and the state of the country became so alarming, that, as
the only means of preserving tranquillity, the council of the regency was
obliged to stultify its own proceedings, by publishing within seven days
another edict, restoring the notes to their original value.
On the same day (the 27th of May) the bank stopped payment in specie.
Law and D’Argenson were both dismissed from the ministry. The weak,
vacillating, and cowardly regent threw the blame of all the mischief upon
Law, who, upon presenting himself at the Palais Royal, was refused
admittance. At nightfall, however, he was sent for, and admitted into the
palace by a secret door,12 when the regent endeavoured to console him, and
made all manner of excuses for the severity with which in public he had
been compelled to treat him. So capricious was his conduct, that, two days
afterwards, he took him publicly to the opera, where he sat in the royal box
alongside of the regent, who treated him with marked consideration in face
of all the people. But such was the hatred against Law that the experiment
had well nigh proved fatal to him. The mob assailed his carriage with stones
just as he was entering his own door; and if the coachman had not made a
sudden jerk into the court-yard, and the domestics closed the gate
immediately, he would, in all probability, have been dragged out and torn to
pieces. On the following day, his wife and daughter were also assailed by
the mob as they were returning in their carriage from the races. When the
regent was informed of these occurrences he sent Law a strong detachment
of Swiss guards, who were stationed night and day in the court of his
residence. The public indignation at last increased so much, that Law,
finding his own house, even with this guard, insecure, took refuge in the
Palais Royal, in the apartments of the regent.
The Chancellor, D’Aguesseau, who had been dismissed in 1718 for his
opposition to the projects of Law, was now recalled to aid in the restoration
of credit. The regent acknowledged too late, that he had treated with
unjustifiable harshness and mistrust one of the ablest, and perhaps the sole
honest public man of that corrupt period. He had retired ever since his
disgrace to his country house at Fresnes, where, in the midst of severe but
delightful philosophic studies, he had forgotten the intrigues of an unworthy
court. Law himself, and the Chevalier de Conflans, a gentleman of the
regent’s household, were despatched in a post-chaise with orders to bring
the ex-chancellor to Paris along with them. D’Aguesseau consented to
render what assistance he could, contrary to the advice of his friends, who
did not approve that he should accept any recal to office of which Law was
the bearer. On his arrival in Paris, five counsellors of the parliament were
admitted to confer with the Commissary of Finance; and on the 1st of June
an order was published abolishing the law which made it criminal to amass
coin to the amount of more than five hundred livres. Every one was
permitted to have as much specie as he pleased. In order that the bank-notes
might be withdrawn, twenty-five millions of new notes were created, on the
security of the revenues of the city of Paris, at two-and-a-half per cent. The
bank-notes withdrawn were publicly burned in front of the Hôtel de Ville.
The new notes were principally of the value of ten livres each; and on the
10th of June the bank was re-opened, with a sufficiency of silver coin to
give in change for them.
D’AGUESSEAU.
These measures were productive of considerable advantage. All the
population of Paris hastened to the bank to get coin for their small notes;
and silver becoming scarce, they were paid in copper. Very few complained
that this was too heavy, although poor fellows might be continually seen
toiling and sweating along the streets, laden with more than they could
comfortably carry, in the shape of change for fifty livres. The crowds
around the bank were so great, that hardly a day passed that some one was
not pressed to death. On the 9th of July, the multitude was so dense and
clamorous that the guards stationed at the entrance of the Mazarin Gardens
closed the gate and refused to admit any more. The crowd became incensed,
and flung stones through the railings upon the soldiers. The latter, incensed
in their turn, threatened to fire upon the people. At that instant one of them
was hit by a stone, and, taking up his piece, he fired into the crowd. One
man fell dead immediately, and another was severely wounded. It was every
instant expected that a general attack would have been commenced upon
the bank; but the gates of the Mazarin Gardens being opened to the crowd,
who saw a whole troop of soldiers, with their bayonets fixed ready to
receive them, they contented themselves by giving vent to their indignation
in groans and hisses.
Eight days afterwards the concourse of people was so tremendous that
fifteen persons were squeezed to death at the doors of the bank. The people
were so indignant that they took three of the bodies on stretchers before
them, and proceeded, to the number of seven or eight thousand, to the
gardens of the Palais Royal, that they might shew the regent the misfortunes
that he and Law had brought upon the country. Law’s coachman, who was
sitting at the box of his master’s carriage, in the court-yard of the palace,
happened to have more zeal than discretion, and, not liking that the mob
should abuse his master, he said, loud enough to be overheard by several
persons, that they were all blackguards, and deserved to be hanged. The
mob immediately set upon him, and thinking that Law was in the carriage,
broke it to pieces. The imprudent coachman narrowly escaped with his life.
No further mischief was done; a body of troops making their appearance,
the crowd quietly dispersed, after an assurance had been given by the regent
that the three bodies they had brought to shew him should be decently
buried at his own expense. The parliament was sitting at the time of this
uproar, and the president took upon himself to go out and see what was the
matter. On his return he informed the councillors that Law’s carriage had
been broken by the mob. All the members rose simultaneously, and
expressed their joy by a loud shout, while one man, more zealous in his
hatred than the rest, exclaimed, “And Law himself, is he torn to pieces?”13
Much, undoubtedly, depended on the credit of the Company of the
Indies, which was answerable for so great a sum to the nation. It was
therefore suggested in the council of the ministry, that any privileges which
could be granted to enable it to fulfil its engagements, would be productive
of the best results. With this end in view, it was proposed that the exclusive
privilege of all maritime commerce should be secured to it, and an edict to
that effect was published. But it was unfortunately forgotten that by such a
measure all the merchants of the country would be ruined. The idea of such
an immense privilege was generally scouted by the nation, and petition on
petition was presented to the parliament that they would refuse to register
the decree. They refused accordingly, and the regent, remarking that they
did nothing but fan the flame of sedition, exiled them to Blois. At the
intercession of D’Aguesseau, the place of banishment was changed to
Pontoise, and thither accordingly the councillors repaired, determined to set
the regent at defiance. They made every arrangement for rendering their
temporary exile as agreeable as possible. The president gave the most
elegant suppers, to which he invited all the gayest and wittiest company of
Paris. Every night there was a concert and ball for the ladies. The usually
grave and solemn judges and councillors joined in cards and other
diversions, leading for several weeks a life of the most extravagant
pleasure, for no other purpose than to shew the regent of how little
consequence they deemed their banishment, and that, when they willed it,
they could make Pontoise a pleasanter residence than Paris.
Of all the nations in the world the French are the most renowned for
singing over their grievances. Of that country it has been remarked with
some truth, that its whole history may be traced in its songs. When Law, by
the utter failure of his best-laid plans, rendered himself obnoxious, satire of
course seized hold upon him; and while caricatures of his person appeared
in all the shops, the streets resounded with songs, in which neither he nor
the regent was spared. Many of these songs were far from decent; and one
of them in particular counselled the application of all his notes to the most
ignoble use to which paper can be applied. But the following, preserved in
the letters of the Duchess of Orleans, was the best and the most popular, and
was to be heard for months in all the carrefours in Paris. The application of
the chorus is happy enough:
Aussitôt que Lass arriva
Dans notre bonne ville,
Monsieur le Régent publia
Que Lass serait utile
Pour rétablir la nation.
La faridondaine! la faridondon!
Mais il nous a tous enrichi,
Biribi!
A la façon de Barbari,
Mon ami!
Ce parpaillot, pour attirer
Tout l’argent de la France,
Songea d’abord à s’assurer
De notre confiance.
Il fit son abjuration,
La faridondaine! la faridondon!
Mais le fourbe s’est converti,
Biribi!
A la façon de Barbari,
Mon ami!
Lass, le fils aîné de Satan
Nous met tous à l’aumône,
Il nous a pris tout notre argent
Et n’en rend à personne.
Mais le Régent, humain et bon,
La faridondaine! la faridondon!
Nous rendra ce qu’on nous a pris,
Biribi!
A la façon de Barbari,
Mon ami!
The following epigram is of the same date:
Lundi, j’achetai des actions;
Mardi, je gagnai des millions;
Mercredi, j’arrangeai mon ménage,
Jeudi, je pris un équipage,
Vendredi, je m’en fus au bal,
Et Samedi, à l’hôpital.
Among the caricatures that were abundantly published, and that shewed
as plainly as graver matters, that the nation had awakened to a sense of its
folly, was one, a fac-simile of which is preserved in the Mémoires de la
Régence. It was thus described by its author: “The ‘Goddess of Shares,’ in
her triumphal car, driven by the Goddess of Folly. Those who are drawing
the car are impersonations of the Mississippi, with his wooden leg, the
South Sea, the Bank of England, the Company of the West of Senegal, and
of various assurances. Lest the car should not roll fast enough, the agents of
these companies, known by their long fox-tails and their cunning looks, turn
round the spokes of the wheels, upon which are marked the names of the
several stocks and their value, sometimes high and sometimes low,
according to the turns of the wheel. Upon the ground are the merchandise,
day-books and ledgers of legitimate commerce, crushed under the chariot of
Folly. Behind is an immense crowd of persons, of all ages, sexes, and
conditions, clamoring after Fortune, and fighting with each other to get a
portion of the shares which she distributes so bountifully among them. In
the clouds sits a demon, blowing bubbles of soap, which are also the objects
of the admiration and cupidity of the crowd, who jump upon one another’s
backs to reach them ere they burst. Right in the pathway of the car, and
blocking up the passage, stands a large building, with three doors, through
one of which it must pass, if it proceeds farther, and all the crowd along
with it. Over the first door are the words, ‘Hôpital des Foux,’ over the
second, ‘Hôpital des Malades,’ and over the third, ‘Hôpital des Gueux.’”
Another caricature represented Law sitting in a large cauldron, boiling over
the flames of popular madness, surrounded by an impetuous multitude, who
were pouring all their gold and silver into it, and receiving gladly in
exchange the bits of paper which he distributed among them by handfuls.
While this excitement lasted, Law took good care not to expose himself
unguarded in the streets. Shut up in the apartments of the regent, he was
secure from all attack; and whenever he ventured abroad, it was either
incognito, or in one of the royal carriages, with a powerful escort. An
amusing anecdote is recorded of the detestation in which he was held by the
people, and the ill-treatment he would have met had he fallen into their
hands. A gentleman of the name of Boursel was passing in his carriage
down the Rue St. Antoine, when his farther progress was stayed by a
hackney-coach that had blocked up the road. M. Boursel’s servant called
impatiently to the hackney-coachman to get out of the way, and, on his
refusal, struck him a blow on the face. A crowd was soon drawn together by
the disturbance, and M. Boursel got out of the carriage to restore order. The
hackney-coachman, imagining that he had now another assailant, bethought
him of an expedient to rid himself of both, and called out as loudly as he
was able, “Help! help! murder! murder! Here are Law and his servant going
to kill me! Help! help!” At this cry the people came out of their shops,
armed with sticks and other weapons, while the mob gathered stones to
inflict summary vengeance upon the supposed financier. Happily for M.
Boursel and his servant, the door of the church of the Jesuits stood wide
open, and, seeing the fearful odds against them, they rushed towards it with
all speed. They reached the altar, pursued by the people, and would have
been ill-treated even there, if, finding the door open leading to the sacristy,
they had not sprang through, and closed it after them. The mob were then
persuaded to leave the church by the alarmed and indignant priests, and
finding M. Boursel’s carriage still in the streets, they vented their ill-will
against it, and did it considerable damage.
The twenty-five millions secured on the municipal revenues of the city
of Paris, bearing so low an interest as two and a half per cent, were not very
popular among the large holders of Mississippi stock. The conversion of the
securities was, therefore, a work of considerable difficulty; for many
preferred to retain the falling paper of Law’s Company, in the hope that a
favourable turn might take place. On the 15th of August, with a view to
hasten the conversion, an edict was passed, declaring that all notes for sums
between one thousand and ten thousand livres, should not pass current,
except for the purchase of annuities and bank accounts, or for the payment
of instalments still due on the shares of the company.
In October following another edict was passed, depriving these notes of
all value whatever after the month of November next ensuing. The
management of the mint, the farming of the revenue, and all the other
advantages and privileges of the India, or Mississippi Company, were taken
from them, and they were reduced to a mere private company. This was the
death-blow to the whole system, which had now got into the hands of its
enemies. Law had lost all influence in the Council of Finance, and the
company, being despoiled of its immunities, could no longer hold out the
shadow of a prospect of being able to fulfil its engagements. All those
suspected of illegal profits at the time the public delusion was at its height,
were sought out and amerced in heavy fines. It was previously ordered that
a list of the original proprietors should be made out, and that such persons
as still retained their shares should place them in deposit with the company,
and that those who had neglected to complete the shares for which they had
put down their names, should now purchase them of the company, at the
rate of 13,500 livres for each share of 500 livres. Rather than submit to pay
this enormous sum for stock which was actually at a discount, the
shareholders packed up all their portable effects, and endeavoured to find a
refuge in foreign countries. Orders were immediately issued to the
authorities at the ports and frontiers, to apprehend all travellers who sought
to leave the kingdom, and keep them in custody, until it was ascertained
whether they had any plate or jewellery with them, or were concerned in the
late stock-jobbing. Against such few as escaped, the punishment of death
was recorded, while the most arbitrary proceedings were instituted against
those who remained.
Law himself, in a moment of despair, determined to leave a country
where his life was no longer secure. He at first only demanded permission
to retire from Paris to one of his country-seats—a permission which the
regent cheerfully granted. The latter was much affected at the unhappy turn
affairs had taken, but his faith continued unmoved in the truth and efficacy
of Law’s financial system. His eyes were opened to his own errors; and
during the few remaining years of his life he constantly longed for an
opportunity of again establishing the system upon a securer basis. At Law’s
last interview with the prince, he is reported to have said,—“I confess that I
have committed many faults. I committed them because I am a man, and all
men are liable to error; but I declare to you most solemnly that none of
them proceeded from wicked or dishonest motives, and that nothing of the
kind will be found in the whole course of my conduct.”
LAW IN A CAR DRAWN BY COCKS.14
Two or three days after his departure the regent sent him a very kind
letter, permitting him to leave the kingdom whenever he pleased, and
stating that he had ordered his passports to be made ready. He at the same
time offered him any sum of money he might require. Law respectfully
declined the money, and set out for Brussels in a post-chaise belonging to
Madame de Prie, the mistress of the Duke of Bourbon, escorted by six
horse-guards. From thence he proceeded to Venice, where he remained for
some months, the object of the greatest curiosity to the people, who
believed him to be the possessor of enormous wealth. No opinion, however,
could be more erroneous. With more generosity than could have been
expected from a man who during the greatest part of his life had been a
professed gambler, he had refused to enrich himself at the expense of a
ruined nation. During the height of the popular frenzy for Mississippi stock,
he had never doubted of the final success of his projects in making France
the richest and most powerful nation of Europe. He invested all his gains in
the purchase of landed property in France—a sure proof of his own belief in
the stability of his schemes. He had hoarded no plate or jewellery, and sent
no money, like the dishonest jobbers, to foreign countries. His all, with the
exception of one diamond, worth about five or six thousand pounds sterling,
was invested in the French soil; and when he left that country, he left it
almost a beggar. This fact alone ought to rescue his memory from the
charge of knavery, so often and so unjustly brought against him.
As soon as his departure was known, all his estates and his valuable
library were confiscated. Among the rest, an annuity of 200,000 livres
(8000l. sterling) on the lives of his wife and children, which had been
purchased for five millions of livres, was forfeited, notwithstanding that a
special edict, drawn up for the purpose in the days of his prosperity, had
expressly declared that it should never be confiscated for any cause
whatever. Great discontent existed among the people that Law had been
suffered to escape. The mob and the parliament would have been pleased to
have seen him hanged. The few who had not suffered by the commercial
revolution rejoiced that the quackhad left the country; but all those (and
they were by far the most numerous class) whose fortunes were implicated
regretted that his intimate knowledge of the distress of the country, and of
the causes that had led to it, had not been rendered more available in
discovering a remedy.
At a meeting of the Council of Finance and the General Council of the
Regency, documents were laid upon the table, from which it appeared that
the amount of notes in circulation was 2700 millions. The regent was called
upon to explain how it happened that there was a discrepancy between the
dates at which these issues were made and those of the edicts by which they
were authorised. He might have safely taken the whole blame upon himself,
but he preferred that an absent man should bear a share of it; and he
therefore stated that Law, upon his own authority, had issued 1200 millions
of notes at different times, and that he (the regent), seeing that the thing had
been irrevocably done, had screened Law by antedating the decrees of the
council which authorised the augmentation. It would have been more to his
credit if he had told the whole truth while he was about it, and
acknowledged that it was mainly through his extravagance and impatience
that Law had been induced to overstep the bounds of safe speculation. It
was also ascertained that the national debt, on the 1st of January 1721,
amounted to upwards of 3100 millions of livres, or more than 124,000,000l.
sterling, the interest upon which was 3,196,000l. A commission, or visa,
was forthwith appointed to examine into all the securities of the state
creditors, who were to be divided into five classes; the first four comprising
those who had purchased their securities with real effects, and, the latter
comprising those who could give no proofs that the transactions they had
entered into were real and bonâ fide. The securities of the latter were
ordered to be destroyed, while those of the first four classes were subjected
to a most rigid and jealous scrutiny. The result of the labours of the visa,
was a report, in which they counselled the reduction of the interest upon
these securities to fifty-six millions of livres. They justified, this, advice by
a statement of the various acts of peculation and extortion which they had
discovered; and an edict to that effect was accordingly published and duly
registered by the parliaments of the kingdom.
D’ARGENSON.
Another tribunal was afterwards established, under the title of
theChambre de l’Arsenal, which took cognisance of all the malversations
committed in the financial departments of the government, during the late
unhappy period. A Master of Requests, named Falhonet, together with the
Abbé Clement, and two clerks in their employ, had been concerned in
divers acts of peculation to the amount of upwards of a million of livres.
The first two were sentenced to be beheaded, and the latter to be hanged;
but their punishment was afterwards commuted into imprisonment for life
in the Bastille. Numerous other acts of dishonesty were discovered, and
punished, by fine and imprisonment.
D’Argenson shared with Law and the regent the unpopularity which had
alighted upon all those concerned in the Mississippi madness. He was
dismissed from his post of Chancellor to make room for D’Aguesseau; but
he retained the title of Keeper of the Seals, and was allowed to attend the
councils whenever he pleased. He thought it better, however, to withdraw
from Paris, and live for a time a life of seclusion at his country-seat. But he
was not formed for retirement; and becoming moody and discontented, he
aggravated a disease under which he had long laboured, and died in less
than a twelve-month. The populace of Paris so detested him, that they
carried their hatred even to his grave. As his funeral procession passed to
the church of St. Nicholas du Chardonneret, the burying-place of his family,
it was beset by a riotous mob, and his two sons, who were following as
chief mourners, were obliged to drive as fast as they were able down a by-
street to escape personal violence.
As regards Law, he for some time entertained a hope that he should be
recalled to France, to aid in establishing its credit upon a firmer basis. The
death of the regent in 1723, who expired suddenly as he was sitting by the
fireside conversing with his mistress, the Duchess de Phalaris, deprived him
of that hope, and he was reduced to lead his former life of gambling. He
was more than once obliged to pawn his diamond, the sole remnant of his
vast wealth, but successful play generally enabled him to redeem it. Being
persecuted by his creditors at Rome, he proceeded to Copenhagen, where he
received permission from the English ministry to reside in his native
country, his pardon for the murder of Mr. Wilson having been sent over to
him in 1719. He was brought over in the admiral’s ship—a circumstance
which gave occasion for a short debate in the House of Lords. Earl
Coningsby complained that a man who had renounced both his country and
his religion, should have been treated with such honour, and expressed his
belief that his presence in England, at a time when the people were so
bewildered by the nefarious practices of the South-Sea directors, would be
attended with no little danger. He gave notice of a motion on the subject;
but it was allowed to drop, no other member of the House having the
slightest participation in his lordship’s fears. Law remained for about four
years in England, and then proceeded to Venice, where he died in 1729, in
very embarrassed circumstances. The following epitaph was written at the
time:
“Ci gît cet Ecossais célébre,
Ce calculateur sans égal,
Qui, par les régles de l’algébre,
A mis la France à l’hôpital.”
His brother, William Law, who had been concerned with him in the
administration both of the bank and the Louisiana Company, was
imprisoned in the Bastille for alleged malversation, but no guilt was ever
proved against him. He was liberated after fifteen months, and became the
founder of a family, which is still known in France under the title of
Marquises of Lauriston.
NECK OR NOTHING.15
In the next chapter will be found an account of the madness which
infected the people of England at the same time, and under very similar
circumstances, but which, thanks to the energies and good sense of a
constitutional government, was attended with results far less disastrous than
those which were seen in France.
SOUTH-SEA HOUSE.
The South-Sea Bubble
Table of Contents
At length corruption, like a general flood,
Did deluge all; and avarice creeping on,
Spread, like a low-born mist, and hid the sun.
Statesmen and patriots plied alike the stocks,
Peeress and butler shared alike the box;
And judges jobbed, and bishops bit the town,
And mighty dukes packed cards for half-a-crown:
Britain was sunk in lucre’s sordid charms.—Pope.
The South-Sea Company was originated by the celebrated Harley Earl of
Oxford, in the year 1711, with the view of restoring public credit, which
had suffered by the dismissal of the Whig ministry, and of providing for the
discharge of the army and navy debentures, and other parts of the floating
debt, amounting to nearly ten millions sterling. A company of merchants, at
that time without a name, took this debt upon themselves, and the
government agreed to secure them for a certain period the interest of six per
cent. To provide for this interest, amounting to 600,000l. per annum, the
duties upon wines, vinegar, India goods, wrought silks, tobacco, whale-fins,
and some other articles, were rendered permanent. The monopoly of the
trade to the South Seas was granted, and the company, being incorporated
by act of parliament, assumed the title by which it has ever since been
known. The minister took great credit to himself for his share in this
transaction, and the scheme was always called by his flatterers “the Earl of
Oxford’s masterpiece.”
HARLEY EARL OF OXFORD
Even at this early period of its history the most visionary ideas were
formed by the company and the public of the immense riches of the eastern
coast of South America. Every body had heard of the gold and silver mines
of Peru and Mexico; every one believed them to be inexhaustible, and that
it was only necessary to send the manufactures of England to the coast to be
repaid a hundred fold in gold and silver ingots by the natives. A report,
industriously spread, that Spain was willing to concede four ports on the
coasts of Chili and Peru for the purposes of traffic, increased the general
confidence, and for many years the South-Sea Company’s stock was in high
favour.
Philip V. of Spain, however, never had any intention of admitting the
English to a free trade in the ports of Spanish America. Negotiations were
set on foot, but their only result was the assientocontract, or the privilege of
supplying the colonies with negroes for thirty years, and of sending once a
year a vessel, limited both as to tonnage and value of cargo, to trade with
Mexico, Peru, or Chili. The latter permission was only granted upon the
hard condition, that the King of Spain should enjoy one-fourth of the
profits, and a tax of five per cent on the remainder. This was a great
disappointment to the Earl of Oxford and his party, who were reminded
much oftener than they found agreeable of the
“Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus.”
But the public confidence in the South-Sea Company was not shaken. The
Earl of Oxford declared that Spain would permit two ships, in addition to
the annual ship, to carry out merchandise during the first year; and a list
was published, in which all the ports and harbours of these coasts were
pompously set forth as open to the trade of Great Britain. The first voyage
of the annual ship was not made till the year 1717, and in the following year
the trade was suppressed by the rupture with Spain.
The king’s speech, at the opening of the session of 1717, made pointed
allusion to the state of public credit, and recommended that proper
measures should be taken to reduce the national debt. The two great
monetary corporations, the South-Sea Company and the Bank of England,
made proposals to parliament on the 20th of May ensuing. The South-Sea
Company prayed that their capital stock of ten millions might be increased
to twelve, by subscription or otherwise, and offered to accept five per cent
instead of six upon the whole amount. The bank made proposals equally
advantageous. The house debated for some time, and finally three acts were
passed, called the South-Sea Act, the Bank Act, and the General Fund Act.
By the first, the proposals of the South-Sea Company were accepted, and
that body held itself ready to advance the sum of two millions towards
discharging the principal and interest of the debt due by the state for the
four lottery funds, of the ninth and tenth years of Queen Anne. By the
second act, the bank received a lower rate of interest for the sum of
1,775,027l. 15s. due to it by the state, and agreed to deliver up to be
cancelled as many exchequer bills as amounted to two millions sterling, and
to accept of an annuity of one hundred thousand pounds, being after the rate
of five per cent, the whole redeemable at one year’s notice. They were
further required to be ready to advance, in case of need, a sum not
exceeding 2,500,000l. upon the same terms of five per cent interest,
redeemable by parliament. The General Fund Act recited the various
deficiencies, which were to be made good by the aids derived from the
foregoing sources.
The name of the South-Sea Company was thus continually before the
public. Though their trade with the South American States produced little or
no augmentation of their revenues, they continued to flourish as a monetary
corporation. Their stock was in high request, and the directors, buoyed up
with success, began to think of new means for extending their influence.
The Mississippi scheme of John Law, which so dazzled and captivated the
French people, inspired them with an idea that they could carry on the same
game in England. The anticipated failure of his plans did not divert them
from their intention. Wise in their own conceit, they imagined they could
avoid his faults, carry on their schemes for ever, and stretch the cord of
credit to its extremest tension, without causing it to snap asunder.
It was while Law’s plan was at its greatest height of popularity, while
people were crowding in thousands to the Rue Quincampoix, and ruining
themselves with frantic eagerness, that the South-Sea directors laid before
parliament their famous plan for paying off the national debt. Visions of
boundless wealth floated before the fascinated eyes of the people in the two
most celebrated countries of Europe. The English commenced their career
of extravagance somewhat later than the French; but as soon as the delirium
seized them, they were determined not to be outdone. Upon the 22d of
January, 1720, the House of Commons resolved itself into a committee of
the whole house, to take into consideration that part of the king’s speech at
the opening of the session which related to the public debts, and the
proposal of the South-Sea Company towards the redemption and sinking of
the same. The proposal set forth at great length, and under several heads,
the debts of the state, amounting to 30,981,712l., which the company were
anxious to take upon themselves, upon consideration of five per cent per
annum, secured to them until Midsummer 1727; after which time, the whole
was to become redeemable at the pleasure of the legislature, and the interest
to be reduced to four per cent. The proposal was received with great favour;
but the Bank of England had many friends in the House of Commons, who
were desirous that that body should share in the advantages that were likely
to accrue. On behalf of this corporation it was represented, that they had
performed great and eminent services to the state in the most difficult times,
and deserved, at least, that if any advantage was to be made by public
bargains of this nature, they should be preferred before a company that had
never done any thing for the nation. The further consideration of the matter
was accordingly postponed for five days. In the mean time, a plan was
drawn up by the governors of the bank. The South-Sea Company, afraid that
the bank might offer still more advantageous terms to the government than
themselves, reconsidered their former proposal, and made some alterations
in it, which they hoped would render it more acceptable. The principal
change was a stipulation that the government might redeem these debts at
the expiration of four years, instead of seven, as at first suggested. The bank
resolved not to be outbidden in this singular auction, and the governors also
reconsidered their first proposal, and sent in a new one.
Thus, each corporation having made two proposals, the house began to
deliberate. Mr. Robert Walpole was the chief speaker in favour of the bank,
and Mr. Aislabie, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the principal advocate
on behalf of the South-Sea Company. It was resolved, on the 2d of
February, that the proposals of the latter were most advantageous to the
country. They were accordingly received, and leave was given to bring in a
bill to that effect.
Exchange Alley was in a fever of excitement. The company’s stock,
which had been at a hundred and thirty the previous day, gradually rose to
three hundred, and continued to rise with the most astonishing rapidity
during the whole time that the bill in its several stages was under
discussion. Mr. Walpole was almost the only statesman in the House who
spoke out boldly against it. He warned them, in eloquent and solemn
language, of the evils that would ensue. It countenanced, he said, “the
dangerous practice of stock-jobbing, and would divert the genius of the
nation from trade and industry. It would hold out a dangerous lure to decoy
the unwary to their ruin, by making them part with the earnings of their
labour for a prospect of imaginary wealth. The great principle of the project
was an evil of first-rate magnitude; it was to raise artificially the value of
the stock, by exciting and keeping up a general infatuation, and by
promising dividends out of funds which could never be adequate to the
purpose.” In a prophetic spirit he added, that if the plan succeeded, the
directors would become masters of the government, form a new and
absolute aristocracy in the kingdom, and control the resolutions of the
legislature. If it failed, which he was convinced it would, the result would
bring general discontent and ruin upon the country. Such would be the
delusion, that when the evil day came, as come it would, the people would
start up, as from a dream, and ask themselves if these things could have
been true. All his eloquence was in vain. He was looked upon as a false
prophet, or compared to the hoarse raven, croaking omens of evil. His
friends, however, compared him to Cassandra, predicting evils which would
only be believed when they came home to men’s hearths, and stared them in
the face at their own boards. Although, in former times, the house had
listened with the utmost attention to every word that fell from his lips, the
benches became deserted when it was known that he would speak on the
South-Sea question.
SIR ROBERT WALPOLE
The bill was two months in its progress through the House of
Commons. During this time every exertion was made by the directors and
their friends, and more especially by the chairman, the noted Sir John Blunt,
to raise the price of the stock. The most extravagant rumours were in
circulation. Treaties between England and Spain were spoken of, whereby
the latter was to grant a free trade to all her colonies; and the rich produce
of the mines of Potosi-la-Paz was to be brought to England until silver
should become almost as plentiful as iron. For cotton and woollen goods,
with which we could supply them in abundance, the dwellers in Mexico
were to empty their golden mines. The company of merchants trading to the
South Seas would be the richest the world ever saw, and every hundred
pounds invested in it would produce hundreds per annum to the
stockholder. At last the stock was raised by these means to near four
hundred; but, after fluctuating a good deal, settled at three hundred and
thirty, at which price it remained when the bill passed the Commons by a
majority of 172 against 55.
In the House of Lords the bill was hurried through all its stages with
unexampled rapidity. On the 4th of April it was read a first time; on the 5th,
it was read a second time; on the 6th, it was committed; and on the 7th, was
read a third time and passed.
Several peers spoke warmly against the scheme; but their warnings fell
upon dull, cold ears. A speculating frenzy had seized them as well as the
plebeians. Lord North and Grey said the bill was unjust in its nature, and
might prove fatal in its consequences, being calculated to enrich the few
and impoverish the many. The Duke of Wharton followed; but, as he only
retailed at second-hand the arguments so eloquently stated by Walpole in
the Lower House, he was not listened to with even the same attention that
had been bestowed upon Lord North and Grey. Earl Cowper followed on
the same side, and compared the bill to the famous horse of the siege of
Troy. Like that, it was ushered in and received with great pomp and
acclamations of joy, but bore within it treachery and destruction. The Earl
of Sunderland endeavoured to answer all objections; and on the question
being put, there appeared only seventeen peers against, and eighty-three in
favour of the project. The very same day on which it passed the Lords, it
received the royal assent, and became the law of the land.
It seemed at that time as if the whole nation had turned stockjobbers.
Exchange Alley was every day blocked up by crowds, and Cornhill was
impassable for the number of carriages. Every body came to purchase stock.
“Every fool aspired to be a knave.” In the words of a ballad published at the
time, and sung about the streets,16
“Then stars and garters did appear
Among the meaner rabble;
To buy and sell, to see and hear
The Jews and Gentiles squabble.
The greatest ladies thither came,
And plied in chariots daily,
Or pawned their jewels for a sum
To venture in the Alley.”
The inordinate thirst of gain that had afflicted all ranks of society was
not to be slaked even in the South Sea. Other schemes, of the most
extravagant kind, were started. The share-lists were speedily filled up, and
an enormous traffic carried on in shares, while, of course, every means were
resorted to to raise them to an artificial value in the market.
CORNHILL, 1720.
Contrary to all expectation, South-Sea stock fell when the bill received
the royal assent. On the 7th of April the shares were quoted at three hundred
and ten, and on the following day at two hundred and ninety. Already the
directors had tasted the profits of their scheme, and it was not likely that
they should quietly allow the stock to find its natural level without an effort
to raise it. Immediately their busy emissaries were set to work. Every
person interested in the success of the project endeavoured to draw a knot
of listeners around him, to whom he expatiated on the treasures of the South
American seas. Exchange Alley was crowded with attentive groups. One
rumour alone, asserted with the utmost confidence, had an immediate effect
upon the stock. It was said that Earl Stanhope had received overtures in
France from the Spanish government to exchange Gibraltar and Port Mahon
for some places on the coast of Peru, for the security and enlargement of the
trade in the South Seas. Instead of one annual ship trading to those ports,
and allowing the king of Spain twenty-five per cent out of the profits, the
company might build and charter as many ships as they pleased, and pay no
per centage whatever to any foreign potentate.
“Visions of ingots danced before their eyes,”
and stock rose rapidly. On the 12th of April, five days after the bill had
become law, the directors opened their books for a subscription of a million,
at the rate of 300l. for every 100l. capital. Such was the concourse of
persons of all ranks, that this first subscription was found to amount to
above two millions of original stock. It was to be paid at five payments, of
60l. each for every 100l. In a few days the stock advanced to three hundred
and forty, and the subscriptions were sold for double the price of the first
payment. To raise the stock still higher, it was declared, in a general court of
directors, on the 21st of April, that the midsummer dividend should be ten
per cent, and that all subscriptions should be entitled to the same. These
resolutions answering the end designed, the directors, to improve the
infatuation of the monied men, opened their books for a second subscription
of a million, at four hundred per cent. Such was the frantic eagerness of
people of every class to speculate in these funds, that in the course of a few
hours no less than a million and a half was subscribed at that rate.
In the mean time, innumerable joint-stock companies started up every
where. They soon received the name of Bubbles, the most appropriate that
imagination could devise. The populace are often most happy in the
nicknames they employ. None could be more apt than that of Bubbles.
Some of them lasted for a week or a fortnight, and were no more heard of,
while others could not even live out that short span of existence. Every
evening produced new schemes, and every morning new projects. The
highest of the aristocracy were as eager in this hot pursuit of gain as the
most plodding jobber in Cornhill. The Prince of Wales became governor of
one company, and is said to have cleared 40,000l. by his speculations.17 The
Duke of Bridgewater started a scheme for the improvement of London and
Westminster, and the Duke of Chandos another. There were nearly a
hundred different projects, each more extravagant and deceptive than the
other, To use the words of the Political State, they were “set on foot and
promoted by crafty knaves, then pursued by multitudes of covetous fools,
and at last appeared to be, in effect, what their vulgar appellation denoted
them to be—bubbles and mere cheats.” It was computed that near one
million and a half sterling was won and lost by these unwarrantable
practices, to the impoverishment of many a fool, and the enriching of many
a rogue.
Some of these schemes were plausible enough, and, had they been
undertaken at a time when the public mind was unexcited, might have been
pursued with advantage to all concerned. But they were established merely
with the view of raising the shares in the market. The projectors took the
first opportunity of a rise to sell out, and next morning the scheme was at an
end. Maitland, in his History of London, gravely informs us, that one of the
projects which received great encouragement, was for the establishment of
a company “to make deal boards out of saw-dust.” This is no doubt
intended as a joke; but there is abundance of evidence to shew that dozens
of schemes, hardly a whit more reasonable, lived their little day, ruining
hundreds ere they fell. One of them was for a wheel for perpetual motion—
capital one million; another was “for encouraging the breed of horses in
England, and improving of glebe and church lands, and repairing and
rebuilding parsonage and vicarage houses.” Why the clergy, who were so
mainly interested in the latter clause, should have taken so much interest in
the first, is only to be explained on the supposition that the scheme was
projected by a knot of the fox-hunting parsons, once so common in
England. The shares of this company were rapidly subscribed for. But the
most absurd and preposterous of all, and which shewed, more completely
than any other, the utter madness of the people, was one started by an
unknown adventurer, entitled “A company for carrying on an undertaking
of great advantage, but nobody to know what it is.” Were not the fact stated
by scores of credible witnesses, it would be impossible to believe that any
person could have been duped by such a project. The man of genius who
essayed this bold and successful inroad upon public credulity, merely stated
in his prospectus that the required capital was half a million, in five
thousand shares of 100l. each, deposit 2l. per share. Each subscriber, paying
his deposit, would be entitled to 100l. per annum per share. How this
immense profit was to be obtained, he did not condescend to inform them at
that time, but promised that in a month full particulars should be duly
announced, and a call made for the remaining 98l. of the subscription. Next
morning, at nine o’clock, this great man opened an office in Cornhill.
Crowds of people beset his door, and when he shut up at three o’clock, he
found that no less than one thousand shares had been subscribed for, and the
deposits paid. He was thus, in five hours, the winner of 2000l. He was
philosopher enough to be contented with his venture, and set off the same
evening for the Continent. He was never heard of again.
Well might Swift exclaim, comparing Change Alley to a gulf in the
South Sea:
“Subscribers here by thousands float,
And jostle one another down,
Each paddling in his leaky boat,
And here they fish for gold and drown.
Now buried in the depths below,
Now mounted up to heaven again,
They reel and stagger to and fro,
At their wit’s end, like drunken men.
Meantime, secure on Garraway cliffs,
A savage race, by shipwrecks fed,
Lie waiting for the foundered skiffs,
And strip the bodies of the dead.”
Another fraud that was very successful was that of the “Globe Permits,”
as they were called. They were nothing more than square pieces of playing-
cards, on which was the impression of a seal, in wax, bearing the sign of the
Globe Tavern, in the neighbourhood of Exchange Alley, with the inscription
of “Sail-Cloth Permits.” The possessors enjoyed no other advantage from
them than permission to subscribe at some future time to a new sail-cloth
manufactory, projected by one who was then known to be a man of fortune,
but who was afterwards involved in the peculation and punishment of the
South-Sea directors. These permits sold for as much as sixty guineas in the
Alley.
Persons of distinction, of both sexes, were deeply engaged in all these
bubbles; those of the male sex going to taverns and coffee-houses to meet
their brokers, and the ladies resorting for the same purpose to the shops of
milliners and haberdashers. But it did not follow that all these people
believed in the feasibility of the schemes to which they subscribed; it was
enough for their purpose that their shares would, by stock-jobbing arts, be
soon raised to a premium, when they got rid of them with all expedition to
the really credulous. So great was the confusion of the crowd in the alley,
that shares in the same bubble were known to have been sold at the same
instant ten per cent higher at one end of the alley than at the other. Sensible
men beheld the extraordinary infatuation of the people with sorrow and
alarm. There were some both in and out of parliament who foresaw clearly
the ruin that was impending. Mr. Walpole did not cease his gloomy
forebodings. His fears were shared by all the thinking few, and impressed
most forcibly upon the government. On the 11th of June, the day the
parliament rose, the king published a proclamation, declaring that all these
unlawful projects should be deemed public nuisances, and prosecuted
accordingly, and forbidding any broker, under a penalty of five hundred
pounds, from buying or selling any shares in them. Notwithstanding this
proclamation, roguish speculators still carried them on, and the deluded
people still encouraged them. On the 12th of July, an order of the Lords
Justices assembled in privy council was published, dismissing all the
petitions that had been presented for patents and charters, and dissolving all
the bubble companies. The following copy of their lordships’ order,
containing a list of all these nefarious projects, will not be deemed
uninteresting at the present time, when, at periodic intervals, there is but too
much tendency in the public mind to indulge in similar practices:
“At the Council Chamber, Whitehall, the 12th day of July, 1720.
Present, their Excellencies the Lords Justices in Council.
“Their Excellencies the Lords Justices, in council, taking into
consideration the many inconveniences arising to the public from
several projects set on foot for raising of joint-stock for various
purposes, and that a great many of his majesty’s subjects have been
drawn in to part with their money on pretence of assurances that their
petitions for patents and charters to enable them to carry on the same
would be granted: to prevent such impositions, their excellencies this
day ordered the said several petitions, together with such reports from
the Board of Trade, and from his majesty’s attorney and solicitor-
general, as had been obtained thereon, to be laid before them; and after
mature consideration thereof, were pleased, by advice of his majesty’s
privy council, to order that the said petitions be dismissed, which are
as follow:
“1. Petition of several persons, praying letters patent for carrying
on a fishing trade by the name of the Grand Fishery of Great Britain.
“2. Petition of the Company of the Royal Fishery of England,
praying letters patent for such further powers as will effectually
contribute to carry on the said fishery.
“3. Petition of George James, on behalf of himself and divers
persons of distinction concerned in a national fishery, praying letters
patent of incorporation, to enable them to carry on the same.
“4. Petition of several merchants, traders, and others, whose names
are thereunto subscribed, praying to be incorporated for reviving and
carrying on a whale fishery to Greenland and elsewhere.
“5. Petition of Sir John Lambert and others thereto subscribing, on
behalf of themselves and a great number of merchants, praying to be
incorporated for carrying on a Greenland trade, and particularly a
whale fishery in Davis’s Straits.
“6. Another petition for a Greenland trade.
“7. Petition of several merchants, gentlemen, and citizens, praying
to be incorporated for buying and building of ships to let or freight.
“8. Petition of Samuel Antrim and others, praying for letters patent
for sowing hemp and flax.
“9. Petition of several merchants, masters of ships, sail-makers,
and manufacturers of sail-cloth, praying a charter of incorporation, to
enable them to carry on and promote the said manufactory by a joint-
stock.
“10. Petition of Thomas Boyd and several hundred merchants,
owners and masters of ships, sail-makers, weavers, and other traders,
praying a charter of incorporation, empowering them to borrow money
for purchasing lands, in order to the manufacturing sail-cloth and fine
holland.
“11. Petition on behalf of several persons interested in a patent
granted by the late King William and Queen Mary for the making of
linen and sail-cloth, praying that no charter may be granted to any
persons whatsoever for making sail-cloth, but that the privilege now
enjoyed by them may be confirmed, and likewise an additional power
to carry on the cotton and cotton-silk manufactures.
“12. Petition of several citizens, merchants, and traders in London,
and others, subscribers to a British stock for a general insurance from
fire in any part of England, praying to be incorporated for carrying on
the said undertaking.
“13. Petition of several of his majesty’s loyal subjects of the city of
London and other parts of Great Britain, praying to be incorporated for
carrying on a general insurance from losses by fire within the kingdom
of England.
“14. Petition of Thomas Surges and others his majesty’s subjects
thereto subscribing, in behalf of themselves and others, subscribers to
a fund of 1,200,000l. for carrying on a trade to his majesty’s German
dominions, praying to be incorporated by the name of the Harburg
Company.
“15. Petition of Edward Jones, a dealer in timber, on behalf of
himself and others, praying to be incorporated for the importation of
timber from Germany.
“16. Petition of several merchants of London, praying a charter of
incorporation for carrying on a salt-work.
“17. Petition of Captain Macphedris of London, merchant, on
behalf of himself and several merchants, clothiers, hatters, dyers, and
other traders, praying a charter of incorporation empowering them to
raise a sufficient sum of money to purchase lands for planting and
rearing a wood called madder, for the use of dyers.
“18. Petition of Joseph Galendo of London, snuff-maker, praying a
patent for his invention to prepare and cure Virginia tobacco for snuff
in Virginia, and making it into the same in all his majesty’s
dominions.”
List of Bubbles.
The following Bubble-Companies were by the same order declared to be
illegal, and abolished accordingly:
1. For the importation of Swedish iron.
2. For supplying London with sea-coal. Capital, three millions.
3. For building and rebuilding houses throughout all England Capital,
three millions.
4. For making of muslin.
5. For carrying on and improving the British alum-works.
6. For effectually settling the island of Blanco and Sal Tartagus.
7. For supplying the town of Deal with fresh water.
8. For the importation of Flanders lace.
9. For improvement of lands in Great Britain. Capital, four millions.
10. For encouraging the breed of horses in England, and improving of
glebe and church lands, and for repairing and rebuilding parsonage and
vicarage houses.
11. For making of iron and steel in Great Britain,
12. For improving the land in the county of Flint. Capital, one million.
13. For purchasing lands to build on. Capital, two millions.
14. For trading in hair.
15. For erecting salt-works in Holy Island. Capital, two millions.
16. For buying and selling estates, and lending money on mortgage.
17. For carrying on an undertaking of great advantage; but nobody to
know what it is.
18. For paving the streets of London. Capital, two millions.
19. For furnishing funerals to any part of Great Britain.
20. For buying and selling lands and lending money at interest. Capital,
five millions.
21. For carrying on the royal fishery of Great Britain. Capital, ten millions.
22. For assuring of seamen’s wages.
23. For erecting loan-offices for the assistance and encouragement of the
industrious. Capital, two millions.
24. For purchasing and improving leaseable lands. Capital, four millions.
25. For importing pitch and tar, and other naval stores, from North Britain
and America.
26. For the clothing, felt, and pantile trade.
27. For purchasing and improving a manor and royalty in Essex.
28. For insuring of horses. Capital, two millions.
29. For exporting the woollen manufacture, and importing copper, brass,
and iron. Capital, four millions.
30. For a grand dispensary. Capital, three millions.
31. For erecting mills and purchasing lead-mines. Capital, two millions.
32. For improving the art of making soap.
33. For a settlement on the island of Santa Cruz.
34. For sinking pits and smelting lead ore in Derbyshire.
35. For making glass bottles and other glass.
36. For a wheel for perpetual motion. Capital, one million.
37. For improving of gardens.
38. For insuring and increasing children’s fortunes.
39. For entering and loading goods at the Custom-house, and for
negotiating business for merchants.
40. For carrying on a woollen manufacture in the North of England.
41. For importing walnut-trees from Virginia, Capital, two millions.
42. For making Manchester stuffs of thread and cotton.
43. For making Joppa and Castile soap.
44. For improving the wrought-iron and steel manufactures of this
kingdom. Capital four millions.
45. For dealing in lace, hollands, cambrics, lawns, &c. Capital, two
millions.
46. For trading in and improving certain commodities of the produce of
this kingdom, &c. Capital three millions.
47. For supplying the London markets with cattle.
48. For making looking-glasses, coach-glasses, &c. Capital, two millions.
49. For working the tin and lead mines in Cornwall and Derbyshire.
50. For making rape-oil.
51. For importing beaver fur. Capital, two millions.
52. For making pasteboard and packing-paper.
53. For importing of oils and other materials used in the woollen
manufacture.
54. For improving and increasing the silk manufactures.
55. For lending money on stock, annuities, tallies, &c.
56. For paying pensions to widows and others, at a small discount. Capital,
two millions.
57. For improving malt liquors. Capital, four millions.
58. For a grand American fishery.
59. For purchasing and improving the fenny lands in Lincolnshire. Capital,
two millions.
60. For improving the paper manufacture of Great Britain.
61. The Bottomry Company.
62. For drying malt by hot air.
63. For carrying on a trade in the river Oronooko.
64. For the more effectual making of baize, in Colchester and other parts
of Great Britain.
65. For buying of naval stores, supplying the victualling, and paying the
wages of the workmen.
66. For employing poor artificers, and furnishing merchants and others
with watches.
67. For improvement of tillage and the breed of cattle.
68. Another for the improvement of our breed in horses.
69. Another for a horse-insurance.
70. For carrying on the corn trade of Great Britain.
71. For insuring to all masters and mistresses the losses they may sustain
by servants. Capital, three millions.
72. For erecting houses or hospitals for taking in and maintaining
illegitimate children. Capital, two millions.
73. For bleaching coarse sugars, without the use of fire or loss of
substance.
74. For building turnpikes and wharfs in Great Britain.
75. For insuring from thefts and robberies.
76. For extracting silver from lead.
77. For making china and delft ware. Capital, one million.
78. For importing tobacco, and exporting it again to Sweden and the north
of Europe. Capital, four millions.
79. For making iron with pit coal.
80. For furnishing the cities of London and Westminster with hay and
straw. Capital, three millions.
81. For a sail and packing-cloth manufactory in Ireland.
82. For taking up ballast.
83. For buying and fitting out ships to suppress pirates.
84. For the importation of timber from Wales. Capital, two millions.
85. For rock-salt.
86. For the transmutation of quicksilver into a malleable fine metal.
CHANGE-ALLEY.18
Besides these bubbles, many others sprang up daily, in-spite of the
condemnation of the government and the ridicule of the still sane portion of
the public. The print-shops teemed with caricatures, and the newspapers
with epigrams and satires, upon the prevalent folly. An ingenious cardmaker
published a pack of South-Sea playing-cards, which are now extremely
rare, each card containing, besides the usual figures, of a very small size, in
one corner, a caricature of a bubble-company, with appropriate verses
underneath. One of the most famous bubbles was “Puckle’s Machine
Company,” for discharging round and square cannon-balls and bullets, and
making a total revolution in the art of war. Its pretensions to public favour
were thus summed up on the eight of spades:
“A rare invention to destroy the crowd
Of fools at home instead of fools abroad.
Fear not, my friends, this terrible machine,
They’re only wounded who have shares therein.”
TREE CARICATURE19
The nine of hearts was a caricature of the English Copper and Brass
Company, with the following epigram:
“The headlong-fool that wants to be a swopper
Of gold and silver coin for English copper,
May, in Change Alley, prove himself an ass,
And give rich metal for adultrate brass.”
The eight of diamonds celebrated the company for the colonisation of
Acadia, with this doggrel:
“He that is rich and wants to fool away
A good round sum in North America,
Let him subscribe himself a headlong sharer,
And asses’ ears shall honour him or bearer.”
And in a similar style every card of the pack exposed some knavish
scheme, and ridiculed the persons who were its dupes. It was computed that
the total amount of the sums proposed for carrying on these projects was
upwards of three hundred millions sterling.
MERCHANT’S GATEWAY
It is time, however, to return to the great South-Sea gulf, that swallowed
the fortunes of so many thousands of the avaricious and the credulous. On
the 29th of May, the stock had risen as high as five hundred, and about two-
thirds of the government annuitants had exchanged the securities of the
state for those of the South-Sea company. During the whole of the month of
May the stock continued to rise, and on the 28th it was quoted at five
hundred and fifty. In four days after this it took a prodigious leap, rising
suddenly from five hundred and fifty to eight hundred and ninety. It was
now the general opinion that the stock could rise no higher, and many
persons took that opportunity of selling out, with a view of realising their
profits. Many noblemen and persons in the train of the king, and about to
accompany him to Hanover, were also anxious to sell out. So many sellers,
and so few buyers, appeared in the Alley on the 3d of June, that the stock
fell at once from eight hundred and ninety to six hundred and forty. The
directors were alarmed, and gave their agents orders to buy. Their efforts
succeeded. Towards evening, confidence was restored, and the stock
advanced to seven hundred and fifty. It continued at this price, with some
slight fluctuation, until the company closed their books on the 22d of June.
It would be needless and uninteresting to detail the various arts
employed by the directors to keep up the price of stock. It will be sufficient
to state that it finally rose to one thousand per cent. It was quoted at this
price in, the commencement of August. The bubble was then full-blown,
and began to quiver and shake preparatory to its bursting.
Many of the government annuitants expressed dissatisfaction against the
directors. They accused them of partiality in making out the lists for shares
in each subscription. Further uneasiness was occasioned by its being
generally known that Sir John Blunt the chairman, and some others, had
sold out. During the whole of the month of August the stock fell, and on the
2d of September it was quoted at seven hundred only.
The state of things now became alarming. To prevent, if possible, the
utter extinction of public confidence in their proceedings, the directors
summoned a general court of the whole corporation, to meet in Merchant
Tailors’ Hall on the 8th of September. By nine o’clock in the morning, the
room was filled to suffocation; Cheapside was blocked up by a crowd
unable to gain admittance, and the greatest excitement prevailed. The
directors and their friends mustered in great numbers. Sir John Fellowes,
the sub-governor, was called to the chair. He acquainted the assembly with
the cause of their meeting; read to them the several resolutions of the court
of directors, and gave them an account of their proceedings; of the taking in
the redeemable and unredeemable funds, and of the subscriptions in money.
Mr. Secretary Craggs then made a short speech, wherein he commended the
conduct of the directors, and urged that nothing could more effectually
contribute to the bringing this scheme to perfection than union among
themselves. He concluded with a motion for thanking the court of directors
for their prudent and skilful management, and for desiring them to proceed
in such manner as they should think most proper for the interest and
advantage of the corporation. Mr. Hungerford, who had rendered himself
very conspicuous in the House of Commons for his zeal in behalf of the
South-Sea company, and who was shrewdly suspected to have been a
considerable gainer by knowing the right time to sell out, was very
magniloquent on this occasion. He said that he had seen the rise and fall,
the decay and resurrection of many communities of this nature, but that, in
his opinion, none had ever performed such wonderful things in so short a
time as the South-Sea company. They had done more than the crown, the
pulpit, or the bench could do. They had reconciled all parties in one
common interest; they had laid asleep, if not wholly extinguished, all the
domestic jars and animosities of the nation. By the rise of their stock,
monied men had vastly increased their fortunes; country gentlemen had
seen the value of their lands doubled and trebled in their hands. They had at
the same time done good to the Church, not a few of the reverend clergy
having got great sums by the project. In short, they had enriched the whole
nation, and he hoped they had not forgotten themselves. There was some
hissing at the latter part of this speech, which for the extravagance of its
eulogy was not far removed from satire; but the directors and their friends,
and all the winners in the room, applauded vehemently. The Duke of
Portland spoke in a similar strain, and expressed his great wonder why any
body should be dissatisfied; of course, he was a winner by his speculations,
and in a condition similar to that of the fat alderman in Joe Miller’s Jests,
who, whenever he had eaten a good dinner, folded his hands upon his
paunch, and expressed his doubts whether there could be a hungry man in
the world.
MR. SECRETARY CRAGGS.
Several resolutions were passed at this meeting, but they had no effect
upon the public. Upon the very same evening the stock fell to six hundred
and forty, and on the morrow to five hundred and forty. Day after day it
continued to fall, until it was as low as four hundred. In a letter dated
September 13th, from Mr. Broderick, M.P., to Lord Chancellor Middleton,
and published in Coxe’s Walpole, the former says: “Various are the
conjectures why the South-Sea directors have suffered the cloud to break so
early. I made no doubt but they would do so when they found it to their
advantage. They have stretched credit so far beyond what it would bear, that
specie proves insufficient to support it. Their most considerable men have
drawn out, securing themselves by the losses of the deluded, thoughtless
numbers, whose understandings have been overruled by avarice and the
hope of making mountains out of mole-hills. Thousands of families will be
reduced to beggary. The consternation is inexpressible—the rage beyond
description, and the case altogether so desperate, that I do not see any plan
or scheme so much as thought of for averting the blow, so that I cannot
pretend to guess what is next to be done.” Ten days afterwards, the stock
still falling, he writes: “The company have yet come to no determination,
for they are in such a wood that they know not which way to turn. By
several gentlemen lately come to town, I perceive the very name of a South-
Sea-man grows abominable in every country. A great many goldsmiths are
already run off, and more will daily. I question whether one-third, nay, one-
fourth of them can stand it. From the very beginning, I founded my
judgment of the whole affair upon the unquestionable maxim, that ten
millions (which is more than our running cash) could not circulate two
hundred millions, beyond which our paper credit extended. That, therefore,
whenever that should become doubtful, be the cause what it would, our
noble state machine must inevitably fall to the ground.”
On the 12th of September, at the earnest solicitation of Mr. Secretary
Craggs, several conferences were held between the directors of the South
Sea and the directors of the Bank. A report which was circulated, that the
latter had agreed to circulate six millions of the South-Sea company’s
bonds, caused the stock to rise to six hundred and seventy; but in the
afternoon, as soon as the report was known to be groundless, the stock fell
again to five hundred and eighty; the next day to five hundred and seventy,
and so gradually to four hundred.20
The ministry were seriously alarmed at the aspect of affairs. The
directors could not appear in the streets without being insulted; dangerous
riots were every moment apprehended. Despatches were sent off to the king
at Hanover, praying his immediate return. Mr. Walpole, who was staying at
his country seat, was sent for, that he might employ his known influence
with the directors of the Bank of England to induce them to accept the
proposal made by the South-Sea company for circulating a number of their
bonds.
The Bank was very unwilling to mix itself up with the affairs of the
company; it dreaded being involved in calamities which it could not relieve,
and received all overtures with visible reluctance. But the universal voice of
the nation called upon it to come to the rescue. Every person of note in
commercial politics was called in to advise in the emergency. A rough draft
of a contract drawn up by Mr. Walpole was ultimately adopted as the basis
of further negotiations, and the public alarm abated a little.
On the following day, the 20th of September, a general court of the
South-Sea company was held at Merchant Tailors’ Hall, in which
resolutions were carried, empowering the directors to agree with the Bank
of England, or any other persons, to circulate the company’s bonds, or make
any other agreement with the Bank which they should think proper. One of
the speakers, a Mr. Pulteney, said it was most surprising to see the
extraordinary panic which had seized upon the people. Men were running to
and fro in alarm and terror, their imaginations filled with some great
calamity, the form and dimensions of which nobody knew:
“Black it stood as night—
Fierce as ten furies—terrible as hell.”
At a general court of the Bank of England held two days afterwards, the
governor informed them of the several meetings that had been held on the
affairs of the South-Sea company, adding that the directors had not yet
thought fit to come to any decision upon the matter. A resolution was then
proposed, and carried without a dissentient voice, empowering the directors
to agree with those of the South Sea to circulate their bonds, to what sum,
and upon what terms, and for what time, they might think proper.
Thus both parties were at liberty to act as they might judge best for the
public interest. Books were opened at the Bank for a subscription of three
millions for the support of public credit, on the usual terms of 15l. per cent
deposit, 3l. per cent premium, and 5l. per cent interest. So great was the
concourse of people in the early part of the morning, all eagerly bringing
their money, that it was thought the subscription would be filled that day;
but before noon, the tide turned. In spite of all that could be done to prevent
it, the South-Sea company’s stock fell rapidly. Their bonds were in such
discredit, that a run commenced upon the most eminent goldsmiths and
bankers, some of whom, having lent out great sums upon South-Sea stock,
were obliged to shut up their shops and abscond. The Sword-blade
company, who had hitherto been the chief cashiers of the South-Sea
company, stopped payment. This being looked upon as but the beginning of
evil, occasioned a great run upon the Bank, who were now obliged to pay
out money much faster than they had received it upon the subscription in
the morning. The day succeeding was a holiday (the 29th of September),
and the Bank had a little breathing time. They bore up against the storm; but
their former rivals, the South-Sea company, were wrecked upon it. Their
stock fell to one hundred and fifty, and gradually, after various fluctuations,
to one hundred and thirty-five.
The Bank, finding they were not able to restore public confidence, and
stem the tide of ruin, without running the risk of being swept away with
those they intended to save, declined to carry out the agreement into which
they had partially entered. They were under no obligation whatever to
continue; for the so-called Bank contract was nothing more than the rough
draught of an agreement, in which blanks had been left for several
important particulars, and which contained no penalty for their secession.
“And thus,” to use the words of the Parliamentary History, “were seen, in
the space of eight months, the rise, progress, and fall of that mighty fabric,
which, being wound up by mysterious springs to a wonderful height, had
fixed the eyes and expectations of all Europe, but whose foundation, being
fraud, illusion, credulity, and infatuation, fell to the ground as soon as the
artful management of its directors was discovered.”
In the hey-day of its blood, during the progress of this dangerous
delusion, the manners of the nation became sensibly corrupted. The
parliamentary inquiry, set on foot to discover the delinquents, disclosed
scenes of infamy, disgraceful alike to the morals of the offenders and the
intellects of the people among whom they had arisen. It is a deeply
interesting study to investigate all the evils that were the result. Nations,
like individuals, cannot become desperate gamblers with impunity.
Punishment is sure to overtake them sooner or later. A celebrated writer21 is
quite wrong when he says, “that such an era as this is the most unfavourable
for a historian; that no reader of sentiment and imagination can be
entertained or interested by a detail of transactions such as these, which
admit of no warmth, no colouring, no embellishment; a detail of which only
serves to exhibit an inanimate picture of tasteless vice and mean
degeneracy.” On the contrary,—and Smollett might have discovered it, if he
had been in the humour,—the subject is capable of inspiring as much
interest as even a novellist can desire. Is there no warmth in the despair of a
plundered people?—no life and animation in the picture which might be
drawn of the woes of hundreds of impoverished and ruined families? of the
wealthy of yesterday become the beggars of to-day? of the powerful and
influential changed into exiles and outcasts, and the voice of self-reproach
and imprecation resounding from every corner of the land? Is it a dull or
uninstructive picture to see a whole people shaking suddenly off the
trammels of reason, and running wild after a golden vision, refusing
obstinately to believe that it is not real, till, like a deluded hind running after
an ignis fatuus, they are plunged into a quagmire? But in this false spirit has
history too often been written. The intrigues of unworthy courtiers to gain
the favour of still more unworthy kings, or the records of murderous battles
and sieges, have been dilated on, and told over and over again, with all the
eloquence of style and all the charms of fancy; while the circumstances
which have most deeply affected the morals and welfare of the people have
been passed over with but slight notice, as dry and dull, and capable of
neither warmth nor colouring.
CARICATURE.22
During the progress of this famous bubble, England presented a singular
spectacle. The public mind was in a state of unwholesome fermentation.
Men were no longer satisfied with the slow but sure profits of cautious
industry. The hope of boundless wealth for the morrow made them heedless
and extravagant for to-day. A luxury, till then unheard-of, was introduced,
bringing in its train a corresponding laxity of morals. The over-bearing
insolence of ignorant men, who had arisen to sudden wealth by successful
gambling, made men of true gentility of mind and manners blush that gold
should have power to raise the unworthy in the scale of society. The
haughtiness of some of these “cyphering cits,” as they were termed by Sir
Richard Steele, was remembered against them in the day of their adversity.
In the parliamentary inquiry, many of the directors suffered more for their
insolence than for their peculation. One of them, who, in the full-blown
pride of an ignorant rich man, had said that he would feed his horse upon
gold, was reduced almost to bread and water for himself; every haughty
look, every overbearing speech, was set down, and repaid them a
hundredfold in poverty and humiliation.
The state of matters all over the country was so alarming, that George I.
shortened his intended stay in Hanover, and returned in all haste to England.
He arrived on the 11th of November, and parliament was summoned to
meet on the 8th of December. In the mean time, public meetings were held
in every considerable town of the empire, at which petitions were adopted,
praying the vengeance of the legislature upon the South-Sea directors, who,
by their fraudulent practices, had brought the nation to the brink of ruin.
Nobody seemed to imagine that the nation itself was as culpable as the
South-Sea company. Nobody blamed the credulity and avarice of the
people,—the degrading lust of gain, which had swallowed up every nobler
quality in the national character, or the infatuation which had made the
multitude run their heads with such frantic eagerness into the net held out
for them by scheming projectors. These things were never mentioned. The
people were a simple, honest, hard-working people, ruined by a gang of
robbers, who were to be hanged, drawn, and quartered without mercy.
This was the almost unanimous feeling of the country. The two Houses
of Parliament were not more reasonable. Before the guilt of the South-Sea
directors was known, punishment was the only cry. The king, in his speech
from the throne, expressed his hope that they would remember that all their
prudence, temper, and resolution were necessary to find out and apply the
proper remedy for their misfortunes. In the debate on the answer to the
address, several speakers indulged in the most violent invectives against the
directors of the South-Sea project. The Lord Molesworth was particularly
vehement. “It had been said by some, that there was no law to punish the
directors of the South-Sea company, who were justly looked upon as the
authors of the present misfortunes of the state. In his opinion, they ought
upon this occasion to follow the example of the ancient Romans, who,
having no law against parricide, because their legislators supposed no son
could be so unnaturally wicked as to embrue his hands in his father’s blood,
made a law to punish this heinous crime as soon as it was committed. They
adjudged the guilty wretch to be sown in a sack, and thrown alive into the
Tiber. He looked upon the contrivers and executors of the villanous South-
Sea scheme as the parricides of their country, and should be satisfied to see
them tied in like manner in sacks, and thrown into the Thames.” Other
members spoke with as much want of temper and discretion. Mr. Walpole
was more moderate. He recommended that their first care should be to
restore public credit. “If the city of London were on fire, all wise men
would aid in extinguishing the flames, and preventing the spread of the
conflagration, before they inquired after the incendiaries. Public credit had
received a dangerous wound, and lay bleeding, and they ought to apply a
speedy remedy to it. It was time enough to punish the assassin afterwards.”
On the 9th of December an address, in answer to his majesty’s speech, was
agreed upon, after an amendment, which was carried without a division,
that words should be added expressive of the determination of the house not
only to seek a remedy for the national distresses, but to punish the authors
of them.
BRITANNIA STRIPT BY A SOUTH-SEA DIRECTOR.23
The inquiry proceeded rapidly. The directors were ordered to lay before
the house a full account of all their proceedings. Resolutions were passed to
the effect that the calamity was mainly owing to the vile arts of stock-
jobbers, and that nothing could tend more to the reestablishment of public
credit than a law to prevent this infamous practice. Mr. Walpole then rose,
and said, that “as he had previously hinted, he had spent some time upon a
scheme for restoring public credit, but that the execution of it depending
upon a position which had been laid down as fundamental, he thought it
proper, before he opened out his scheme, to be informed whether he might
rely upon that foundation. It was, whether the subscription of public debts
and encumbrances, money subscriptions, and other contracts, made with the
South-Sea company, should remain in the present state?” This question
occasioned an animated debate. It was finally agreed, by a majority of 259
against 117, that all these contracts should remain in their present state,
unless altered for the relief of the proprietors by a general court of the
South-Sea company, or set aside by due course of law. On the following
day, Mr. Walpole laid before a committee of the whole house his scheme for
the restoration of public credit, which was, in substance, to engraft nine
millions of South-Sea stock into the Bank of England, and the same sum
into the East India company, upon certain conditions. The plan was
favourably received by the house. After some few objections, it was ordered
that proposals should be received from the two great corporations. They
were both unwilling to lend their aid, and the plan met with a warm but
fruitless opposition at the general courts summoned for the purpose of
deliberating upon it. They, however, ultimately agreed upon the terms on
which they would consent to circulate the South-Sea bonds, and their report
being presented to the committee, a bill was brought in under the
superintendence of Mr. Walpole, and safely carried through both Houses of
Parliament.
A bill was at the same time brought in for restraining the South-Sea
directors, governor, sub-governor, treasurer, cashier, and clerks from
leaving the kingdom for a twelvemonth, and for discovering their estates
and effects, and preventing them from transporting or alienating the same.
All the most influential members of the House supported the bill. Mr.
Shippen, seeing Mr. Secretary Craggs in his place, and believing the
injurious rumours that were afloat of that minister’s conduct in the South-
Sea business, determined to touch him to the quick. He said, he was glad to
see a British House of Commons resuming its pristine vigour and spirit, and
acting with so much unanimity for the public good. It was necessary to
secure the persons and estates of the South-Sea directors and their officers;
“but,” he added, looking fixedly at Mr. Craggs as he spoke, “there were
other men in high station, whom, in time, he would not be afraid to name,
who were no less guilty than the directors.” Mr. Craggs arose in great
wrath, and said, that if the innuendo were directed against him, he was
ready to give satisfaction to any man who questioned him, either in the
House or out of it. Loud cries of order immediately arose on every side. In
the midst of the uproar, Lord Molesworth got up, and expressed his wonder
at the boldness of Mr. Craggs in challenging the whole House of Commons.
He, Lord Molesworth, though somewhat old, past sixty, would answer Mr.
Craggs whatever he had to say in the House, and he trusted there were
plenty of young men beside him, who would not be afraid to look Mr.
Craggs in the face out of the House. The cries of order again resounded
from every side; the members arose simultaneously; every body seemed to
be vociferating at once. The speaker in vain called order. The confusion
lasted several minutes, during which Lord Molesworth and Mr. Craggs
were almost the only members who kept their seats. At last, the call for Mr.
Craggs became so violent, that he thought proper to submit to the universal
feeling of the House, and explain his unparliamentary expression. He said,
that by giving satisfaction to the impugners of his conduct in that House, he
did not mean that he would fight, but that he would explain his conduct.
Here the matter ended, and the House proceeded to debate in what manner
they should conduct their inquiry into the affairs of the South-Sea company,
whether in a grand or a select committee. Ultimately, a secret committee of
thirteen was appointed, with power to send for persons, papers, and records.
The Lords were as zealous and as hasty as the Commons. The Bishop of
Rochester said the scheme had been like a pestilence. The Duke of Wharton
said the House ought to shew no respect of persons; that, for his part, he
would give up the dearest friend he had, if he had been engaged in the
project. The nation had been plundered in a most shameful and flagrant
manner, and he would go as far as any body in the punishment of the
offenders. Lord Stanhope said, that every farthing possessed by the
criminals, whether directors or not directors, ought to be confiscated, to
make good the public losses.
During all this time the public excitement was extreme. We learn from
Coxe’s Walpole, that the very name of a South-Sea director was thought to
be synonymous with every species of fraud and villany. Petitions from
counties, cities, and boroughs, in all parts of the kingdom, were presented,
crying for the justice due to an injured nation and the punishment of the
villanous peculators. Those moderate men, who would not go to extreme
lengths, even in the punishment of the guilty, were accused of being
accomplices, were exposed to repeated insults and virulent invectives, and
devoted, both in anonymous letters and public writings, to the speedy
vengeance of an injured people. The accusations against Mr. Aislabie,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Mr. Craggs, another member of the
ministry, were so loud, that the House of Lords resolved to proceed at once
into the investigation concerning them. It was ordered, on the 21st of
January, that all brokers concerned in the South-Sea scheme should lay
before the House an account of the stock or subscriptions bought or sold by
them for any of the officers of the Treasury or Exchequer, or in trust for any
of them, since Michaelmas 1719. When this account was delivered, it
appeared that large quantities of stock had been transferred to the use of Mr.
Aislabie. Five of the South-Sea directors, including Mr. Edward Gibbon,
the grandfather of the celebrated historian, were ordered into the custody of
the black rod. Upon a motion made by Earl Stanhope, it was unanimously
resolved, that the taking in or giving credit for stock without a valuable
consideration actually paid or sufficiently secured; or the purchasing stock
by any director or agent of the South-Sea company, for the use or benefit of
any member of the administration, or any member of either House of
Parliament, during such time as the South-Sea bill was yet pending in
parliament, was a notorious and dangerous corruption. Another resolution
was passed a few days afterwards, to the effect that several of the directors
and officers of the company having, in a clandestine manner, sold their own
stock to the company, had been guilty of a notorious fraud and breach of
trust, and had thereby mainly caused the unhappy turn of affairs that had so
much affected public credit. Mr. Aislabie resigned his office as Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and absented himself from parliament, until the formal
inquiry into his individual guilt was brought under the consideration of the
legislature.
In the mean time, Knight, the treasurer of the company, and who was
entrusted with all the dangerous secrets of the dishonest directors, packed
up his books and documents, and made his escape from the country. He
embarked in disguise, in a small boat on the river, and proceeding to a
vessel hired for the purpose, was safely conveyed to Calais. The Committee
of Secrecy informed the House of the circumstance, when it was resolved
unanimously that two addresses should be presented to the king; the first
praying that he would issue a proclamation offering a reward for the
apprehension of Knight; and the second, that he would give immediate
orders to stop the ports, and to take effectual care of the coasts, to prevent
the said Knight, or any other officers of the South-Sea company, from
escaping out of the kingdom. The ink was hardly dry upon these addresses
before they were carried to the king by Mr. Methuen, deputed by the House
for that purpose. The same evening a royal proclamation was issued,
offering a reward of two thousand pounds for the apprehension of Knight.
The Commons ordered the doors of the House to be locked, and the keys to
be placed on the table. General Ross, one of the members of the Committee
of Secrecy, acquainted them that they had already discovered a train of the
deepest villany and fraud that hell had ever contrived to ruin a nation,
which in due time they would lay before the House. In the mean time, in
order to a further discovery, the Committee thought it highly necessary to
secure the persons of some of the directors and principal South-Sea officers,
and to seize their papers. A motion to this effect having been made, was
carried unanimously. Sir Robert Chaplin, Sir Theodore Janssen, Mr.
Sawbridge, and Mr. F. Eyles, members of the House, and directors of the
South-Sea company, were summoned to appear in their places, and answer
for their corrupt practices. Sir Theodore Janssen and Mr. Sawbridge
answered to their names, and endeavoured to exculpate themselves. The
House heard them patiently, and then ordered them to withdraw. A motion
was then made, and carried nemine contradicente, that they had been guilty
of a notorious breach of trust—had occasioned much loss to great numbers
of his majesty’s subjects, and had highly prejudiced the public credit. It was
then ordered that, for their offence, they should be expelled the House, and
taken into the custody of the sergeant-at-arms. Sir Robert Chaplin and Mr.
Eyles, attending in their places four days afterwards, were also expelled the
House. It was resolved at the same time to address the king to give
directions to his ministers at foreign courts to make application for Knight,
that he might be delivered up to the English authorities, in case he took
refuge in any of their dominions. The king at once agreed, and messengers
were despatched to all parts of the continent the same night.
Among the directors taken into custody was Sir John Blunt, the man
whom popular opinion has generally accused of having been the original
author and father of the scheme. This man, we are informed by Pope, in his
epistle to Allen Lord Bathurst, was a dissenter, of a most religious
deportment, and professed to be a great believer.24 He constantly declaimed
against the luxury and corruption of the age, the partiality of parliaments,
and the misery of party spirit. He was particularly eloquent against avarice
in great and noble persons. He was originally a scrivener, and afterwards
became, not only a director, but the most active manager of the South-Sea
company. Whether it was during his career in this capacity that he first
began to declaim against the avarice of the great, we are not informed. He
certainly must have seen enough of it to justify his severest anathema; but if
the preacher had himself been free from the vice he condemned, his
declamations would have had a better effect. He was brought up in custody
to the bar of the House of Lords, and underwent a long examination. He
refused to answer several important questions. He said he had been
examined already by a committee of the House of Commons, and as he did
not remember his answers, and might contradict himself, he refused to
answer before another tribunal. This declaration, in itself an indirect proof
of guilt, occasioned some commotion in the House. He was again asked
peremptorily whether he had ever sold any portion of the stock to any
member of the administration, or any member of either House of
Parliament, to facilitate the passing of the bill. He again declined to answer.
He was anxious, he said, to treat the House with all possible respect, but he
thought it hard to be compelled to accuse himself. After several ineffectual
attempts to refresh his memory, he was directed to withdraw. A violent
discussion ensued between the friends and opponents of the ministry. It was
asserted that the administration were no strangers to the convenient
taciturnity of Sir John Blunt. The Duke of Wharton made a reflection upon
the Earl Stanhope, which the latter warmly resented. He spoke under great
excitement, and with such vehemence as to cause a sudden determination of
blood to the head. He felt himself so ill that he was obliged to leave the
House and retire to his chamber. He was cupped immediately, and also let
blood on the following morning, but with slight relief. The fatal result was
not anticipated. Towards evening he became drowsy, and turning himself on
his face, expired. The sudden death of this statesman caused great grief to
the nation. George I. was exceedingly affected, and shut himself up for
some hours in his closet, inconsolable for his loss.
Knight, the treasurer of the company, was apprehended at Tirlemont,
near Liege, by one of the secretaries of Mr. Leathes, the British resident at
Brussels, and lodged in the citadel of Antwerp. Repeated applications were
made to the court of Austria to deliver him up, but in vain. Knight threw
himself upon the protection of the states of Brabant, and demanded to be
tried in that country. It was a privilege granted to the states of Brabant by
one of the articles of the Joyeuse Entrée, that every criminal apprehended in
that country should be tried in that country. The states insisted on their
privilege, and refused to deliver Knight to the British authorities. The latter
did not cease their solicitations; but in the mean time, Knight escaped from
the citadel.
BRABANT SCREEN.25
On the 16th of February the Committee of Secrecy made their first
report to the House. They stated that their inquiry had been attended with
numerous difficulties and embarrassments; every one they had examined
had endeavoured, as far as in him lay, to defeat the ends of justice. In some
of the books produced before them, false and fictitious entries had been
made; in others, there were entries of money with blanks for the name of
the stockholders. There were frequent erasures and alterations, and in some
of the books leaves were torn out. They also found that some books of great
importance had been destroyed altogether, and that some had been taken
away or secreted. At the very entrance into their inquiry, they had observed
that the matters referred to them were of great variety and extent. Many
persons had been entrusted with various parts in the execution of the law,
and under colour thereof had acted in an unwarrantable manner, in
disposing of the properties of many thousands of persons amounting to
many millions of money. They discovered that, before the South-Sea Act
was passed, there was an entry in the company’s books of the sum of
1,259,325l., upon account of stock stated to have been sold to the amount of
574,500l. This stock was all fictitious, and had been disposed of with a view
to promote the passing of the bill. It was noted as sold on various days, and
at various prices, from 150 to 325 per cent. Being surprised to see so large
an account disposed of at a time when the company were not empowered to
increase their capital, the Committee determined to investigate most
carefully the whole transaction. The governor, sub-governor, and several
directors were brought before them, and examined rigidly. They found that,
at the time these entries were made, the company was not in possession of
such a quantity of stock, having in their own right only a small quantity, not
exceeding thirty thousand pounds at the utmost. Pursuing the inquiry, they
found that this amount of stock was to be esteemed as taken in or holden by
the company for the benefit of the pretended purchasers, although no
mutual agreement was made for its delivery or acceptance at any certain
time. No money was paid down, nor any deposit or security whatever given
to the company by the supposed purchasers; so that if the stock had fallen,
as might have been expected had the act not passed, they would have
sustained no loss. If, on the contrary, the price of stock advanced (as it
actually did by the success of the scheme), the difference by the advanced
price was to be made good to them. Accordingly, after the passing of the
act, the account of stock was made up and adjusted with Mr. Knight, and
the pretended purchasers were paid the difference out of the company’s
cash. This fictitious stock, which had been chiefly at the disposal of Sir
John Blunt, Mr. Gibbon, and Mr. Knight, was distributed among several
members of the government and their connexions, by way of bribe, to
facilitate the passing of the bill. To the Earl of Sunderland was assigned
50,000l. of this stock; to the Duchess of Kendal, 10,000l.; to the Countess
of Platen, 10,000l.; to her two nieces, 10,000l.; to Mr. Secretary Craggs,
30,000l.; to Mr. Charles Stanhope (one of the secretaries of the Treasury),
10,000l.; to the Sword-blade company, 50,000l. It also appeared that Mr.
Stanhope had received the enormous sum of 250,000l. as the difference in
the price of some stock, through the hands of Turner, Caswall, and Co., but
that his name had been partly erased from their books, and altered to
Stangape. Aislabie, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, had made profits still
more abominable. He had an account with the same firm, who were also
South-Sea directors, to the amount of 794,451l. He had, besides, advised
the company to make their second subscription one million and a half,
instead of a million, by their own authority, and without any warrant. The
third subscription had been conducted in a manner as disgraceful. Mr.
Aislabie’s name was down for 70,000l.; Mr. Craggs, senior, for 659,000l.;
the Earl of Sunderland’s for 160,000l.; and Mr. Stanhope for 47,000l. This
report was succeeded by six others, less important. At the end of the last,
the committee declared, that the absence of Knight, who had been
principally entrusted, prevented them from carrying on their inquiries.
The first report was ordered to be printed, and taken into consideration
on the next day but one succeeding. After a very angry and animated
debate, a series of resolutions were agreed to, condemnatory of the conduct
of the directors, of the members of the parliament and of the administration
concerned with them; and declaring that they ought, each and all, to make
satisfaction out of their own estates for the injury they had done the public.
Their practices were declared to be corrupt, infamous, and dangerous; and a
bill was ordered to be brought in for the relief of the unhappy sufferers.
BONFIRES ON TOWER HILL
Mr. Charles Stanhope was the first person brought to account for his
share in these transactions. He urged in his defence that, for some years
past, he had lodged all the money he was possessed of in Mr. Knight’s
hands, and whatever stock Mr. Knight had taken in for him, he had paid a
valuable consideration for it. As for the stock that had been bought for him
by Turner, Caswall, and Co., he knew nothing about it. Whatever had been
done in that matter was done without his authority, and he could not be
responsible for it. Turner and Co. took the latter charge upon themselves;
but it was notorious to every unbiassed and unprejudiced person that Mr.
Stanhope was a gainer of the 250,000l. which lay in the hands of that firm
to his credit. He was, however, acquitted by a majority of three only. The
greatest exertions were made to screen him. Lord Stanhope, the son of the
Earl of Chesterfield, went round to the wavering members, using all the
eloquence he was possessed of to induce them either to vote for the
acquittal, or to absent themselves from the House. Many weak-headed
country gentlemen were led astray by his persuasions, and the result was as
already stated. The acquittal caused the greatest discontent throughout the
country. Mobs of a menacing character assembled in different parts of
London; fears of riots were generally entertained, especially as the
examination of a still greater delinquent was expected by many to have a
similar termination. Mr. Aislabie, whose high office and deep
responsibilities should have kept him honest, even had native principle been
insufficient, was very justly regarded as perhaps the greatest criminal of all.
His case was entered into on the day succeeding the acquittal of Mr.
Stanhope. Great excitement prevailed, and the lobbies and avenues of the
House were beset by crowds, impatient to know the result. The debate
lasted the whole day. Mr. Aislabie found few friends: his guilt was so
apparent and so heinous that nobody had courage to stand up in his favour.
It was finally resolved, without a dissentient voice, that Mr. Aislabie had
encouraged and promoted the destructive execution of the South-Sea
scheme with a view to his own exorbitant profit, and had combined with the
directors in their pernicious practices, to the ruin of the public trade and
credit of the kingdom: that he should for his offences be ignominiously
expelled from the House of Commons, and committed a close prisoner to
the Tower of London; that he should be restrained from going out of the
kingdom for a whole year, or till the end of the next session of Parliament;
and that he should make out a correct account of all his estate, in order that
it might be applied to the relief of those who had suffered by his mal-
practices.
This verdict caused the greatest joy. Though it was delivered at half-past
twelve at night, it soon spread over the city. Several persons illuminated
their houses in token of their joy. On the following day, when Mr. Aislabie
was conveyed to the Tower, the mob assembled on Tower-hill with the
intention of hooting and pelting him. Not succeeding in this, they kindled a
large bonfire, and danced around it in the exuberance of their delight.
Several bonfires were made in other places; London presented the
appearance of a holiday, and people congratulated one another as if they
had just escaped from some great calamity. The rage upon the acquittal of
Mr. Stanhope had grown to such a height that none could tell where it
would have ended, had Mr. Aislabie met with the like indulgence.
To increase the public satisfaction, Sir George Caswall, of the firm of
Turner, Caswall, and Co., was expelled from the House on the following
day, committed to the Tower, and ordered to refund the sum of 250,000l.
EARL OF SUNDERLAND.
That part of the report of the Committee of Secrecy which related to the
Earl of Sunderland was next taken into consideration. Every effort was
made to clear his lordship from the imputation. As the case against him
rested chiefly on the evidence extorted from Sir John Blunt, great pains
were taken to make it appear that Sir John’s word was not to be believed,
especially in a matter affecting the honour of a peer and privy councillor.
All the friends of the ministry rallied around the earl, it being generally
reported that a verdict of guilty against him would bring a Tory ministry
into power. He was eventually acquitted by a majority of 233 against 172;
but the country was convinced of his guilt. The greatest indignation was
every where expressed, and menacing mobs again assembled in London.
Happily no disturbance took place.
This was the day on which Mr. Craggs the elder expired. The morrow
had been appointed for the consideration of his case. It was very generally
believed that he had poisoned himself. It appeared, however, that grief for
the loss of his son, one of the secretaries of the Treasury, who had died five
weeks previously of the small-pox, preyed much on his mind. For this son,
dearly beloved, he had been amassing vast heaps of riches: he had been
getting money, but not honestly; and he for whose sake he had bartered his
honour and sullied his fame was now no more. The dread of further
exposure increased his trouble of mind, and ultimately brought on an
apoplectic fit, in which he expired. He left a fortune of a million and a half,
which was afterwards confiscated for the benefit of the sufferers by the
unhappy delusion he had been so mainly instrumental in raising.
One by one the case of every director of the company was taken into
consideration. A sum amounting to two millions and fourteen thousand
pounds was confiscated from their estates towards repairing the mischief
they had done, each man being allowed a certain residue in proportion to
his conduct and circumstances, with which he might begin the world anew.
Sir John Blunt was only allowed 5,000l. out of his fortune of upwards of
183,000l.; Sir John Fellows was allowed 10,000l. out of 243,000l.; Sir
Theodore Janssen, 50,000l. out of 243,000l.; Mr. Edward Gibbon, 10,000l.
out of 106,000l.; Sir John Lambert, 5000l. out of 72,000l. Others, less
deeply involved, were treated with greater liberality. Gibbon, the historian,
whose grandfather was the Mr. Edward Gibbon so severely mulcted, has
given, in the Memoirs of his Life and Writings, an interesting account of the
proceedings in parliament at this time. He owns that he is not an
unprejudiced witness; but, as all the writers from which it is possible to
extract any notice of the proceedings of these disastrous years were
prejudiced on the other side, the statements of the great historian become of
additional value. If only on the principle audi alteram partem, his opinion is
entitled to consideration. “In the year 1716,” he says, “my grandfather was
elected one of the directors of the South-Sea company, and his books
exhibited the proof that before his acceptance of that fatal office, he had
acquired an independent fortune of 60,000l. But his fortune was
overwhelmed in the shipwreck of the year 1720, and the labours of thirty
years were blasted in a single day. Of the use or abuse of the South-Sea
scheme, of the guilt or innocence of my grandfather and his brother
directors, I am neither a competent nor a disinterested judge. Yet the equity
of modern times must condemn the violent and arbitrary proceedings,
which would have disgraced the cause of justice, and rendered injustice still
more odious. No sooner had the nation awakened from its golden dream,
than a popular and even a parliamentary clamour demanded its victims; but
it was acknowledged on all sides, that the directors, however guilty, could
not be touched by any known laws of the land. The intemperate notions of
Lord Molesworth were not literally acted on; but a bill of pains and
penalties was introduced—a retro-active statute, to punish the offences
which did not exist at the time they were committed. The legislature
restrained the persons of the directors, imposed an exorbitant security for
their appearance, and marked their character with a previous note of
ignominy. They were compelled to deliver, upon oath, the strict value of
their estates, and were disabled from making any transfer or alienation of
any part of their property. Against a bill of pains and penalties, it is the
common right of every subject to be heard by his counsel at the bar. They
prayed to be heard. Their prayer was refused, and their oppressors, who
required no evidence, would listen to no defence. It had been at first
proposed, that one-eighth of their respective estates should be allowed for
the future support of the directors; but it was especially urged that, in the
various shades of opulence and guilt, such a proportion would be too light
for many, and for some might possibly be too heavy. The character and
conduct of each man were separately weighed; but, instead of the calm
solemnity of a judicial inquiry, the fortune and honour of thirty-three
Englishmen were made the topics of hasty conversation, the sport of a
lawless majority; and the basest member of the committee, by a malicious
word or a silent vote, might indulge his general spleen or personal
animosity. Injury was aggravated by insult, and insult was embittered by
pleasantry. Allowances of 20l. or 1s. were facetiously moved. A vague
report that a director had formerly been concerned in another project, by
which some unknown persons had lost their money, was admitted as a proof
of his actual guilt. One man was ruined because he had dropped a foolish
speech, that his horses should feed upon gold; another, because he was
grown so proud, that one day, at the Treasury, he had refused a civil answer
to persons much above him. All were condemned, absent and unheard, in
arbitrary fines and forfeitures, which swept away the greatest part of their
substance. Such bold oppression can scarcely be shielded by the
omnipotence of parliament. My grandfather could not expect to be treated
with more lenity than his companions. His Tory principles and connexions
rendered him obnoxious to the ruling powers. His name was reported in a
suspicious secret. His well-known abilities could not plead the excuse of
ignorance or error. In the first proceedings against the South-Sea directors,
Mr. Gibbon was one of the first taken into custody, and in the final sentence
the measure of his fine proclaimed him eminently guilty. The total estimate,
which he delivered on oath to the House of Commons, amounted to
106,543l. 5s. 6d., exclusive of antecedent settlements. Two different
allowances of 15,000l. and of 10,000l. were moved for Mr. Gibbon; but on
the question being put, it was carried without a division for the smaller sum.
On these ruins, with the skill and credit of which parliament had not been
able to despoil him, my grandfather, at a mature age, erected the edifice of a
new fortune. The labours of sixteen years were amply rewarded; and I have
reason to believe that the second structure was not much inferior to the
first.”
THE SOUTH-SEA BUBBLE.—CARICATURE BY HOGARTH.26
The next consideration of the legislature, after the punishment of the
directors, was to restore public credit. The scheme of Walpole had been
found insufficient, and had fallen into disrepute. A computation was made
of the whole capital stock of the South-Sea company at the end of the year
1720. It was found to amount to thirty-seven millions eight hundred
thousand pounds, of which the stock allotted to all the proprietors only
amounted to twenty-four millions five hundred thousand pounds. The
remainder of thirteen millions three hundred thousand pounds belonged to
the company in their corporate capacity, and was the profit they had made
by the national delusion. Upwards of eight millions of this were taken from
the company, and divided among the proprietors and subscribers generally,
making a dividend of about 33l. 6s. 8d. per cent. This was a great relief. It
was further ordered, that such persons as had borrowed money from the
South-Sea company upon stock actually transferred and pledged at the time
of borrowing to or for the use of the company, should be free from all
demands, upon payment of ten per cent of the sums so borrowed. They had
lent about eleven millions in this manner, at a time when prices were
unnaturally raised; and they now received back one million one hundred
thousand, when prices had sunk to their ordinary level.
But it was a long time before public credit was thoroughly restored.
Enterprise, like Icarus, had soared too high, and melted the wax of her
wings; like Icarus, she had fallen into a sea, and learned, while floundering
in its waves, that her proper element was the solid ground. She has never
since attempted so high a flight.
In times of great commercial prosperity there has been a tendency to
over-speculation on several occasions since then. The success of one project
generally produces others of a similar kind. Popular imitativeness will
always, in a trading nation, seize hold of such successes, and drag a
community too anxious for profits into an abyss from which extrication is
difficult. Bubble companies, of a kind similar to those engendered by the
South-Sea project, lived their little day in the famous year of the panic,
1825. On that occasion, as in 1720, knavery gathered a rich harvest from
cupidity, but both suffered when the day of reckoning came. The schemes
of the year 1836 threatened, at one time, results as disastrous; but they were
happily averted before it was too late.27
BUBBLERS’ ARMS—DESPAIR—FROM A PRINT IN THE COLLECTION OF E. HAWKINS,
ESQ.
CONRAD GESNER.
The Tulipomania
Table of Contents
Quis furor, ô cives!—Lucan.
The tulip,—so named, it is said, from a Turkish word, signifying a turban,
—was introduced into western Europe about the middle of the sixteenth
century. Conrad Gesner, who claims the merit of having brought it into
repute,—little dreaming of the commotion it was shortly afterwards to make
in the world,—says that he first saw it in the year 1559, in a garden at
Augsburg, belonging to the learned Counsellor Herwart, a man very famous
in his day for his collection of rare exotics. The bulbs were sent to this
gentleman by a friend at Constantinople, where the flower had long been a
favourite. In the course of ten or eleven years after this period, tulips were
much sought after by the wealthy, especially in Holland and Germany. Rich
people at Amsterdam sent for the bulbs direct to Constantinople, and paid
the most extravagant prices for them. The first roots planted in England
were brought from Vienna in 1600. Until the year 1634 the tulip annually
increased in reputation, until it was deemed a proof of bad taste in any man
of fortune to be without a collection of them. Many learned men, including
Pompeius de Angelis and the celebrated Lipsius of Leyden, the author of
the treatise “De Constantia,” were passionately fond of tulips. The rage for
possessing them soon caught the middle classes of society, and merchants
and shopkeepers, even of moderate means, began to vie with each other in
the rarity of these flowers and the preposterous prices they paid for them. A
trader at Harlaem was known to pay one-half of his fortune for a single
root, not with the design of selling it again at a profit, but to keep in his own
conservatory for the admiration of his acquaintance.
One would suppose that there must have been some great virtue in this
flower to have made it so valuable in the eyes of so prudent a people as the
Dutch; but it has neither the beauty nor the perfume of the rose—hardly the
beauty of the “sweet, sweet-pea;” neither is it as enduring as either. Cowley,
it is true, is loud in its praise. He says—
“The tulip next appeared, all over gay,
But wanton, full of pride, and full of play;
The world can’t shew a dye but here has place;
Nay, by new mixtures, she can change her face;
Purple and gold are both beneath her care,
The richest needlework she loves to wear;
Her only study is to please the eye,
And to outshine the rest in finery.”
This, though not very poetical, is the description of a poet. Beckmann,
in his History of Inventions, paints it with more fidelity, and in prose more
pleasing than Cowley’s poetry. He says, “There are few plants which
acquire, through accident, weakness, or disease, so many variegations as the
tulip. When uncultivated, and in its natural state, it is almost of one colour,
has large leaves, and an extraordinarily long stem. When it has been
weakened by cultivation, it becomes more agreeable in the eyes of the
florist. The petals are then paler, smaller, and more diversified in hue; and
the leaves acquire a softer green colour. Thus this masterpiece of culture,
the more beautiful it turns, grows so much the weaker, so that, with the
greatest skill and most careful attention, it can scarcely be transplanted, or
even kept alive.”
Many persons grow insensibly attached to that which gives them a great
deal of trouble, as a mother often loves her sick and ever-ailing child better
than her more healthy offspring. Upon the same principle we must account
for the unmerited encomia lavished upon these fragile blossoms. In 1634,
the rage among the Dutch to possess them was so great that the ordinary
industry of the country was neglected, and the population, even to its lowest
dregs, embarked in the tulip trade. As the mania increased, prices
augmented, until, in the year 1635, many persons were known to invest a
fortune of 100,000 florins in the purchase of forty roots. It then became
necessary to sell them by their weight in perits, a small weight less than a
grain. A tulip of the species called Admiral Liefken, weighing 400 perits,
was worth 4400 florins; an Admiral Van der Eyck, weighing 446 perits, was
worth 1260 florins; a Childer of 106 perits was worth 1615 florins; a
Viceroy of 400 perits, 3000 florins, and, most precious of all, a Semper
Augustus, weighing 200 perits, was thought to be very cheap at 5500
florins. The latter was much sought after, and even an inferior bulb might
command a price of 2000 florins. It is related that, at one time, early in
1636, there were only two roots of this description to be had in all Holland,
and those not of the best. One was in the possession of a dealer in
Amsterdam, and the other in Harlaem. So anxious were the speculators to
obtain them, that one person offered the fee-simple of twelve acres of
building-ground for the Harlaem tulip. That of Amsterdam was bought for
4600 florins, a new carriage, two grey horses, and a complete suit of
harness. Hunting, an industrious author of that day, who wrote a folio
volume of one thousand pages upon the tulipomania, has preserved the folio
wing list of the various articles, and their value, which were delivered for
one single root of the rare species called the Viceroy:
florins.
Two lasts of wheat

Four lasts of rye

Four fat oxen

Eight fat swine

Twelve fat sheep

Two hogsheads of wine

Four tuns of beer

Two tuns of butter

One thousand lbs. of cheese

A complete bed

A suit of clothes

A silver drinking-cup


People who had been absent from Holland, and whose chance it was to
return when this folly was at its maximum, were sometimes led into
awkward dilemmas by their ignorance. There is an amusing instance of the
kind related in Blainville’s Travels. A wealthy merchant, who prided
himself not a little on his rare tulips, received upon one occasion a very
valuable consignment of merchandise from the Levant. Intelligence of its
arrival was brought him by a sailor, who presented himself for that purpose
at the counting-house, bales of goods of every description. The merchant, to
reward him for his news, munificently made him a present of a fine red
herring for his breakfast. The sailor had, it appears, a great partiality for
onions, and seeing a bulb very like an onion lying upon the counter of this
liberal trader, and thinking it, no doubt, very much out of its place among
silks and velvets, he slily seized an opportunity and slipped it into his
pocket, as a relish for his herring. He got clear off with his prize, and
proceeded to the quay to eat his breakfast. Hardly was his back turned when
the merchant missed his valuable Semper Augustus, worth three thousand
florins, or about 280l. sterling. The whole establishment was instantly in an
uproar; search was every where made for the precious root, but it was not to
be found. Great was the merchant’s distress of mind. The search was
renewed, but again without success. At last some one thought of the sailor.
The unhappy merchant sprang into the street at the bare suggestion. His
alarmed household followed him. The sailor, simple soul! had not thought
of concealment. He was found quietly sitting on a coil of ropes, masticating
the last morsel of his “onion”. Little did he dream that he had been eating a
breakfast whose cost might have regaled a whole ship’s crew for a
twelvemonth; or, as the plundered merchant himself expressed it, “might
have sumptuously feasted the Prince of Orange and the whole court of the
Stadtholder.” Anthony caused pearls to be dissolved in wine to drink the
health of Cleopatra; Sir Richard Whittington was as foolishly magnificent
in an entertainment to King Henry V.; and Sir Thomas Gresham drank a
diamond dissolved in wine to the health of Queen Elizabeth, when she
opened the Royal Exchange; but the breakfast of this roguish Dutchman
was as splendid as either. He had an advantage, too, over his wasteful
predecessors: their gems did not improve the taste or the wholesomeness of
their wine, while his tulip was quite delicious with his red herring. The
most unfortunate part of the business for him was, that he remained in
prison for some months on a charge of felony preferred against him by the
merchant.
Another story is told of an English traveller, which is scarcely less
ludicrous. This gentleman, an amateur botanist, happened to see a tulip-root
lying in the conservatory of a wealthy Dutchman. Being ignorant of its
quality, he took out his penknife, and peeled off its coats, with the view of
making experiments upon it. When it was by this means reduced to half its
size, he cut it into two equal sections, making all the time many learned
remarks on the singular appearances of the unknown bulb. Suddenly, the
owner pounced upon him, and, with fury in his eyes, asked him if he knew
what he had been doing? “Peeling a most extraordinary onion,” replied the
philosopher. “Hundert tausend duyvel!” said the Duchman; “it’s an Admiral
Van der Eyck.” “Thank you,” replied the traveller, taking out his note-book
to make a memorandum of the same; “are these admirals common in your
country?” “Death and the devil!” said the Dutchman, seizing the astonished
man of science by the collar; “come before the syndic, and you shall see.”
In spite of his remonstrances, the traveller was led through the streets
followed by a mob of persons. When brought into the presence of the
magistrate, he learned, to his consternation, that the root upon which he had
been 
experimentalising 
was 
worth 
four 
thousand 
florins; 
and,
notwithstanding all he could urge in extenuation, he was lodged in prison
until he found securities for the payment of this sum.
The demand for tulips of a rare species increased so much in the year
1636, that regular marts for their sale were established on the Stock
Exchange of Amsterdam, in Rotterdam, Harlaem, Leyden, Alkmar, Hoorn,
and other towns. Symptoms of gambling now became, for the first time,
apparent. The stock-jobbers, ever on the alert for a new speculation, dealt
largely in tulips, making use of all the means they so well knew how to
employ, to cause fluctuations in prices. At first, as in all these gambling
mania, confidence was at its height, and every body gained. The tulip-
jobbers speculated in the rise and fall of the tulip stocks, and made large
profits by buying when prices fell, and selling out when they rose. Many
individuals grew suddenly rich. A golden bait hung temptingly out before
the people, and one after the other, they rushed to the tulip-marts, like flies
around a honey-pot. Every one imagined that the passion for tulips would
last for ever, and that the wealthy from every part of the world would send
to Holland, and pay whatever prices were asked for them. The riches of
Europe would be concentrated on the shores of the Zuyder Zee, and poverty
banished from the favoured clime of Holland. Nobles, citizens, farmers,
mechanics, sea-men, footmen, maid-servants, even chimney-sweeps and old
clothes-women, dabbled in tulips. People of all grades converted their
property into cash, and invested it in flowers. Houses and lands were
offered for sale at ruinously low prices, or assigned in payment of bargains
made at the tulip-mart. Foreigners became smitten with the same frenzy,
and money poured into Holland from all directions. The prices of the
necessaries of life rose again by degrees: houses and lands, horses and
carriages, and luxuries of every sort, rose in value with them, and for some
months Holland seemed the very antechamber of Plutus. The operations of
the trade became so extensive and so intricate, that it was found necessary
to draw up a code of laws for the guidance of the dealers. Notaries and
clerks were also appointed, who devoted themselves exclusively to the
interests of the trade. The designation of public notary was hardly known in
some towns, that of tulip-notary usurping its place. In the smaller towns,
where there was no exchange, the principal tavern was usually selected as
the “show-place,” where high and low traded in tulips, and confirmed their
bargains over sumptuous entertainments. These dinners were sometimes
attended by two or three hundred persons, and large vases of tulips, in full
bloom, were placed at regular intervals upon the tables and sideboards for
their gratification during the repast.
At last, however, the more prudent began to see that this folly could not
last for ever. Rich people no longer bought the flowers to keep them in their
gardens, but to sell them again at cent per cent profit. It was seen that
somebody must lose fearfully in the end. As this conviction spread, prices
fell, and never rose again. Confidence was destroyed, and a universal panic
seized upon the dealers. A had agreed to purchase ten Semper Augustines
from B, at four thousand florins each, at six weeks after the signing of the
contract. B was ready with the flowers at the appointed time; but the price
had fallen to three or four hundred florins, and A refused either to pay the
difference or receive the tulips. Defaulters were announced day after day in
all the towns of Holland. Hundreds who, a few months previously, had
begun to doubt that there was such a thing as poverty in the land, suddenly
found themselves the possessors of a few bulbs, which nobody would buy,
even though they offered them at one quarter of the sums they had paid for
them. The cry of distress resounded every where, and each man accused his
neighbour. The few who had contrived to enrich themselves hid their wealth
from the knowledge of their fellow-citizens, and invested it in the English
or other funds. Many who, for a brief season, had emerged from the
humbler walks of life, were cast back into their original obscurity.
Substantial merchants were reduced almost to beggary, and many a
representative of a noble line saw the fortunes of his house ruined beyond
redemption.
When the first alarm subsided, the tulip-holders in the several towns
held public meetings to devise what measures, were best to be taken to
restore public credit. It was generally agreed, that deputies should be sent
from all parts to Amsterdam, to consult with the government upon some
remedy for the evil. The government at first refused to interfere, but advised
the tulip-holders to agree to some plan among themselves. Several meetings
were held for this purpose; but no measure could be devised likely to give
satisfaction to the deluded people, or repair even a slight portion of the
mischief that had been done. The language of complaint and reproach was
in every body’s mouth, and all the meetings were of the most stormy
character. At last, however, after much bickering and ill-will, it was agreed,
at Amsterdam, by the assembled deputies, that all contracts made in the
height of the mania, or prior to the month of November 1636, should be
declared null and void, and that, in those made after that date, purchasers
should be freed from their engagements, on paying ten per cent to the
vendor. This decision gave no satisfaction. The vendors who had their tulips
on hand were, of course, discontented, and those who had pledged
themselves to purchase, thought themselves hardly treated. Tulips which
had, at one time, been worth six thousand florins, were now to be procured
for five hundred; so that the composition of ten per cent was one hundred
florins more than the actual value. Actions for breach of contract were
threatened in all the courts of the country; but the latter refused to take
cognisance of gambling transactions.
The matter was finally referred to the Provincial Council at the Hague,
and it was confidently expected that the wisdom of this body would invent
some measure by which credit should be restored. Expectation was on the
stretch for its decision, but it never came. The members continued to
deliberate week after week, and at last, after thinking about it for three
months, declared that they could offer no final decision until they had more
information. They advised, however, that, in the mean time, every vendor
should, in the presence of witnesses, offer the tulips in natura to the
purchaser for the sums agreed upon. If the latter refused to take them, they
might be put up for sale by public auction, and the original contractor held
responsible for the difference between the actual and the stipulated price.
This was exactly the plan recommended by the deputies, and which was
already shewn to be of no avail. There was no court in Holland which
would enforce payment. The question was raised in Amsterdam, but the
judges unanimously refused to interfere, on the ground that debts contracted
in gambling were no debts in law.
Thus the matter rested. To find a remedy was beyond the power of the
government. Those who were unlucky enough to have had stores of tulips
on hand at the time of the sudden reaction were left to bear their ruin as
philosophically as they could; those who had made profits were allowed to
keep them; but the commerce of the country suffered a severe shock, from
which it was many years ere it recovered.
The example of the Dutch was imitated to some extent in England. In
the year 1636 tulips were publicly sold in the Exchange of London, and the
jobbers exerted themselves to the utmost to raise them to the fictitious value
they had acquired in Amsterdam. In Paris also the jobbers strove to create a
tulipomania. In both cities they only partially succeeded. However, the
force of example brought the flowers into great favour, and amongst a
certain class of people tulips have ever since been prized more highly than
any other flowers of the field. The Dutch are still notorious for their
partiality to them, and continue to pay higher prices for them than any other
people. As the rich Englishman boasts of his fine race-horses or his old
pictures, so does the wealthy Dutchman vaunt him of his tulips.
In England, in our day, strange as it may appear, a tulip will produce
more money than an oak. If one could be found, rara in terris, and black as
the black swan of Juvenal, its price would equal that of a dozen acres of
standing corn. In Scotland, towards the close of the seventeenth century, the
highest price for tulips, according to the authority of a writer in the
supplement to the third edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica, was ten
guineas. Their value appears to have diminished from that time till the year
1769, when the two most valuable species in England were the Don
Quevedo and the Valentinier, the former of which was worth two guineas
and the latter two guineas and a half. These prices appear to have been the
minimum. In the year 1800, a common price was fifteen guineas for a
single bulb. In 1835, a bulb of the species called the Miss Fanny Kemble
was sold by public auction in London for seventy-five pounds. Still more
remarkable was the price of a tulip in the possession of a gardener in the
King’s Road, Chelsea;—in his catalogues it was labelled at two hundred
guineas.
The Alchymists
Table of Contents
or
Searchers for the Philosopher’s Stone and the Water of Life.
Mercury (loquitur). The mischief a secret any of them
know, above the consuming of coals and drawing of
usquebaugh! howsoever they may pretend, under the
specious names of Geber, Arnold, Lulli, or bombast of
Hohenheim, to commit miracles in art, and treason
against nature! As if the title of philosopher, that
creature of glory, were to be fetched out of a furnace! I
am their crude and their sublimate, their precipitate and
their unctions; their male and their female, sometimes
their hermaphrodite—what they list to style me! They
will calcine you a grave matron, as it might be a mother
of the maids, and spring up a young virgin out of her
ashes, as fresh as a phœnix; lay you an old courtier on
the coals, like a sausage or a bloat-herring, and, after
they have broiled him enough, blow a soul into him
with a pair of bellows! See, they begin to muster again,
and draw their forces out against me! The genius of the
place defend me!—Ben Jonson’s Masque: Mercury
vindicated from the Alchymists.
Dissatisfaction with his lot seems to be the characteristic of man in all ages
and climates. So far, however, from being an evil, as at first might be
supposed, it has been the great civiliser of our race; and has tended, more
than any thing else, to raise us above the condition of the brutes. But the
same discontent which has been the source of all improvement, has been the
parent of no small progeny of follies and absurdities; to trace these latter is
our present object. Vast as the subject appears, it is easily reducible within
such limits as will make it comprehensive without being wearisome, and
render its study both instructive and amusing.
Three causes especially have excited the discontent of mankind; and, by
impelling us to seek for remedies for the irremediable, have bewildered us
in a maze of madness and error. These are death, toil, and ignorance of the
future—the doom of man upon this sphere, and for which he shews his
antipathy by his love of life, his longing for abundance, and his craving
curiosity to pierce the secrets of the days to come. The first has led many to
imagine that they might find means to avoid death, or failing in this, that
they might, nevertheless, so prolong existence as to reckon it by centuries
instead of units. From this sprang the search, so long continued and still
pursued, for the elixir vitæ, or water of life, which has led thousands to
pretend to it and millions to believe in it. From the second sprang the search
for the philosopher’s stone, which was to create plenty by changing all
metals into gold; and from the third, the false sciences of astrology,
divination, and their divisions of necromancy, chiromancy, augury, with all
their train of signs, portents, and omens.
In tracing the career of the erring philosophers, or the wilful cheats, who
have encouraged or preyed upon the credulity of mankind, it will simplify
and elucidate the subject, if we divide it into three classes: the first
comprising alchymists, or those in general who have devoted themselves to
the discovering of the philosopher’s stone and the water of life; the second
comprising astrologers, necromancers, sorcerers, geomancers, and all those
who pretended to discover futurity; and the third consisting of the dealers in
charms, amulets, philters, universal-panacea mongers, touchers for the evil,
seventh sons of a seventh son, sympathetic powder compounders,
homœopathists, animal magnetisers, and all the motley tribe of quacks,
empirics, and charlatans.
But in narrating the career of such men, it will be found that many of
them united several or all of the functions just mentioned; that the alchymist
was a fortune-teller, or a necromancer—that he pretended to cure all
maladies by touch or charm, and to work miracles of every kind. In the dark
and early ages of European history this is more especially the case. Even as
we advance to more recent periods, we shall find great difficulty in
separating the characters. The alchymist seldom confined himself strictly to
his pretended science—the sorcerer and necromancer to theirs, or the
medical charlatan to his. Beginning with alchymy, some confusion of these
classes is unavoidable; but the ground will clear for us as we advance.
Let us not, in the pride of our superior knowledge, turn with contempt
from the follies of our predecessors. The study of the errors into which great
minds have fallen in the pursuit of truth can never be uninstructive. As the
man looks back to the days of his childhood and his youth, and recalls to his
mind the strange notions and false opinions that swayed his actions at that
time, that he may wonder at them; so should society, for its edification, look
back to the opinions which governed the ages fled. He is but a superficial
thinker who would despise and refuse to hear of them merely because they
are absurd. No man is so wise but that he may learn some wisdom from his
past errors, either of thought or action; and no society has made such
advances as to be capable of no improvement from the retrospect of its past
folly and credulity. And not only is such a study instructive: he who reads
for amusement only will find no chapter in the annals of the human mind
more amusing than this. It opens out the whole realm of fiction—the wild,
the fantastic, and the wonderful, and all the immense variety of things “that
are not, and cannot be; but that have been imagined and believed.”
For more than a thousand years the art of alchymy captivated many noble
spirits, and was believed in by millions. Its origin is involved in obscurity.
Some of its devotees have claimed for it an antiquity coeval with the
creation of man himself, others, again, would trace it no further back than
the time of Noah. Vincent de Beauvais argues, indeed, that all the
antediluvians must have possessed a knowledge of alchymy; and
particularly cites Noah as having been acquainted with the elixir vitæ, or he
could not have lived to so prodigious an age, and have begotten children
when upwards of five hundred. Lenglet du Fresnoy, in his History of the
Hermetic Philosophy, says, “Most of them pretended that Shem, or Chem,
the son of Noah, was an adept in the art, and thought it highly probable that
the words chemistry and alchymy are both derived from his name.” Others
say, the art was derived from the Egyptians, amongst whom it was first
founded by Hermes Trismegistus. Moses, who is looked upon as a first-rate
alchymist, gained his knowledge in Egypt; but he kept it all to himself, and
would not instruct the children of Israel in its mysteries. All the writers
upon alchymy triumphantly cite the story of the golden calf, in the 32d
chapter of Exodus, to prove that this great lawgiver was an adept, and could
make or unmake gold at his pleasure. It is recorded, that Moses was so
wrath with the Israelites for their idolatry, “that he took the calf which they
had made, and burned it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it
upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.” This, say the
alchymists, he never could have done had he not been in possession of the
philosopher’s stone; by no other means could he have made the powder of
gold float upon the water. But we must leave this knotty point for the
consideration of the adepts in the art, if any such there be, and come to
more modern periods of its history. The Jesuit, Father Martini, in his
Historia Sinica, says, it was practised by the Chinese two thousand five
hundred years before the birth of Christ; but his assertion, being
unsupported, is worth nothing. It would appear, however, that pretenders to
the art of making gold and silver existed in Rome in the first centuries after
the Christian era, and that, when discovered, they were liable to punishment
as knaves and impostors. At Constantinople, in the fourth century, the
transmutation of metals was very generally believed in, and many of the
Greek ecclesiastics wrote treatises upon the subject. Their names are
preserved, and some notice of their works given, in the third volume of
Langlet du Fresnoy’s History of the Hermetic Philosophy. Their notion
appears to have been, that all metals were composed of two substances; the
one, metallic earth; and the other, a red inflammable matter, which they
called sulphur. The pure union of these substances formed gold; but other
metals were mixed with and contaminated by various foreign ingredients.
The object of the philosopher’s stone was to dissolve or neutralise all these
ingredients, by which iron, lead, copper, and all metals would be transmuted
into the original gold. Many learned and clever men wasted their time, their
health, and their energies, in this vain pursuit; but for several centuries it
took no great hold upon the imagination of the people. The history of the
delusion appears, in a manner, lost from this time till the eighth century,
when it appeared amongst the Arabians. From this period it becomes easier
to trace its progress. A master then appeared, who was long looked upon as
the father of the science, and whose name is indissolubly connected with it.
Geber.
Of this philosopher, who devoted his life to the study of alchymy, but few
particulars are known. He is thought to have lived in the year 730. His true
name was Abou Moussah Djafar, to which was added Al Sofi, or “The
Wise,” and he was born at Houran, in Mesopotamia.28 Some have thought
he was a Greek, others a Spaniard, and others a prince of Hindostan; but of
all the mistakes which have been made respecting him, the most ludicrous
was that made by the French translator of Sprenger’s History of Medicine,
who thought, from the sound of his name, that he was a German, and
rendered it as the “Donnateur,” or Giver. No details of his life are known;
but it is asserted, that he wrote more than five hundred works upon the
philosopher’s stone and the water of life. He was a great enthusiast in his
art, and compared the incredulous to little children shut up in a narrow
room, without windows or aperture, who, because they saw nothing
beyond, denied the existence of the great globe itself. He thought that a
preparation of gold would cure all maladies, not only in man, but in the
inferior animals and plants. He also imagined that all the metals laboured
under disease, with the exception of gold, which was the only one in perfect
health. He affirmed, that the secret of the philosopher’s stone had been
more than once discovered; but that the ancient and wise men who had hit
upon it would never, by word or writing, communicate it to men, because of
their unworthiness and incredulity.29 But the life of Geber, though spent in
the pursuit of this vain chimera, was not altogether useless. He stumbled
upon discoveries which he did not seek; and science is indebted to him for
the first mention of corrosive sublimate, the red oxide of mercury, nitric
acid, and the nitrate of silver.30
For more than two hundred years after the death of Geber, the Arabian
philosophers devoted themselves to the study of alchymy, joining with it
that of astrology. Of these the most celebrated was
Alfarabi.
Alfarabi flourished at the commencement of the tenth century, and enjoyed
the reputation of being one of the most learned men of his age. He spent his
life in travelling from country to country, that he might gather the opinions
of philosophers upon the great secrets of nature. No danger dismayed him;
no toil wearied him of the pursuit. Many sovereigns endeavoured to retain
him at their courts; but he refused to rest until he had discovered the great
object of his life—the art of preserving it for centuries, and of making gold
as much as he needed. This wandering mode of life at last proved fatal to
him. He had been on a visit to Mecca, not so much for religious as for
philosophical purposes, when, returning through Syria, he stopped at the
court of the Sultan Seifeddoulet, who was renowned as the patron of
learning. He presented himself in his travelling attire in the presence of that
monarch and his courtiers; and, without invitation, coolly sat himself down
on the sofa beside the prince. The courtiers and wise men were indignant;
and the sultan, who did not know the intruder, was at first inclined to follow
their example. He turned to one of his officers, and ordered him to eject the
presumptuous stranger from the room; but Alfarabi, without moving, dared
them to lay hands upon him; and, turning himself calmly to the prince,
remarked, that he did not know who was his guest, or he would treat him
with honour, not with violence. The sultan, instead of being still further
incensed, as many potentates would have been, admired his coolness; and,
requesting him to sit still closer to him on the sofa, entered into a long
conversation with him upon science and divine philosophy. All the court
were charmed with the stranger. Questions for discussion were propounded,
on all of which he shewed superior knowledge. He convinced every one
who ventured to dispute with him; and spoke so eloquently upon the
science of alchymy, that he was at once recognised as only second to the
great Geber himself. One of the doctors present inquired whether a man
who knew so many sciences was acquainted with music? Alfarabi made no
reply, but merely requested that a lute should be brought him. The lute was
brought; and he played such ravishing and tender melodies, that all the
court were melted into tears. He then changed his theme, and played airs so
sprightly, that he set the grave philosophers, sultan and all, dancing as fast
as their legs could carry them. He then sobered them again by a mournful
strain, and made them sob and sigh as if broken-hearted. The sultan, highly
delighted with his powers, entreated him to stay, offering him every
inducement that wealth, power, and dignity could supply; but the alchymist
resolutely refused, it being decreed, he said, that he should never repose till
he had discovered the philosopher’s stone. He set out accordingly the same
evening, and was murdered by some thieves in the deserts of Syria. His
biographers give no further particulars of his life beyond mentioning that he
wrote several valuable treatises on his art, all of which, however, have been
lost. His death happened in the year 954.
Avicenna.
Avicenna, whose real name was Ebn Cinna, another great alchymist, was
born at Bokhara in 980. His reputation as a physician and a man skilled in
all sciences was so great, that the Sultan Magdal Douleth resolved to try his
powers in the great science of government. He was accordingly made
Grand Vizier of that prince, and ruled the state with some advantage; but in
a science still more difficult, he failed completely. He could not rule his
own passions, but gave himself up to wine and women, and led a life of
shameless debauchery. Amid the multifarious pursuits of business and
pleasure, he nevertheless found time to write seven treatises upon the
philosopher’s stone, which were for many ages looked upon as of great
value by pretenders to the art. It is rare that an eminent physician as
Avicenna appears to have been, abandons himself to sensual gratification;
but so completely did he become enthralled in the course of a few years,
that he was dismissed from his high office, and died shortly afterwards of
premature old age and a complication of maladies, brought on by
debauchery. His death took place in the year 1036. After his time few
philosophers of any note in Arabia are heard of as devoting themselves to
the study of alchymy; but it began shortly afterwards to attract greater
attention in Europe. Learned men in France, England, Spain, and Italy,
expressed their belief in the science, and many devoted their whole energies
to it. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries especially, it was extensively
pursued, and some of the brightest names of that age are connected with it.
Among the most eminent of them are
Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas.
The first of these philosophers was born in the year 1193, of a noble family
at Lawingen, in the Duchy of Neuburg, on the Danube. For the first thirty
years of his life he appeared remarkably dull and stupid, and it was feared
by every one that no good could come of him. He entered a Dominican
monastery at an early age; but made so little progress in his studies, that he
was more than once upon the point of abandoning them in despair, but he
was endowed with extraordinary perseverance. As he advanced to middle
age, his mind expanded, and he learned whatever he applied himself to with
extreme facility. So remarkable a change was not in that age to be
accounted for but by a miracle. It was asserted and believed that the Holy
Virgin, touched with his great desire to become learned and famous, took
pity upon his incapacity, and appeared to him in the cloister where he sat
almost despairing, and asked him whether he wished to excel in philosophy
or divinity. He chose philosophy, to the chagrin of the Virgin, who
reproached him in mild and sorrowful accents that he had not made a better
choice. She, however, granted his request, that he should become the most
excellent philosopher of the age; but set this drawback to his pleasure, that
he should relapse, when at the height of his fame, into his former incapacity
and stupidity. Albertus never took the trouble to contradict the story, but
prosecuted his studies with such unremitting zeal, that his reputation
speedily spread over all Europe. In the year 1244, the celebrated Thomas
Aquinas placed himself under his tuition. Many extraordinary stories are
told of the master and his pupil. While they paid all due attention to other
branches of science, they never neglected the pursuit of the philosopher’s
stone and the elixir vitæ. Although they discovered neither, it was believed
that Albert had seized some portion of the secret of life, and found means to
animate a brazen statue, upon the formation of which, under proper
conjunctions of the planets, he had been occupied many years of his life. He
and Thomas Aquinas completed it together, endowed it with the faculty of
speech, and made it perform the functions of a domestic servant. In this
capacity it was exceedingly useful; but, through some defect in the
machinery, it chattered much more than was agreeable to either philosopher.
Various remedies were tried to cure it of its garrulity, but in vain; and one
day, Thomas Aquinas was so enraged at the noise it made when he was in
the midst of a mathematical problem, that he seized a ponderous hammer
and smashed it to pieces.31 He was sorry afterwards for what he had done,
and was reproved by his master for giving way to his anger, so unbecoming
in a philosopher. They made no attempt to re-animate the statue.
ALBERTUS MAGNUS.
Such stories as these shew the spirit of the age. Every great man who
attempted to study the secrets of nature was thought a magician; and it is
not to be wondered at that, when philosophers themselves pretended to
discover an elixir for conferring immortality, or a red stone which was to
create boundless wealth, that popular opinion should have enhanced upon
their pretensions, and have endowed them with powers still more
miraculous. It was believed of Albertus Magnus that he could even change
the course of the seasons, a feat which the many thought less difficult than
the discovery of the grand elixir. Albertus was desirous of obtaining a piece
of ground on which to build a monastery in the neighbourhood of Cologne.
The ground belonged to William Count of Holland and King of the
Romans, who for some reason or other did not wish to part with it. Albertus
is reported to have gained it by the following extraordinary method: He
invited the prince as he was passing through Cologne to a magnificent
entertainment prepared for him and all his court. The prince accepted it, and
repaired with a lordly retinue to the residence of the sage. It was in the
midst of winter, the Rhine was frozen over, and the cold was so bitter, that
the knights could not sit on horseback without running the risk of losing
their toes by the frost. Great, therefore, was their surprise, on arriving at
Albert’s house, to find that the repast was spread in his garden, in which the
snow had drifted to the depth of several feet. The earl in high dudgeon
remounted his steed, but Albert at last prevailed upon him to take his seat at
the table. He had no sooner done so, than the dark clouds rolled away from
the sky—a warm sun shone forth—the cold north wind veered suddenly
round and blew a mild breeze from the south—the snows melted away—the
ice was unbound upon the streams, and the trees put forth their green leaves
and their fruit—flowers sprang up beneath their feet, while larks,
nightingales, blackbirds, cuckoos, thrushes, and every sweet song-bird sang
hymns from every tree. The earl and his attendants wondered greatly; but
they ate their dinner, and in recompense for it, Albert got his piece of
ground to build a convent on. He had not, however, shewn them all his
power. Immediately that the repast was over, he gave the word, and dark
clouds obscured the sun—the snow fell in large flakes—the singing-birds
fell dead—the leaves dropped from the trees, and the winds blew so cold
and howled so mournfully, that the guests wrapped themselves up in their
thick cloaks, and retreated into the house to warm themselves at the blazing
fire in Albert’s kitchen.32
Thomas Aquinas also could work wonders as well as his master. It is
related of him that he lodged in a street at Cologne, where he was much
annoyed by the incessant clatter made by the horses’ hoofs, as they were led
through it daily to exercise by their grooms. He had entreated the latter to
select some other spot, where they might not disturb a philosopher; but the
grooms turned a deaf ear to all his solicitations. In this emergency he had
recourse to the aid of magic. He constructed a small horse of bronze, upon
which he inscribed certain cabalistic characters, and buried it at midnight in
the midst of the highway. The next morning a troop of grooms came riding
along as usual; but the horses, as they arrived at the spot where the magic
horse was buried, reared and plunged violently—their nostrils distended
with terror—their manes grew erect, and the perspiration ran down their
sides in streams. In vain the riders applied the spur—in vain they coaxed or
threatened, the animals would not pass the spot. On the following day their
success was no better. They were at length compelled to seek another spot
for their exercise, and Thomas Aquinas was left in peace.33
Albertus Magnus was made Bishop of Ratisbon in 1259; but he
occupied the see only four years, when he resigned, on the ground that its
duties occupied too much of the time which he was anxious to devote to
philosophy. He died in Cologne in 1280, at the advanced age of eighty-
seven. The Dominican writers deny that he ever sought the philosopher’s
stone, but his treatise upon minerals sufficiently proves that he did.
Artephius.
Artephius, a name noted in the annals of alchymy, was born in the early part
of the twelfth century. He wrote two famous treatises; the one upon the
philosopher’s stone, and the other on the art of prolonging human life. In
the latter he vaunts his great qualifications for instructing mankind on such
a matter, as he was at that time in the thousand and twenty-fifth year of his
age! He had many disciples who believed in his extreme age, and who
attempted to prove that he was Apollonius of Tyana, who lived soon after
the advent of Jesus Christ, and the particulars of whose life and pretended
miracles have been so fully described by Philostratus. He took good care
never to contradict a story which so much increased the power he was
desirous of wielding over his fellow-mortals. On all convenient occasions,
he boasted of it; and having an excellent memory, a fertile imagination, and
a thorough knowledge of all existing history, he was never at a loss for an
answer when questioned as to the personal appearance, the manners, or the
character of the great men of antiquity. He also pretended to have found the
philosopher’s stone; and said that, in search of it, he had descended to hell,
and seen the devil sitting on a throne of gold, with a legion of imps and
fiends around him. His works on alchymy have been translated into French,
and were published in Paris in 1609 or 1610.
Alain de Lisle.
Contemporary with Albertus Magnus was Alain de Lisle of Flanders, who
was named, from his great learning, the “universal doctor.” He was thought
to possess a knowledge of all the sciences, and, like Artephius, to have
discovered the elixir vitæ. He became one of the friars of the abbey of
Citeaux, and died in 1298, aged about one hundred and ten years. It was
said of him that he was at the point of death when in his fiftieth year, but
that the fortunate discovery of the elixir enabled him to add sixty years to
his existence. He wrote a commentary on the prophecies of Merlin.
Arnold de Villeneuve.
This philosopher has left a much greater reputation. He was born in the year
1245, and studied medicine with great success in the university of Paris. He
afterwards travelled for twenty years in Italy and Germany, where he made
acquaintance with Pietro d’Apone, a man of a character akin to his own,
and addicted to the same pursuits. As a physician, he was thought, in his
own lifetime, to be the most able the world had ever seen. Like all the
learned men of that day, he dabbled in astrology and alchymy, and was
thought to have made immense quantities of gold from lead and copper.
When Pietro d’Apone was arrested in Italy, and brought to trial as a
sorcerer, a similar accusation was made against Arnold; but he managed to
leave the country in time, and escape the fate of his unfortunate friend. He
lost some credit by predicting the end of the world, but afterwards regained
it. The time of his death is not exactly known; but it must have been prior to
the year 1311, when Pope Clement V. wrote a circular letter to all the clergy
of Europe who lived under his obedience, praying them to use their utmost
efforts to discover the famous treatise of Arnold on The Practice of
Medicine. The author had promised, during his lifetime, to make a present
of the work to the Holy See, but died without fulfilling it.
ARNOLD DE VILLENEUVE.
In a very curious work by Monsieur Longeville Harcouet, entitled The
History of the Persons who have lived several centuries and then grown
young again, there is a receipt, said to have been given by Arnold de
Villeneuve, by means of which any one might prolong his life for a few
hundred years or so. In the first place, say Arnold and Monsieur Harcouet,
“the person intending so to prolong his life must rub himself well, two or
three times a week, with the juice or marrow of cassia (moëlle de la casse).
Every night, upon going to bed, he must put upon his heart a plaster,
composed of a certain quantity of oriental saffron, red rose-leaves, sandal-
wood, aloes, and amber, liquified in oil of roses and the best white wax. In
the morning, he must take it off, and enclose it carefully in a leaden box till
the next night, when it must be again applied. If he be of a sanguine
temperament, he shall take sixteen chickens; if phlegmatic, twenty-five; and
if melancholy, thirty, which he shall put into a yard where the air and the
water are pure. Upon these he is to feed, eating one a day; but previously
the chickens are to be fattened by a peculiar method, which will impregnate
their flesh with the qualities that are to produce longevity in the eater. Being
deprived of all other nourishment till they are almost dying of hunger, they
are to be fed upon broth made of serpents and vinegar, which broth is to be
thickened with wheat and bran.” Various ceremonies are to be performed in
the cooking of this mess, which those may see in the book of M. Harcouet
who are at all interested in the matter; and the chickens are to be fed upon it
for two months. They are then fit for table, and are to be washed down with
moderate quantities of good white wine or claret. This regimen is to be
followed regularly every seven years, and any one may live to be as old as
Methuselah! It is right to state that M. Harcouet has but little authority for
attributing this precious composition to Arnold of Villeneuve. It is not found
in the collected works of that philosopher; but was first brought to light by a
M. Poirier, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, who asserted that
he had discovered it in MS. in the undoubted writing of Arnold.
Pietro d’Apone.
This unlucky sage was born at Apone, near Padua, in the year 1250. Like
his friend Arnold de Villeneuve, he was an eminent physician, and a
pretender to the arts of astrology and alchymy. He practised for many years
in Paris, and made great wealth by killing and curing, and telling fortunes.
In an evil day for him, he returned to his own country, with the reputation of
being a magician of the first order. It was universally believed that he had
drawn seven evil spirits from the infernal regions, whom he kept enclosed
in seven crystal vases until he required their services, when he sent them
forth to the ends of the earth to execute his pleasure. One spirit excelled in
philosophy; a second, in alchymy; a third, in astrology; a fourth, in physic;
a fifth, in poetry; a sixth, in music; and the seventh, in painting: and
whenever Pietro wished for information or instruction in any of these arts,
he had only to go to his crystal vase and liberate the presiding spirit.
Immediately all the secrets of the art were revealed to him; and he might, if
it pleased him, excel Homer in poetry, Apelles in painting, or Pythagoras
himself in philosophy. Although he could make gold out of brass, it was
said of him that he was very sparing of his powers in that respect, and kept
himself constantly supplied with money by other and less creditable means.
Whenever he disbursed gold, he muttered a certain charm, known only to
himself, and next morning the gold was safe again in his own possession.
The trader to whom he gave it might lock it in his strong box and have it
guarded by a troop of soldiers, but the charmed metal flew back to its old
master. Even if it were buried in the earth, or thrown into the sea, the dawn
of the next morning would behold it in the pockets of Pietro. Few people, in
consequence, liked to have dealings with such a personage, especially for
gold. Some, bolder than the rest, thought that his power did not extend over
silver; but, when they made the experiment, they found themselves
mistaken. Bolts and bars could not restrain it, and it sometimes became
invisible in their very hands, and was whisked through the air to the purse
of the magician. He necessarily acquired a very bad character; and, having
given utterance to some sentiments regarding religion which were the very
reverse of orthodox, he was summoned before the tribunals of the
Inquisition to answer for his crimes as a heretic and a sorcerer. He loudly
protested his innocence, even upon the rack, where he suffered more torture
than nature could support. He died in prison ere his trial was concluded, but
was afterwards found guilty. His bones were ordered to be dug up and
publicly burned. He was also burned in effigy in the streets of Padua.
Raymond Lulli.
RAYMOND LULLI.
While Arnold de Villeneuve and Pietro d’Apone flourished in France and
Italy, a more celebrated adept than either appeared in Spain. This was
Raymond Lulli, a name which stands in the first rank among the alchymists.
Unlike many of his predecessors, he made no pretensions to astrology or
necromancy; but, taking Geber for his model, studied intently the nature
and composition of metals, without reference to charms, incantations, or
any foolish ceremonies. It was not, however, till late in life that he
commenced his study of the art. His early and middle age were spent in a
different manner, and his whole history is romantic in the extreme. He was
born of an illustrious family, in Majorca, in the year 1235. When that island
was taken from the Saracens by James I. king of Aragon, in 1230, the father
of Raymond, who was originally of Catalonia, settled there, and received a
considerable appointment from the crown. Raymond married at an early
age; and, being fond of pleasure, he left the solitudes of his native isle, and
passed over with his bride into Spain. He was made Grand Seneschal at the
court of King James, and led a gay life for several years. Faithless to his
wife, he was always in the pursuit of some new beauty, till his heart was
fixed at last by the lovely but unkind Ambrosia de Castello. This lady, like
her admirer, was married; but, unlike him, was faithful to her vows, and
treated all his solicitations with disdain. Raymond was so enamoured, that
repulse only increased his flame; he lingered all night under her windows,
wrote passionate verses in her praise, neglected his affairs, and made
himself the butt of all the courtiers. One day, while watching under her
lattice, he by chance caught sight of her bosom, as her neckerchief was
blown aside by the wind. The fit of inspiration came over him, and he sat
down and composed some tender stanzas upon the subject, and sent them to
the lady. The fair Ambrosia had never before condescended to answer his
letters; but she replied to this. She told him that she could never listen to his
suit; that it was unbecoming in a wise man to fix his thoughts, as he had
done, on any other than his God; and entreated him to devote himself to a
religious life, and conquer the unworthy passion which he had suffered to
consume him. She, however, offered, if he wished it, to shew him the fair
bosom which had so captivated him. Raymond was delighted. He thought
the latter part of this epistle but ill corresponded with the former, and that
Ambrosia, in spite of the good advice she gave him, had at last relented, and
would make him as happy as he desired. He followed her about from place
to place, entreating her to fulfil her promise: but still Ambrosia was cold,
and implored him with tears to importune her no longer; for that she never
could be his, and never would, if she were free to-morrow. “What means
your letter, then?” said the despairing lover. “I will shew you!” replied
Ambrosia, who immediately uncovered her bosom, and exposed to the eyes
of her horror-stricken admirer a large cancer which had extended to both
breasts. She saw that he was shocked; and, extending her hand to him, she
prayed him once more to lead a religious life, and set his heart upon the
Creator, and not upon the creature. He went home an altered man. He threw
up, on the morrow, his valuable appointment at the court, separated from his
wife, and took a farewell of his children, after dividing one-half of his
ample fortune among them. The other half he shared among the poor. He
then threw himself at the foot of a crucifix, and devoted himself to the
service of God, vowing, as the most acceptable atonement for his errors,
that he would employ the remainder of his days in the task of converting the
Mussulmans to the Christian religion. In his dreams he saw Jesus Christ,
who said to him, “Raymond! Raymond! follow me!” The vision was three
times repeated, and Raymond was convinced that it was an intimation direct
from heaven. Having put his affairs in order, he set out on a pilgrimage to
the shrine of St. James of Compostello, and afterwards lived for ten years in
solitude amid the mountains of Aranda. Here he learned the Arabic, to
qualify himself for his mission of converting the Mahometans. He also
studied various sciences, as taught in the works of the learned men of the
East, and first made acquaintance with the writings of Geber, which were
destined to exercise so much influence over his future life.
At the end of this probation, and when he had entered his fortieth year,
he emerged from his solitude into more active life. With some remains of
his fortune, which had accumulated during his retirement, he founded a
college for the study of Arabic, which was approved of by the pope, with
many commendations upon his zeal and piety. At this time he narrowly
escaped assassination from an Arabian youth whom he had taken into his
service. Raymond had prayed to God, in some of his accesses of fanaticism,
that he might suffer martyrdom in his holy cause. His servant had overheard
him: and, being as great a fanatic as his master, he resolved to gratify his
wish, and punish him, at the same time, for the curses which he incessantly
launched against Mahomet and all who believed in him, by stabbing him to
the heart. He therefore aimed a blow at his master as he sat one day at table;
but the instinct of self-preservation being stronger than the desire of
martyrdom, Raymond grappled with his antagonist, and overthrew him. He
scorned to take his life himself; but handed him over to the authorities of
the town, by whom he was afterwards found dead in his prison.
After this adventure Raymond travelled to Paris, where he resided for
some time, and made the acquaintance of Arnold de Villeneuve. From him
he probably received some encouragement to search for the philosopher’s
stone, as he began from that time forth to devote less of his attention to
religious matters, and more to the study of alchymy. Still he never lost sight
of the great object for which he lived—the conversion of the Mahometans
—and proceeded to Rome, to communicate personally with Pope John XXI.
on the best measures to be adopted for that end. The Pope gave him
encouragement in words, but failed to associate any other persons with him
in the enterprise which he meditated. Raymond, therefore, set out for Tunis
alone, and was kindly received by many Arabian philosophers, who had
heard of his fame as a professor of alchymy. If he had stuck to alchymy
while in their country, it would have been well for him; but he began
cursing Mahomet, and got himself into trouble. While preaching the
doctrines of Christianity in the great bazaar of Tunis, he was arrested and
thrown into prison. He was shortly afterwards brought to trial, and
sentenced to death. Some of his philosophic friends interceded hard for him,
and he was pardoned upon condition that he left Africa immediately and
never again set foot in it. If he was found there again, no matter what his
object might be, or whatever length of time might intervene, his original
sentence would be carried into execution. Raymond was not at all solicitous
of martyrdom when it came to the point, whatever he might have been
when there was no danger, and he gladly accepted his life upon these
conditions, and left Tunis with the intention of proceeding to Rome. He
afterwards changed his plan, and established himself at Milan, where, for a
length of time, he practised alchymy, and some say astrology, with great
success.
Most writers who believed in the secrets of alchymy, and who have
noticed the life of Raymond Lulli, assert, that while in Milan, he received
letters from Edward King of England, inviting him to settle in his states.
They add that Lulli gladly accepted the invitation, and had apartments
assigned for his use in the Tower of London, where he refined much gold;
superintended the coinage of “rose-nobles,” and made gold out of iron,
quicksilver, lead, and pewter, to the amount of six millions. The writers in
the Biographie Universelle, an excellent authority in general, deny that
Raymond was ever in England, and say, that in all these stories of his
wondrous powers as an alchymist, he has been mistaken for another
Raymond, a Jew of Tarragona. Naudé, in his Apologie, says, simply, “that
six millions were given by Raymond Lulli to King Edward, to make war
against the Turks and other infidels:” not that he transmuted so much metal
into gold; but, as he afterwards adds, that he advised Edward to lay a tax
upon wool, which produced that amount. To shew that Raymond went to
England, his admirers quote a work attributed to him, De Transmutatione
Animæ Metallorum, in which he expressly says that he was in England at
the intercession of the king.34 The hermetic writers are not agreed whether
it was Edward I. or Edward II. who invited him over; but, by fixing the date
of his journey in 1312, they make it appear that it was Edward II. Edmond
Dickenson, in his work on the Quintessences of the Philosophers, says, that
Raymond worked in Westminster Abbey, where, a long time after his
departure, there was found in the cell which he had occupied a great
quantity of golden dust, of which the architects made a great profit. In the
biographical sketch of John Cremer, Abbot of Westminster, given by
Lenglet, it is said that it was chiefly through his instrumentality that
Raymond came to England. Cremer had been himself for thirty years
occupied in the vain search for the philosopher’s stone, when he
accidentally met Raymond in Italy, and endeavoured to induce him to
communicate his grand secret. Raymond told him that he must find it for
himself, as all great alchymists had done before him. Cremer, on his return
to England, spoke to King Edward in high terms of the wonderful
attainments of the philosopher, and a letter of invitation was forthwith sent
him. Robert Constantinus, in the Nomenclator Scriptorum Medicorum,
published in 1515, says, that after a great deal of research, he found that
Raymond Lulli resided for some time in London, and that he actually made
gold, by means of the philosopher’s stone, in the Tower; that he had seen
the golden pieces of his coinage, which were still named in England the
nobles of Raymond, or rose-nobles. Lulli himself appears to have boasted
that he made gold; for, in his well-known Testamentum, he states that he
converted no less than fifty thousand pounds weight of quicksilver, lead,
and pewter into that metal.35 It seems highly probable that the English king,
believing in the extraordinary powers of the alchymist, invited him to
England to make test of them, and that he was employed in refining gold
and in coining. Camden, who is not credulous in matters like these, affords
his countenance to the story of his coinage of nobles; and there is nothing at
all wonderful in the fact of a man famous for his knowledge of metals being
employed in such a capacity. Raymond was, at this time, an old man, in his
seventy-seventh year, and somewhat in his dotage. He was willing enough
to have it believed that he had discovered the grand secret, and supported
the rumour rather than contradicted it. He did not long remain in England,
but returned to Rome to carry out the projects which were nearer to his
heart than the profession of alchymy. He had proposed them to several
successive popes with little or no success. The first was a plan for the
introduction of the oriental languages into all the monasteries of Europe; the
second, for the reduction into one of all the military orders, that, being
united, they might move more efficaciously against the Saracens; and the
third, that the sovereign pontiff should forbid the works of Averroes to be
read in the schools, as being more favourable to Mahometanism than to
Christianity. The pope did not receive the old man with much cordiality;
and, after remaining for about two years in Rome, he proceeded once more
to Africa, alone and unprotected, to preach the Gospel of Jesus. He landed
at Bona in 1314, and so irritated the Mahometans by cursing their prophet,
that they stoned him, and left him for dead on the sea-shore. He was found
some hours afterwards by a party of Genoese merchants, who conveyed
him on board their vessel, and sailed towards Majorca. The unfortunate man
still breathed, but could not articulate. He lingered in this state for some
days, and expired just as the vessel arrived within sight of his native shores.
His body was conveyed with great pomp to the church of St. Eulalia, at
Palma, where a public funeral was instituted in his honour. Miracles were
afterwards said to have been worked at his tomb.
Thus ended the career of Raymond Lulli, one of the most extraordinary
men of his age; and, with the exception of his last boast about the six
millions of gold, the least inclined to quackery of any of the professors of
alchymy. His writings were very numerous, and include nearly five hundred
volumes, upon grammar, rhetoric, morals, theology, politics, civil and canon
law, physics, metaphysics, astronomy, medicine, and chemistry.
Roger Bacon.
The powerful delusion of alchymy seized upon a mind still greater than that
of Raymond Lulli. Roger Bacon firmly believed in the philosopher’s stone,
and spent much of his time in search of it. His example helped to render all
the learned men of the time more convinced of its practicability, and more
eager in the pursuit. He was born at Ilchester, in the county of Somerset, in
the year 1214. He studied for some time in the University of Oxford, and
afterwards in that of Paris, in which he received the degree of doctor of
divinity. Returning to England in 1240, he became a monk of the order of
St. Francis. He was by far the most learned man of his age; and his
acquirements 
were 
so 
much 
above 
the 
comprehension 
of 
his
contemporaries, that they could only account for them by supposing that he
was indebted for them to the devil. Voltaire has not inaptly designated him
“De l’or encrouté de toutes les ordures de son siècle;” but the crust of
superstition that enveloped his powerful mind, though it may have dimmed,
could not obscure the brightness of his genius. To him, and apparently to
him only, among all the inquiring spirits of the time, were known the
properties of the concave and convex lens. He also invented the magic
lantern; that pretty plaything of modern days, which acquired for him a
reputation that embittered his life. In a history of alchymy, the name of this
great man cannot be omitted, although unlike many others of whom we
shall have occasion to speak, he only made it secondary to other pursuits.
The love of universal knowledge that filled his mind, would not allow him
to neglect one branch of science, of which neither he nor the world could
yet see the absurdity. He made ample amends for his time lost in this pursuit
by his knowledge in physics and his acquaintance with astronomy. The
telescope, burning-glasses, and gunpowder, are discoveries which may well
carry his fame to the remotest time, and make the world blind to the one
spot of folly—the diagnosis of the age in which he lived, and the
circumstances by which he was surrounded. His treatise on the Admirable
Power of Art and Nature in the Production of the Philosopher’s Stone was
translated into French by Girard de Tormes, and published at Lyons in 1557.
His Mirror of Alchymy was also published in French in the same year, and
in Paris in 1612, with some additions from the works of Raymond Lulli. A
complete list of all the published treatises upon the subject may be seen in
Lenglet du Fresnoy.
Pope John XXII.
This prelate is said to have been the friend and pupil of Arnold de
Villeneuve, by whom he was instructed in all the secrets of alchymy.
Tradition asserts of him, that he made great quantities of gold, and died as
rich as Crœsus. He was born at Cahors, in the province of Guienne, in the
year 1244. He was a very eloquent preacher, and soon reached high dignity
in the Church. He wrote a work on the transmutation of metals, and had a
famous laboratory at Avignon. He issued two bulls against the numerous
pretenders to the art, who had sprung up in every part of Christendom; from
which it might be inferred that he was himself free from the delusion. The
alchymists claim him, however, as one of the most distinguished and
successful professors of their art, and say that his bulls were not directed
against the real adepts, but the false pretenders. They lay particular stress
upon these words in his bull, “Spondent, quas non exhibent, divitias,
pauperes alchymistæ.” These, it is clear, they say, relate only to poor
alchymists, and therefore false ones. He died in the year 1344, leaving in
his coffers a sum of eighteen millions of florins. Popular belief alleged that
he had made, and not amassed, this treasure; and alchymists complacently
cite this as a proof that the philosopher’s stone was not such a chimera as
the incredulous pretended. They take it for granted that John really left this
money, and ask by what possible means he could have accumulated it.
Replying to their own question, they say triumphantly, “His book shews it
was by alchymy, the secrets of which he learned from Arnold de Villeneuve
and Raymond Lulli. But he was as prudent as all other hermetic
philosophers. Whoever would read his book to find out his secret, would
employ all his labour in vain; the pope took good care not to divulge it.”
Unluckily for their own credit, all these gold-makers are in the same
predicament; their great secret loses its worth most wonderfully in the
telling, and therefore they keep it snugly to themselves. Perhaps they
thought that, if everybody could transmute metals, gold would be so
plentiful that it would be no longer valuable, and that some new art would
be requisite to transmute it back again into steel and iron. If so, society is
much indebted to them for their forbearance.
Jean de Meung.
All classes of men dabbled in the art at this time; the last mentioned was a
pope, the one of whom we now speak was a poet. Jean de Meung, the
celebrated author of the Roman de la Rose, was born in the year 1279 or
1280, and was a great personage at the courts of Louis X., Philip the Long,
Charles IV., and Philip de Valois. His famous poem of the Roman de la
Rose, which treats of every subject in vogue at that day, necessarily makes
great mention of alchymy. Jean was a firm believer in the art, and wrote,
besides his Roman, two shorter poems, the one entitled The Remonstrance
of Nature to the wandering Alchymist and The Reply of the Alchymist to
Nature. Poetry and alchymy were his delight, and priests and women were
his abomination. A pleasant story is related of him and the ladies of the
court of Charles IV. He had written the following libellous couplet upon the
fair sex:
“Toutes êtes, serez, ou fûtes,
De fait ou de volonté, putains;
Et qui très bien vous chercherait,
Toutes putains vous trouverait.”36
This naturally gave great offence; and being perceived one day in the
king’s antechamber, by some ladies who were waiting for an audience, they
resolved to punish him. To the number of ten or twelve, they armed
themselves with canes and rods, and surrounding the unlucky poet, called
upon the gentlemen present to strip him naked, that they might wreak just
vengeance upon him, and lash him through the streets of the town. Some of
the lords present were in no wise loath, and promised themselves great sport
from his punishment. But Jean de Meung was unmoved by their threats, and
stood up calmly in the midst of them, begging them to hear him first, and
then, if not satisfied, they might do as they liked with him. Silence being
restored, he stood upon a chair, and entered on his defence. He
acknowledged that he was the author of the obnoxious verses, but denied
that they bore reference to all womankind. He only meant to speak of the
vicious and abandoned, whereas those whom he saw around him were
patterns of virtue, loveliness, and modesty. If, however, any lady present
thought herself aggrieved, he would consent to be stripped, and she might
lash him till her arms were wearied. It is added, that by this means Jean
escaped his flogging, and that the wrath of the fair ones immediately
subsided. The gentlemen present were, however, of opinion, that if every
lady in the room whose character corresponded with the verses had taken
him at his word; the poet would in all probability have been beaten to death.
All his life long he evinced a great animosity towards the priesthood, and
his famous poem abounds with passages reflecting upon their avarice,
cruelty, and immorality. At his death he left a large box, filled with some
weighty material, which he bequeathed to the Cordeliers, as a peace-
offering, for the abuse he had lavished upon them. As his practice of
alchymy was well known, it was thought the box was filled with gold and
silver, and the Cordeliers congratulated each other on their rich acquisition.
When it came to be opened, they found to their horror that it was filled only
with slates, scratched with hieroglyphic and cabalistic characters. Indignant
at the insult, they determined to refuse him Christian burial, on pretence
that he was a sorcerer. He was, however, honourably buried in Paris, the
whole court attending his funeral.
Nicholas Flamel.
The story of this alchymist, as handed down by tradition, and enshrined in
the pages of Lenglet da Fresnoy, is not a little marvellous. He was born at
Pontoise, of a poor but respectable family, at the end of the thirteenth, or
beginning of the fourteenth century. Having no patrimony, he set out for
Paris at an early age, to try his fortune as a public scribe. He had received a
good education, was well skilled in the learned languages, and was an
excellent penman. He soon procured occupation as a letter-writer and
copyist, and used to sit at the corner of the Rue de Marivaux, and practise
his calling; but he hardly made profit enough to keep body and soul
together. To mend his fortunes he tried poetry; but this was a more wretched
occupation still. As a transcriber he had at least gained bread and cheese;
but his rhymes were not worth a crust. He then tried painting with as little
success; and as a last resource, began to search for the philosopher’s stone
and tell fortunes. This was a happier idea; he soon increased in substance,
and had wherewithal to live comfortably. He therefore took unto himself his
wife Petronella, and began to save money; but continued to all outward
appearance as poor and miserable as before. In the course of a few years, he
became desperately addicted to the study of alchymy, and thought of
nothing but the philosopher’s stone, the elixir of life, and the universal
alkahest. In the year 1257, he bought by chance an old book for two florins,
which soon became his sole study. It was written with a steel instrument
upon the bark of trees, and contained twenty-one, or as he himself always
expressed it, three times seven, leaves. The writing was very elegant and in
the Latin language. Each seventh leaf contained a picture and no writing.
On the first of these was a serpent swallowing rods; on the second, a cross
with a serpent crucified; and on the third, the representation of a desert, in
the midst of which was a fountain, with serpents crawling from side to side.
It purported to be written by no less a personage than “Abraham, patriarch,
Jew, prince, philosopher, priest, Levite, and astrologer;” and invoked curses
upon any one who should cast eyes upon it, without being “a sacrificer or a
scribe.” Nicholas Flamel never thought it extraordinary that Abraham
should have known Latin, and was convinced that the characters on his
book had been traced by the hands of that great patriarch himself. He was at
first afraid to read it, after he became aware of the curse it contained; but he
got over that difficulty by recollecting that, although he was not a sacrificer,
he had practised as a scribe. As he read he was filled with admiration, and
found that it was a perfect treatise upon the transmutation of metals. All the
processes were clearly explained; the vessels, the retorts, the mixtures, and
the proper times and seasons for experiment. But as ill-luck would have it,
the possession of the philosopher’s stone, or prime agent in the work, was
presupposed. This was a difficulty which was not to be got over. It was like
telling a starving man how to cook a beef-steak, instead of giving him the
money to buy one. But Nicholas did not despair, and set about studying the
hieroglyphics and allegorical representations with which the book
abounded. He soon convinced himself that it had been one of the sacred
books of the Jews, and that it was taken from the temple of Jerusalem on its
destruction by Titus. The process of reasoning by which he arrived at this
conclusion is not stated.
From some expression in the treatise, he learned that the allegorical
drawings on the fourth and fifth leaves enshrined the secret of the
philosopher’s stone, without which all the fine Latin of the directions was
utterly unavailing. He invited all the alchymists and learned men of Paris to
come and examine them, but they all departed as wise as they came.
Nobody could make any thing either of Nicholas or his pictures; and some
even went so far as to say that his invaluable book was not worth a farthing.
This was not to be borne; and Nicholas resolved to discover the great secret
by himself, without troubling the philosophers. He found on the first page
of the fourth leaf, the picture of Mercury attacked by an old man resembling
Saturn or Time. The latter had an hour-glass on his head, and in his hand a
scythe, with which he aimed a blow at Mercury’s feet. The reverse of the
leaf represented a flower growing on a mountain top, shaken rudely by the
wind, with a blue stalk, red and white blossoms, and leaves of pure gold.
Around it were a great number of dragons and griffins. On the first page of
the fifth leaf was a fine garden, in the midst of which was a rose-tree in full
bloom, supported against the trunk of a gigantic oak. At the foot of this
there bubbled up a fountain of milk-white water, which, forming a small
stream, flowed through the garden, and was afterwards lost in the sands. On
the second page was a king, with a sword in his hand, superintending a
number of soldiers, who, in execution of his orders, were killing a great
multitude of young children, spurning the prayers and tears of their
mothers, who tried to save them from destruction. The blood of the children
was carefully collected by another party of soldiers, and put into a large
vessel, in which two allegorical figures of the sun and moon were bathing
themselves.
For twenty-one years poor Nicholas wearied himself with the study of
these pictures, but still he could make nothing of them. His wife Petronella
at last persuaded him to find out some learned rabbi; but there was no rabbi
in Paris learned enough to be of any service to him. The Jews met but small
encouragement to fix their abode in France, and all the chiefs of that people
were located in Spain. To Spain accordingly Nicholas Flamel repaired. He
left his book in Paris, for fear, perhaps, that he might be robbed of it on the
road; and telling his neighbours that he was going on a pilgrimage to the
shrine of St. James of Compostello, he trudged on foot towards Madrid in
search of a rabbi. He was absent two years in that country, and made
himself known to a great number of Jews, descendants of those who had
been expelled from France in the reign of Philip Augustus. The believers in
the philosopher’s stone give the following account of his adventures: They
say that at Leon he made the acquaintance of a converted Jew, named
Cauches, a very learned physician, to whom he explained the title and
nature of his little book. The doctor was transported with joy as soon as he
heard it named, and immediately resolved to accompany Nicholas to Paris,
that he might have a sight of it. The two set out together; the doctor on the
way entertaining his companion with the history of his book, which, if the
genuine book he thought it to be, from the description he had heard of it,
was in the handwriting of Abraham himself, and had been in the possession
of personages no less distinguished than Moses, Joshua, Solomon, and
Esdras. It contained all the secrets of alchymy and of many other sciences,
and was the most valuable book that had ever existed in this world. The
doctor was himself no mean adept, and Nicholas profited greatly by his
discourse, as in the garb of poor pilgrims they wended their way to Paris,
convinced of their power to turn every old shovel in that capital into pure
gold. But, unfortunately, when they reached Orleans, the doctor was taken
dangerously ill. Nicholas watched by his bedside, and acted the double part
of a physician and nurse to him; but he died after a few days, lamenting
with his last breath that he had not lived long enough to see the precious
volume. Nicholas rendered the last honours to his body; and with a
sorrowful heart, and not one sou in his pocket, proceeded home to his wife
Petronella. He immediately recommenced the study of his pictures; but for
two whole years he was as far from understanding them as ever. At last, in
the third year, a glimmer of light stole over his understanding. He recalled
some expression of his friend the doctor, which had hitherto escaped his
memory, and he found that all his previous experiments had been conducted
on a wrong basis. He recommenced them now with renewed energy, and at
the end of the year had the satisfaction to see all his toils rewarded. On the
13th January 1382, says Lenglet, he made a projection on mercury, and had
some very excellent silver. On the 25th April following, he converted a
large quantity of mercury into gold, and the great secret was his.
Nicholas was now about eighty years of age, and still a hale and stout
old man. His friends say that by a simultaneous discovery of the elixir of
life, he found means to keep death at a distance for another quarter of a
century; and that he died in 1415, at the age of 116. In this interval he made
immense quantities of gold, though to all outward appearance he was as
poor as a mouse. At an early period of his changed fortune, he had, like a
worthy man, taken counsel with his old wife Petronella, as to the best use
he could make of his wealth. Petronella replied, that as unfortunately they
had no children, the best thing he could do, was to build hospitals and
endow churches. Nicholas thought so too, especially when he began to find
that his elixir could not keep off death, and that the grim foe was making
rapid advances upon him. He richly endowed the church of St. Jacques de la
Boucherie, near the Rue de Marivaux, where he had all his life resided,
besides seven others in different parts of the kingdom. He also endowed
fourteen hospitals, and built three chapels.
The fame of his great wealth and his munificent benefactions soon
spread over all the country, and he was visited, among others, by the
celebrated doctors of that day, Jean Gerson, Jean de Courtecuisse, and
Pierre d’Ailli. They found him in his humble apartment, meanly clad, and
eating porridge out of an earthen vessel; and with regard to his secret, as
impenetrable as all his predecessors in alchymy. His fame reached the ears
of the king, Charles VI., who sent M. de Cramoisi, the Master of Requests,
to find out whether Nicholas had indeed discovered the philosopher’s stone.
But M. de Cramoisi took nothing by his visit; all his attempts to sound the
alchymist were unavailing, and he returned to his royal master no wiser
than he came. It was in this year, 1414, that he lost his faithful Petronella.
He did not long survive her, but died in the following year, and was buried
with great pomp by the grateful priests of St. Jacques de la Boucherie.
The great wealth of Nicholas Flamel is undoubted, as the records of
several churches and hospitals in France can testify. That he practised
alchymy is equally certain, as he left behind several works upon the subject.
Those who knew him well, and who were incredulous about the
philosopher’s stone, give a satisfactory solution of the secret of his wealth.
They say that he was always a miser and a usurer; that his journey to Spain
was undertaken with very different motives from those pretended by the
alchymists; that, in fact, he went to collect debts due from Jews in that
country to their brethren in Paris, and that he charged a commission of fully
cent per cent in consideration of the difficulty of collecting and the dangers
of the road; that when he possessed thousands, he lived upon almost
nothing; and was the general money-lender, at enormous profits, to all the
dissipated young men at the French court.
Among the works written by Nicholas Flamel on the subject of alchymy
is The Philosophic Summary, a poem, reprinted in 1735, as an appendix to
the third volume of the Roman de la Rose. He also wrote three treatises
upon natural philosophy, and an alchymic allegory, entitled Le Désir désiré.
Specimens of his writing, and a fac-simile of the drawings in his book of
Abraham, may be seen in Salmon’s Bibliothèque des Philosophes
Chimiques. The writer of the article Flamel in the Biographie Universelle
says, that for a hundred years after the death of Flamel, many of the adepts
believed that he was still alive, and that he would live for upwards of six
hundred years. The house he formerly occupied, at the corner of the Rue de
Marivaux, has been often taken by credulous speculators, and ransacked
from top to bottom, in the hopes that gold might be found. A report was
current in Paris, not long previous to the year 1816, that some lodgers had
found in the cellars several jars filled with a dark-coloured ponderous
matter. Upon the strength of the rumour, a believer in all the wondrous tales
told of Nicholas Flamel bought the house, and nearly pulled it to pieces in
ransacking the walls and wainscoting for hidden gold. He got nothing for
his pains, however, and had a heavy bill to pay to restore his dilapidations.
George Ripley.
While alchymy was thus cultivated on the continent of Europe, it was not
neglected in the isles of Britain. Since the time of Roger Bacon, it had
fascinated the imagination of many ardent men in England. In the year 1404
an act of parliament was passed declaring the making of gold and silver to
be felony. Great alarm was felt at that time lest any alchymist should
succeed in his projects, and perhaps bring ruin upon the state by furnishing
boundless wealth to some designing tyrant, who would make use of it to
enslave his country. This alarm appears to have soon subsided; for, in the
year 1455, King Henry VI., by advice of his council and parliament, granted
four successive patents and commissions to several knights, citizens of
London, chemists, monks, mass-priests, and others, to find out the
philosopher’s stone and elixir, “to the great benefit,” said the patent, “of the
realm, and the enabling of the king to pay all the debts of the crown in real
gold and silver.” Prinn, in his Aurum Reginæ, observes, as a note to this
passage, that the king’s reason for granting this patent to ecclesiastics was,
that “they were such good artists in transubstantiating bread and wine in the
eucharist, and therefore the more likely to be able to effect the
transmutation of baser metals into better.” No gold, of course, was ever
made; and next year the king, doubting very much of the practicability of
the thing, took further advice, and appointed a commission of ten learned
men and persons of eminence to judge and certify to him whether the
transmutation of metals were a thing practicable or no. It does not appear
whether the commission ever made any report upon the subject.
In the succeeding reign an alchymist appeared who pretended to have
discovered the secret. This was George Ripley, the canon of Bridlington, in
Yorkshire. He studied for twenty years in the universities of Italy, and was a
great favourite with Pope Innocent VIII., who made him one of his
domestic chaplains, and master of the ceremonies in his household.
Returning to England in 1477, he dedicated to King Edward IV. his famous
work, The Compound of Alchymy; or, the Twelve Gates leading to the
Discovery of the Philosopher’s Stone. These gates he described to be
calcination, solution, separation, conjunction, putrefaction, congelation,
cibation, sublimation, fermentation, exaltation, multiplication, and
projection; to which he might have added botheration, the most important
process of all. He was very rich, and allowed it to be believed that he could
make gold out of iron. Fuller, in his Worthies of England, says that an
English gentleman of good credit reported, that in his travels abroad he saw
a record in the island of Malta which declared that Ripley gave yearly to the
knights of that island, and of Rhodes, the enormous sum of one hundred
thousand pounds sterling to enable them to carry on the war against the
Turks. In his old age he became an anchorite near Boston, and wrote
twenty-five volumes upon the subject of alchymy, the most important of
which is the Duodecim Portarum already mentioned. Before he died, he
seems to have acknowledged that he had mis-spent his life in this vain
study, and requested that all men, when they met with any of his books,
would burn them, or afford them no credit, as they had been written merely
from his opinion, and not from proof; and that subsequent trial had made
manifest to him that they were false and vain.37
Basil Valentine.
Germany also produced many famous alchymists in the fifteenth century,
the chief of whom are Basil Valentine, Bernard of Trèves, and the Abbot
Trithemius. Basil Valentine was born at Mayence, and was made prior of St.
Peter’s, at Erfurt, about the year 1414. It was known, during his life, that he
diligently sought the philosopher’s stone, and that he had written some
works upon the process of transmutation. They were thought for many years
to be lost, but were, after his death, discovered enclosed in the stone-work
of one of the pillars in the Abbey. They were twenty-one in number, and are
fully set forth in the third volume of Lenglet’s History of the Hermetic
Philosophy. The alchymists asserted that heaven itself conspired to bring to
light these extraordinary works; and that the pillar in which they were
enclosed was miraculously shattered by a thunderbolt; and that as soon as
the manuscripts were liberated, the pillar closed up again of its own accord!
Bernard of Treves.
The life of this philosopher is a remarkable instance of talent and
perseverance misapplied. In the search of his chimera nothing could daunt
him. Repeated disappointment never diminished his hopes; and from the
age of fourteen to that of eighty-five he was incessantly employed among
the drugs and furnaces of his laboratory, wasting his life with the view of
prolonging it, and reducing himself to beggary in the hopes of growing rich.
He was born at either Trèves or Padua in the year 1406. His father is
said by some to have been a physician in the latter city, and by others to
have been Count of the Marches of Trèves, and one of the most wealthy
nobles of his country. At all events, whether noble or physician, he was a
rich man, and left his son a magnificent estate. At the age of fourteen he
first became enamoured of the science of alchymy, and read the Arabian
authors in their own language. He himself has left a most interesting record
of his labours and wanderings, from which the following particulars are
chiefly extracted. The first book which fell into his hands was that of the
Arabian philosopher Rhazes, from the reading of which he imagined that he
had discovered the means of augmenting gold a hundredfold. For four years
he worked in his laboratory, with the book of Rhazes continually before
him. At the end of that time, he found that he had spent no less than eight
hundred crowns upon his experiment, and had got nothing but fire and
smoke for his pains. He now began to lose confidence in Rhazes, and turned
to the works of Geber. He studied him assiduously for two years; and being
young, rich, and credulous, was beset by all the alchymists of the town, who
kindly assisted him in spending his money. He did not lose his faith in
Geber, or patience with his hungry assistants, until he had lost two thousand
crowns—a very considerable sum in those days.
Among all the crowd of pretended men of science who surrounded him,
there was but one as enthusiastic and as disinterested as himself. With this
man, who was a monk of the order of St. Francis, he contracted an intimate
friendship, and spent nearly all his time. Some obscure treatises of
Rupecissa and Sacrobosco having fallen into their hands, they were
persuaded, from reading them, that highly rectified spirits of wine was the
universal alkahest, or dissolvent, which would aid them greatly in the
process of transmutation. They rectified the alcohol thirty times, till they
made it so strong as to burst the vessels which contained it. After they had
worked three years, and spent three hundred crowns in the liquor, they
discovered that they were on the wrong track. They next tried alum and
copperas; but the great secret still escaped them. They afterwards imagined
that there was a marvellous virtue in all excrement, especially the human,
and actually employed more than two years in experimentalising upon it
with mercury, salt, and molten lead! Again the adepts flocked around him
from far and near to aid him with their counsels. He received them all
hospitably, and divided his wealth among them so generously and
unhesitatingly, that they gave him the name of the “Good Trevisan,” by
which he is still often mentioned in works that treat on alchymy. For twelve
years he led this life, making experiments every day upon some new
substance, and praying to God night and morning that he might discover the
secret of transmutation.
In this interval he lost his friend the monk, and was joined by a
magistrate of the city of Trèves, as ardent as himself in the search. His new
acquaintance imagined that the ocean was the mother of gold, and that sea-
salt would change lead or iron into the precious metals. Bernard resolved to
try; and, transporting his laboratory to a house on the shores of the Baltic,
he worked upon salt for more than a year, melting it, sublimating it,
crystallising it, and occasionally drinking it, for the sake of other
experiments. Still the strange enthusiast was not wholly discouraged, and
his failure in one trial only made him the more anxious to attempt another.
He was now approaching the age of fifty, and had as yet seen nothing of
the world. He therefore determined to travel through Germany, Italy,
France, and Spain. Wherever he stopped he made inquiries whether there
were any alchymists in the neighbourhood. He invariably sought them out;
and if they were poor, relieved, and if affluent, encouraged them. At
Citeaux he became acquainted with one Geoffrey Leuvier, a monk of that
place, who persuaded him that the essence of egg-shells was a valuable
ingredient. He tried, therefore, what could be done; and was only prevented
from wasting a year or two on the experiment by the opinions of an
attorney, at Berghem, in Flanders, who said that the great secret resided in
vinegar and copperas. He was not convinced of the absurdity of this idea
until he had nearly poisoned himself. He resided in France for about five
years, when, hearing accidentally that one Master Henry, confessor to the
Emperor Frederic III., had discovered the philosopher’s stone, he set out for
Germany to pay him a visit. He had, as usual, surrounded himself with a set
of hungry dependants, several of whom determined to accompany him. He
had not heart to refuse them, and he arrived at Vienna with five of them.
Bernard sent a polite invitation to the confessor, and gave him a sumptuous
entertainment, at which were present nearly all the alchymists of Vienna.
Master Henry frankly confessed that he had not discovered the
philosopher’s stone, but that he had all his life been employed in searching
for it, and would so continue till he found it, or died. This was a man after
Bernard’s own heart, and they vowed with each other an eternal friendship.
It was resolved, at supper, that each alchymist present should contribute a
certain sum towards raising forty-two marks of gold, which, in five days, it
was confidently asserted by Master Henry, would increase, in his furnace,
fivefold. Bernard, being the richest man, contributed the lion’s share, ten
marks of gold, Master Henry five, and the others one or two a-piece, except
the dependants of Bernard, who were obliged to borrow their quota from
their patron. The grand experiment was duly made; the golden marks were
put into a crucible, with a quantity of salt, copperas, aquafortis, egg-shells,
mercury, lead, and dung. The alchymists watched this precious mess with
intense interest, expecting that it would agglomerate into one lump of pure
gold. At the end of three weeks they gave up the trial, upon some excuse
that the crucible was not strong enough, or that some necessary ingredient
was wanting. Whether any thief had put his hands into the crucible is not
known, but it is alleged that the gold found therein at the close of the
experiment was worth only sixteen marks, instead of the forty-two, which
were put there at the beginning.
Bernard, though he made no gold at Vienna, made away with a very
considerable quantity. He felt the loss so acutely, that he vowed to think no
more of the philosopher’s stone. This wise resolution he kept for two
months; but he was miserable. He was in the condition of the gambler, who
cannot resist the fascination of the game while he has a coin remaining, but
plays on with the hope of retrieving former losses, till hope forsakes him,
and he can live no longer. He returned once more to his beloved crucibles,
and resolved to prosecute his journey in search of a philosopher who had
discovered the secret, and would communicate it to so zealous and
persevering an adept as himself. From Vienna he travelled to Rome, and
from Rome to Madrid. Taking ship at Gibraltar, he proceeded to Messina;
from Messina to Cyprus; from Cyprus to Greece; from Greece to
Constantinople; and thence into Egypt, Palestine, and Persia. These
wanderings occupied him about eight years. From Persia he made his way
back to Messina, and from thence into France. He afterwards passed over
into England, still in search of his great chimera; and this occupied four
years more of his life. He was now growing both old and poor; for he was
sixty-two years of age, and had been obliged to sell a great portion of his
patrimony to provide for his expenses. His journey to Persia had cost
upwards of thirteen thousand crowns, about one-half of which had been
fairly melted in his all-devouring furnaces; the other half was lavished upon
the sycophants that he made it his business to search out in every town he
stopped at.
On his return to Trèves he found, to his sorrow, that, if not an actual
beggar, he was not much better. His relatives looked upon him as a
madman, and refused even to see him. Too proud to ask for favours from
any one, and still confident that, some day or other, he would be the
possessor of unbounded wealth, he made up his mind to retire to the island
of Rhodes, where he might, in the mean time, hide his poverty from the
eyes of the world. Here he might have lived unknown and happy; but, as ill
luck would have it, he fell in with a monk as mad as himself upon the
subject of transmutation. They were, however, both so poor that they could
not afford to buy the proper materials to work with. They kept up each
other’s spirits by learned discourses on the hermetic philosophy, and in the
reading of all the great authors who had written upon the subject. Thus did
they nurse their folly, as the good wife of Tam O’Shanter did her wrath, “to
keep it warm.” After Bernard had resided about a year in Rhodes, a
merchant, who knew his family, advanced him the sum of eight thousand
florins, upon the security of the last-remaining acres of his formerly large
estate. Once more provided with funds, he recommenced his labours with
all the zeal and enthusiasm of a young man. For three years he hardly
stepped out of his laboratory: he ate there, and slept there, and did not even
give himself time to wash his hands and clean his beard, so intense was his
application. It is melancholy to think that such wonderful perseverance
should have been wasted in so vain a pursuit, and that energies so
unconquerable should have had no worthier field to strive in. Even when he
had fumed away his last coin, and had nothing left in prospective to keep
his old age from starvation, hope never forsook him. He still dreamed of
ultimate success, and sat down a grey-headed man of eighty, to read over all
the authors on the hermetic mysteries, from Geber to his own day, lest he
should have misunderstood some process, which it was not yet too late to
recommence. The alchymists say, that he succeeded at last, and discovered
the secret of transmutation in his eighty-second year. They add that he lived
three years afterwards to enjoy his wealth. He lived, it is true, to this great
age, and made a valuable discovery—more valuable than gold or gems. He
learned, as he himself informs us, just before he had attained his eighty-
third year, that the great secret of philosophy was contentment with our lot.
Happy would it have been for him if he had discovered it sooner, and before
he became decrepit, a beggar, and an exile!
He died at Rhodes, in the year 1490, and all the alchymists of Europe
sang elegies over him, and sounded his praise as the “good Trevisan.” He
wrote several treatises upon his chimera, the chief of which are, the Book of
Chemistry, the Verbum dimissum, and an essay De Natura Ovi.
Trithemius.
The name of this eminent man has become famous in the annals of
alchymy, although he did but little to gain so questionable an honour. He
was born in the year 1462, at the village of Trittheim, in the electorate of
Trèves. His father was John Heidenberg, a vine-grower, in easy
circumstances, who, dying when his son was but seven years old, left him
to the care of his mother. The latter married again very shortly afterwards,
and neglected the poor boy, the offspring of her first marriage. At the age of
fifteen he did not even know his letters, and was, besides, half starved, and
otherwise ill-treated by his step-father; but the love of knowledge
germinated in the breast of the unfortunate youth, and he learned to read at
the house of a neighbour. His father-in-law set him to work in the
vineyards, and thus occupied all his days; but the nights were his own. He
often stole out unheeded, when all the household were fast asleep, poring
over his studies in the fields, by the light of the moon; and thus taught
himself Latin and the rudiments of Greek. He was subjected to so much ill-
usage at home, in consequence of this love of study, that he determined to
leave it. Demanding the patrimony which his father had left him, he
proceeded to Trèves; and assuming the name of Trithemius, from that of his
native village of Trittheim, lived there for some months under the tuition of
eminent masters, by whom he was prepared for the university. At the age of
twenty, he took it into his head that he should like to see his mother once
more; and he set out on foot from the distant university for that purpose. On
his arrival near Spannheim, late in the evening of a gloomy winter’s day, it
came on to snow so thickly, that he could not proceed onwards to the town.
He therefore took refuge for the night in a neighbouring monastery; but the
storm continued several days, the roads became impassable, and the
hospitable monks would not hear of his departure. He was so pleased with
them and their manner of life, that he suddenly resolved to fix his abode
among them, and renounce the world. They were no less pleased with him,
and gladly received him as a brother. In the course of two years, although
still so young, he was unanimously elected their abbot. The financial affairs
of the establishment had been greatly neglected, the walls of the building
were falling into ruin, and every thing was in disorder. Trithemius, by his
good management and regularity, introduced a reform in every branch of
expenditure. The monastery was repaired, and a yearly surplus, instead of a
deficiency, rewarded him for his pains. He did not like to see the monks
idle, or occupied solely between prayers for their business, and chess for
their relaxation. He, therefore, set them to work to copy the writings of
eminent authors. They laboured so assiduously, that, in the course of a few
years, their library, which had contained only about forty volumes, was
enriched with several hundred valuable manuscripts, comprising many of
the classical Latin authors, besides the works of the early fathers, and the
principal historians, and philosophers of more modern date. He retained the
dignity of Abbot of Spannheim for twenty-one years, when the monks, tired
of the severe discipline he maintained, revolted against him, and chose
another abbot in his place. He was afterwards made Abbot of St. James, in
Wurzburg, where he died in 1516.
During his learned leisure at Spannheim, he wrote several works upon
the occult sciences, the chief of which are an essay on geomancy, or
divination by means of lines and circles on the ground; another upon
sorcery; a third upon alchymy; and a fourth upon the government of the
world by its presiding angels, which was translated into English, and
published by the famous William Lilly in 1647.
It has been alleged by the believers in the possibility of transmutation,
that the prosperity of the abbey of Spannheim, while under his
superintendence, was owing more to the philosopher’s stone than to wise
economy. Trithemius, in common with many other learned men, has been
accused of magic; and a marvellous story is told of his having raised from
the grave the form of Mary of Burgundy, at the intercession of her widowed
husband, the Emperor Maximilian. His work on steganographia, or
cabalistic writing, was denounced to the Count Palatine, Frederic II., as
magical and devilish; and it was by him taken from the shelves of his
library and thrown into the fire. Trithemius is said to be the first writer who
makes mention of the wonderful story of the devil and Dr. Faustus, the truth
of which he firmly believed. He also recounts the freaks of a spirit
namedHudekin, by whom he was at times tormented.38
The Marechal de Rays.
One of the greatest encouragers of alchymy in the fifteenth century was
Gilles de Laval, Lord of Rays and a Marshal of France. His name and deeds
are little known; but in the annals of crime and folly, they might claim the
highest and worst pre-eminence. Fiction has never invented any thing
wilder or more horrible than his career; and were not the details but too well
authenticated by legal and other documents which admit no doubt, the lover
of romance might easily imagine they were drawn to please him from the
stores of the prolific brain, and not from the page of history.
He was born about the year 1420, of one of the noblest families of
Brittany. His father dying when Gilles had attained his twentieth year, he
came into uncontrolled possession, at that early age, of a fortune which the
monarchs of France might have envied him. He was a near kinsman of the
Montmorencys, the Roncys, and the Craons; possessed fifteen princely
domains, and had an annual revenue of about three hundred thousand livres.
Besides this, he was handsome, learned, and brave. He distinguished
himself greatly in the wars of Charles VII., and was rewarded by that
monarch with the dignity of a marshal of France. But he was extravagant
and magnificent in his style of living, and accustomed from his earliest
years to the gratification of every wish and passion; and this, at last, led him
from vice to vice and from crime to crime, till a blacker name than his is not
to be found in any record of human iniquity.
In his castle of Champtocé he lived with all the splendour of an eastern
caliph. He kept up a troop of two hundred horsemen to accompany him
wherever he went; and his excursions for the purposes of hawking and
hunting were the wonder of all the country around, so magnificent were the
caparisons of his steeds and the dresses of his retainers. Day and night his
castle was open all the year round to comers of every degree. He made it a
rule to regale even the poorest beggar with wine and hippocrass. Every day
an ox was roasted whole in his spacious kitchens, besides sheep, pigs, and
poultry sufficient to feed five hundred persons. He was equally magnificent
in his devotions. His private chapel at Champtocé was the most beautiful in
France, and far surpassed any of those in the richly-endowed cathedrals of
Notre Dame in Paris, of Amiens, of Beauvais, or of Rouen. It was hung
with cloth of gold and rich velvet. All the chandeliers were of pure gold
curiously inlaid with silver. The great crucifix over the altar was of solid
silver, and the chalices and incense-burners were of pure gold. He had
besides a fine organ, which he caused to be carried from one castle to
another on the shoulders of six men, whenever he changed his residence.
He kept up a choir of twenty-five young children of both sexes, who were
instructed in singing by the first musicians of the day. The master of his
chapel he called a bishop, who had under him his deans, arch-deacons, and
vicars, each receiving great salaries; the bishop four hundred crowns a year,
and the rest in proportion.
He also maintained a whole troop of players, including ten dancing girls
and as many ballad-singers, besides morris-dancers, jugglers, and
mountebanks of every description. The theatre on which they performed
was fitted up without any regard to expense, and they played mysteries or
danced the morris-dance every evening for the amusement of himself and
household, and such strangers as were sharing his prodigal hospitality.
At the age of twenty-three he married Catherine, the wealthy heiress of
the house of Touars, for whom he refurnished his castle at an expense of a
hundred thousand crowns. His marriage was the signal for new
extravagance, and he launched out more madly than ever he had done
before; sending for fine singers or celebrated dancers from foreign countries
to amuse him and his spouse; and instituting tilts and tournaments in his
great court-yard almost every week for all the knights and nobles of the
province of Brittany. The Duke of Brittany’s court was not half so splendid
as that of the Maréchal de Rays. His utter disregard for wealth was so well
known, that he was made to pay three times its value for every thing he
purchased. His castle was filled with needy parasites and panderers to his
pleasures, amongst whom he lavished rewards with an unsparing hand. But
the ordinary round of sensual gratification ceased at last to afford him
delight; he was observed to be more abstemious in the pleasures of the
table, and to neglect the beauteous dancing girls who used formerly to
occupy so much of his attention. He was sometimes gloomy and reserved,
and there was an unnatural wildness in his eye which gave indications of
incipient madness. Still his discourse was as reasonable as ever, his urbanity
to the guests that flocked from far and near to Champtocé suffered no
diminution; and learned priests, when they conversed with him, thought to
themselves that few of the nobles of France were so well informed as Gilles
de Laval. But dark rumours spread gradually over the country; murder, and,
if possible, still more atrocious deeds were hinted at; and it was remarked
that many young children of both sexes suddenly disappeared, and were
never afterwards heard of. One or two had been traced to the castle of
Champtocé, and had never been seen to leave it; but no one dared to accuse
openly so powerful a man as the Maréchal de Rays. Whenever the subject
of the lost children was mentioned in his presence, he manifested the
greatest astonishment at the mystery which involved their fate, and
indignation against those who might be guilty of kidnapping them. Still the
world was not wholly deceived; his name became as formidable to young
children as that of the devouring ogre in fairy tales, and they were taught to
go miles round, rather than pass under the turrets of Champtocé.
In the course of a few years, the reckless extravagance of the marshal
drained him of all his funds, and he was obliged to put up some of his
estates for sale. The Duke of Brittany entered into a treaty with him for the
valuable seignory of Ingrande; but the heirs of Gilles implored the
interference of Charles VII. to stay the sale. Charles immediately issued an
edict, which was confirmed by the provincial Parliament of Brittany,
forbidding him to alienate his paternal estates. Gilles had no alternative but
to submit. He had nothing to support his extravagance but his allowance as
a marshal of France, which did not cover the one-tenth of his expenses. A
man of his habits and character could not retrench his wasteful expenditure,
and live reasonably; he could not dismiss without a pang his horsemen, his
jesters, his morris-dancers, his choristers, and his parasites, or confine his
hospitality to those who really needed it. Notwithstanding his diminished
resources, he resolved to live as he had lived before, and turn alchymist,
that he might make gold out of iron, and be still the wealthiest and most
magnificent among the nobles of Brittany.
In pursuance of this determination, he sent to Paris, Italy, Germany, and
Spain, inviting all the adepts in the science to visit him at Champtocé. The
messengers he despatched on this mission were two of his most needy and
unprincipled dependants, Gilles de Sillé and Roger de Bricqueville. The
latter, the obsequious panderer to his most secret and abominable pleasures,
he had entrusted with the education of his motherless daughter, a child but
five years of age, with permission that he might marry her at the proper
time to any person he chose, or to himself if he liked it better. This man
entered into the new plans of his master with great zeal, and introduced to
him one Prelati, an alchymist of Padua, and a physician of Poitou, who was
addicted to the same pursuits.
The marshal caused a splendid laboratory to be fitted up for them, and
the three commenced the search for the philosopher’s stone. They were
soon afterwards joined by another pretended philosopher, named Anthony
Palermo, who aided in their operations for upwards of a year. They all fared
sumptuously at the marshal’s expense, draining him of the ready money he
possessed, and leading him on from day to day with the hope that they
would succeed in the object of their search. From time to time new
aspirants from the remotest parts of Europe arrived at his castle, and for
months he had upwards of twenty alchymists at work, trying to transmute
copper into gold; and wasting the gold which was still his own in drugs and
elixirs.
But the Lord of Rays was not a man to abide patiently their lingering
processes. Pleased with their comfortable quarters, they jogged on from day
to day, and would have done so for years, had they been permitted. But he
suddenly dismissed them all, with the exception of the Italian Prelati, and
the physician of Poitou. These he retained to aid him to discover the secret
of the philosopher’s stone by a bolder method. The Poitousan had
persuaded him that the devil was the great depository of that and all other
secrets, and that he would raise him before Gilles, who might enter into any
contract he pleased with him. Gilles expressed his readiness, and promised
to give the devil any thing but his soul, or do any deed that the arch-enemy
might impose upon him. Attended solely by the physician, he proceeded at
midnight to a wild-looking place in a neighbouring forest; the physician
drew a magic circle around them on the sward, and muttered for half an
hour an invocation to the evil spirit to arise at his bidding, and disclose the
secrets of alchymy. Gilles looked on with intense interest, and expected
every moment to see the earth open, and deliver to his gaze the great enemy
of mankind. At last the eyes of the physician became fixed, his hair stood
on end, and he spoke, as if addressing the fiend. But Gilles saw nothing
except his companion. At last the physician fell down on the sward as if
insensible. Gilles looked calmly on to see the end. After a few minutes the
physician arose, and asked him if he had not seen how angry the devil
looked? Gilles replied that he had seen nothing; upon which his companion
informed him that Beelzebub had appeared in the form of a wild leopard,
growled at him savagely, and said nothing; and that the reason why the
marshal had neither seen nor heard him was, that he hesitated in his own
mind as to devoting himself entirely to the service. De Rays owned that he
had indeed misgivings, and inquired what was to be done to make the devil
speak out, and unfold his secret? The physician replied, that some person
must go to Spain and Africa to collect certain herbs which only grew in
those countries, and offered to go himself, if De Rays would provide the
necessary funds. De Rays at once consented; and the physician set out on
the following day with all the gold that his dupe could spare him. The
marshal never saw his face again.
But the eager Lord of Champtocé could not rest. Gold was necessary for
his pleasures; and unless by supernatural aid, he had no means of procuring
any further supplies. The physician was hardly twenty leagues on his
journey, before Gilles resolved to make another effort to force the devil to
divulge the art of gold-making. He went out alone for that purpose; but all
his conjurations were of no effect. Beelzebub was obstinate, and would not
appear. Determined to conquer him if he could, he unbosomed himself to
the Italian alchymist, Prelati. The latter offered to undertake the business,
upon condition that De Rays did not interfere in the conjurations, and
consented besides to furnish him with all the charms and talismans that
might be required. He was further to open a vein in his arm, and sign with
his blood a contract that “he would work the devil’s will in all things,” and
offer up to him a sacrifice of the heart, lungs, hands, eyes, and blood of a
young child. The grasping monomaniac made no hesitation, but agreed at
once to the disgusting terms proposed to him. On the following night,
Prelati went out alone, and after having been absent for three or four hours,
returned to Gilles, who sat anxiously awaiting him. Prelati then informed
him that he had seen the devil in the shape of a handsome youth of twenty.
He further said, that the devil desired to be called Barron in all future
invocations; and had shewn him a great number of ingots of pure gold,
buried under a large oak in the neighbouring forest, all of which, and as
many more as he desired, should become the property of the Maréchal de
Rays if he remained firm, and broke no condition of the contract. Prelati
further shewed him a small casket of black dust, which would turn iron into
gold; but as the process was very troublesome, he advised that they should
be contented with the ingots they found under the oak tree, and which
would more than supply all the wants that the most extravagant imagination
could desire. They were not, however, to attempt to look for the gold till a
period of seven times seven weeks, or they would find nothing but slates
and stones for their pains. Gilles expressed the utmost chagrin and
disappointment, and at once said that he could not wait for so long a period;
if the devil were not more, prompt Prelati might tell him that the Maréchal
de Rays was not to be trifled with, and would decline all further
communication with him. Prelati at last persuaded him to wait seven times
seven days. They then went at midnight with picks and shovels to dig up the
ground under the oak, where they found nothing to reward them but a great
quantity of slates, marked with hieroglyphics. It was now Prelati’s turn to
be angry; and he loudly swore that the devil was nothing but a liar and a
cheat. The marshal joined cordially in the opinion, but was easily persuaded
by the cunning Italian to make one more trial. He promised at the same time
that he would endeavour on the following night to discover the reason why
the devil had broken his word. He went out alone accordingly, and on his
return informed his patron that he had seen Barron, who was exceedingly
angry that they had not waited the proper time ere they looked for the
ingots. Barron had also said, that the Maréchal de Rays could hardly expect
any favours from him, at a time when he must know that he had been
meditating a pilgrimage to the Holy Land to make atonement for his sins.
The Italian had doubtless surmised this from some incautious expression of
his patron, for de Rays frankly confessed that there were times when, sick
of the world and all its pomps and vanities, he thought of devoting himself
to the service of God.
In this manner the Italian lured on from month to month his credulous
and guilty patron, extracting from him all the valuables he possessed, and
only waiting a favourable opportunity to decamp with his plunder. But the
day of retribution was at hand for both. Young girls and boys continued to
disappear in the most mysterious manner; and the rumours against the
owner of Champtocé grew so loud and distinct, that the Church was
compelled to interfere. Representations were made by the Bishop of Nantes
to the Duke of Brittany, that it would be a public scandal if the accusations
against the Maréchal de Rays were not inquired into. He was arrested
accordingly in his own castle, along with his accomplice Prelati, and thrown
into a dungeon at Nantes to await his trial.
The judges appointed to try him were the Bishop of Nantes Chancellor
of Brittany, the Vicar of the Inquisition in France, and the celebrated Pierre
l’Hôpital, the President of the provincial Parliament. The offences laid to
his charge were, sorcery, sodomy, and murder. Gilles, on the first day of his
trial, conducted himself with the utmost insolence. He braved the judges on
the judgment-seat, calling them simoniacs and persons of impure life, and
said he would rather be hanged by the neck like a dog without trial, than
plead either guilty or not guilty before such contemptible miscreants. But
his confidence forsook him as the trial proceeded, and he was found guilty
on the clearest evidence of all the crimes laid to his charge. It was proved
that he took insane pleasure in stabbing the victims of his lust and in
observing the quivering of their flesh, and the fading lustre of their eyes as
they expired. The confession of Prelati first made the judges acquainted
with this horrid madness, and Gilles himself confirmed it before his death.
Nearly a hundred children of the villagers around his two castles of
Champtocé and Machecoue, had been missed within three years, the greater
part, if not all, of whom were immolated to the lust or the cupidity of this
monster. He imagined that he thus made the devil his friend, and that his
recompense would be the secret of the philosopher’s stone.
Gilles and Prelati were both condemned to be burned alive. At the place
of execution they assumed the air of penitence and religion. Gilles tenderly
embraced Prelati, saying, “Farewell, friend Francis! In this world we shall
never meet again; but let us place our hopes in God; we shall see each
other in Paradise.” Out of consideration for his high rank and connexions,
the punishment of the marshal was so far mitigated, that he was not burned
alive like Prelati. He was first strangled, and then thrown into the flames:
his body, when half consumed, was given over to his relatives for interment,
while that of the Italian was burned to ashes, and then scattered to the
winds.39
Jacques Cœur.
This remarkable pretender to the secret of the philosopher’s stone was
contemporary with the last mentioned. He was a great personage at the
court of Charles VII., and in the events of his reign played a prominent part.
From a very humble origin he rose to the highest honours of the state, and
amassed enormous wealth by peculation and plunder of the country which
he should have served. It was to hide his delinquencies in this respect, and
to divert attention from the real source of his riches, that he boasted of
having discovered the art of transmuting the inferior metals into gold and
silver.
His father was a goldsmith in the city of Bourges; but so reduced in
circumstances towards the latter years of his life, that he was unable to pay
the necessary fees to procure his son’s admission into the guild. Young
Jacques became, however, a workman in the Royal Mint of Bourges, in
1428, and behaved himself so well, and shewed so much knowledge of
metallurgy, that he attained rapid promotion in that establishment. He had
also the good fortune to make the acquaintance of the fair Agnes Sorel, by
whom he was patronised and much esteemed. Jacques had now three things
in his favour—ability, perseverance, and the countenance of the king’s
mistress. Many a man succeeds with but one of these to help him forward;
and it would have been strange indeed if Jacques Cœur, who had them all,
should have languished in obscurity. While still a young man, he was made
master of the mint, in which he had been a journeyman, and installed at the
same time into the vacant office of grand treasurer of the royal household.
He possessed an extensive knowledge of finance, and turned it
wonderfully to his own advantage, as soon as he became entrusted with
extensive funds. He speculated in articles of the first necessity, and made
himself popular by buying up grain, honey, wines, and other produce, till
there was a scarcity, when he sold it again at enormous profit. Strong in the
royal favour, he did not hesitate to oppress the poor by continual acts of
forestalling and monopoly. As there is no enemy so bitter as the estranged
friend, so of all the tyrants and tramplers upon the poor, there is none so
fierce and reckless as the upstart that sprang from their ranks. The offensive
pride of Jacques Cœur to his inferiors was the theme of indignant reproach
in his own city, and his cringing humility to those above him was as much
an object of contempt to the aristocrats into whose society he thrust himself.
But Jacques did not care for the former, and to the latter he was blind. He
continued his career till he became the richest man in France, and so useful
to the king that no important enterprise was set on foot until he had been
consulted. He was sent, in 1446, on an embassy to Genoa, and in the
following year to Pope Nicholas V. In both these missions he acquitted
himself to the satisfaction of his sovereign, and was rewarded with a
lucrative appointment, in addition to those which he already held.
In the year 1449, the English in Normandy, deprived of their great
general, the Duke of Bedford, broke the truce with the French king, and
took possession of a small town belonging to the Duke of Brittany. This was
the signal for the recommencement of a war, in which the French regained
possession of nearly the whole province. The money for this war was
advanced, for the most part, by Jacques Cœur. When Rouen yielded to the
French, and Charles made his triumphal entry into that city, accompanied
by Dunois and his most famous generals, Jacques was among the most
brilliant of his cortège. His chariot and horses vied with those of the king in
the magnificence of their trappings; and his enemies said of him that he
publicly boasted that he alone had driven out the English, and that the
valour of the troops would have been nothing without his gold.
Dunois appears, also, to have been partly of the same opinion. Without
disparaging the courage of the army, he acknowledged the utility of the able
financier, by whose means they had been fed and paid, and constantly
afforded him his powerful protection.
When peace returned, Jacques again devoted himself to commerce, and
fitted up several galleys to trade with the Genoese. He also bought large
estates in various parts of France; the chief of which were the baronies of
St. Fargeau, Meneton, Salone, Maubranche, Meaune, St. Gerant de Vaux,
and St. Aon de Boissy; the earldoms or counties of La Palisse,
Champignelle, Beaumont, and Villeneuve la Genêt, and the marquisate of
Toucy. He also procured for his son, Jean Cœur, who had chosen the
Church for his profession, a post no less distinguished than that of
Archbishop of Bourges.
Every body said that so much wealth could not have been honestly
acquired; and both rich and poor longed for the day that should humble the
pride of the man, whom the one class regarded as an upstart and the other as
an oppressor. Jacques was somewhat alarmed at the rumours that were
afloat respecting him, and of dark hints that he had debased the coin of the
realm and forged the king’s seal to an important document, by which he had
defrauded the state of very considerable sums. To silence these rumours, he
invited many alchymists from foreign countries to reside with him, and
circulated a counter rumour, that he had discovered the secret of the
philosopher’s stone. He also built a magnificent house in his native city,
over the entrance of which he caused to be sculptured the emblems of that
science. Some time afterwards he built another, no less splendid, at
Montpellier, which he inscribed in a similar manner. He also wrote a
treatise upon the hermetic philosophy, in which he pretended that he knew
the secret of transmuting metals.
HOUSE OF JACQUES CŒUR, BOURGES.
But all these attempts to disguise his numerous acts of peculation
proved unavailing; and he was arrested in 1452, and brought to trial on
several charges. Upon one only, which the malice of his enemies invented
to ruin him, was he acquitted; which was, that he had been accessory to the
death, by poison, of his kind patroness, Agnes Sorel. Upon the others he
was found guilty, and sentenced to be banished the kingdom, and to pay the
enormous fine of four hundred thousand crowns. It was proved that he had
forged the king’s seal; that in his capacity of master of the mint of Bourges,
he had debased, to a very great extent, the gold and silver coin of the realm;
and that he had not hesitated to supply the Turks with arms and money to
enable them to carry on war against their Christian neighbours, for which
service he had received the most munificent recompenses. Charles VII. was
deeply grieved at his condemnation, and believed to the last that he was
innocent. By his means the fine was reduced within a sum which Jacques
Cœur could pay. After remaining for some time in prison, he was liberated,
and left France with a large sum of money, part of which, it was alleged,
was secretly paid him by Charles out of the produce of his confiscated
estates. He retired to Cyprus, where he died about 1460, the richest and
most conspicuous personage of the island.
The writers upon alchymy all claim Jacques Cœur as a member of their
fraternity, and treat as false and libellous the more rational explanation of
his wealth which the records of his trial afford. Pierre Borel, in his
Antiquités Gauloises, maintains the opinion that Jacques was an honest
man, and that he made his gold out of lead and copper by means of the
philosopher’s stone. The alchymic adepts in general were of the same
opinion; but they found it difficult to persuade even his contemporaries of
the fact. Posterity is still less likely to believe it.
Inferior Adepts of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries.
Many other pretenders to the secrets of the philosopher’s stone appeared in
every country in Europe, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The
possibility of transmutation was so generally admitted, that every chemist
was more or less an alchymist. Germany, Holland, Italy, Spain, Poland,
France, and England produced thousands of obscure adepts, who supported
themselves, in the pursuit of their chimera, by the more profitable resources
of astrology and divination. The monarchs of Europe were no less
persuaded than their subjects of the possibility of discovering the
philosopher’s stone. Henry VI. and Edward IV. of England encouraged
alchymy. In Germany, the Emperors Maximilian, Rudolph, and Frederic II.
devoted much of their attention to it; and every inferior potentate within
their dominions imitated their example. It was a common practice in
Germany, among the nobles and petty sovereigns, to invite an alchymist to
take up his residence among them, that they might confine him in a
dungeon till he made gold enough to pay millions for his ransom. Many
poor wretches suffered perpetual imprisonment in consequence. A similar
fate appears to have been intended by Edward II. for Raymond Lulli, who,
upon the pretence that he was thereby honoured, was accommodated with
apartments in the Tower of London. He found out in time the trick that was
about to be played him, and managed to make his escape; some of his
biographers say, by jumping into the Thames, and swimming to a vessel
that lay waiting to receive him. In the sixteenth century, the same system
was pursued, as will be shewn more fully in the life of Seton the
Cosmopolite.
The following is a catalogue of the chief authors upon alchymy, who
flourished during this epoch, and whose lives and adventures are either
unknown or are unworthy of more detailed notice. John Dowston, an
Englishman, lived in 1315, and wrote two treatises on the philosopher’s
stone. Richard, or, as some call him, Robert, also an Englishman, lived in
1330, and wrote a work entitled Correctorium Alchymiæ, which was much
esteemed till the time of Paracelsus. In the same year lived Peter of
Lombardy, who wrote what he called a Complete Treatise upon the
Hermetic Science, an abridgment of which was afterwards published by
Lacini, a monk of Calabria. In 1330 the most famous alchymist of Paris was
one Odomare, whose work, De Practica Magistri, was for a long time a
hand-book among the brethren of the science. John de Rupecissa, a French
monk of the order of St. Francis, flourished in 1357, and pretended to be a
prophet as well as an alchymist. Some of his prophecies were so
disagreeable to Pope Innocent VI., that the pontiff determined to put a stop
to them, by locking up the prophet in the dungeons of the Vatican. It is
generally believed that he died there, though there is no evidence of the
fact. His chief works are, the Book of Light, the Five Essences, the Heaven
of Philosophers, and his grand work, De Confectione Lapidis. He was not
thought a shining light among the adepts. Ortholani was another pretender,
of whom nothing is known, but that he exercised the arts of alchymy and
astrology at Paris, shortly before the time of Nicholas Flamel. His work on
the practice of alchymy was written in that city in 1358. Isaac of Holland
wrote, it is supposed, about this time; and his son also devoted himself to
the science. Nothing worth repeating is known of their lives. Boerhaave
speaks with commendation of many passages in their works, and Paracelsus
esteemed them highly: the chief are, De Triplici Ordine Elixiris et Lapidis
Theoria, printed at Berne in 1608; and Mineralia Opera, seu de Lapide
Philosophico, printed at Middleburg in 1600. They also wrote eight other
works upon the same subject. Koffstky, a Pole, wrote an alchymical treatise,
entitled The Tincture of Minerals, about the year 1488. In this list of authors
a royal name must not be forgotten. Charles VI. of France, one of the most
credulous princes of the day, whose court absolutely swarmed with
alchymists, conjurers, astrologers, and quacks of every description, made
several attempts to discover the philosopher’s stone, and thought he knew
so much about it, that he determined to enlighten the world with a treatise;
it is called the Royal Work of Charles VI. of France, and the Treasure of
Philosophy. It is said to be the original from which Nicholas Flamel took
the idea of his Désir désiré. Lenglet du Fresnoy says it is very allegorical,
and utterly incomprehensible. For a more complete list of the hermetic
philosophers of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the reader is referred
to the third volume of Lenglet’s History, already quoted.
PROGRESS OF THE INFATUATION DURING THE SIXTEENTH
AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES.—PRESENT STATE OF THE
SCIENCE.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the search for the
philosopher’s stone was continued by thousands of the enthusiastic and the
credulous; but a great change was introduced during this period. The
eminent men who devoted themselves to the study totally changed its
aspect, and referred to the possession of their wondrous stone and elixir, not
only the conversion of the base into the precious metals, but the solution of
all the difficulties of other sciences. They pretended that by its means man
would be brought into closer communion with his Maker; that disease and
sorrow would be banished from the world; and that “the millions of
spiritual beings who walk the earth unseen” would be rendered visible, and
become the friends, companions, and instructors of mankind. In the
seventeenth century more especially, these poetical and fantastic doctrines
excited the notice of Europe; and from Germany, where they had been first
disseminated by Rosencreutz, spread into France and England, and ran
away with the sound judgment of many clever but too enthusiastic searchers
for the truth. Paracelsus, Dee, and many others of less note, were captivated
by the grace and beauty of the new mythology, which was arising to adorn
the literature of Europe. Most of the alchymists of the sixteenth century,
although ignorant of the Rosicrucians as a sect, were, in some degree,
tinctured with their fanciful tenets: but before we speak more fully of these
poetical visionaries, it will be necessary to resume the history of the
hermetic folly, and trace the gradual change that stole over the dreams of
the adepts. It will be seen that the infatuation increased rather than
diminished as the world grew older.
Augurello.
Among the alchymists who were born in the fifteenth, and distinguished
themselves in the sixteenth century, the first in point of date is John Aurelio
Augurello. He was born at Rimini in 1441, and became professor of the
belles lettres at Venice and Trevisa. He was early convinced of the truth of
the hermetic science, and used to pray to God that he might be happy
enough to discover the philosopher’s stone. He was continually surrounded
by the paraphernalia of chemistry, and expended all his wealth in the
purchase of drugs and metals. He was also a poet, but of less merit than
pretensions. His Chrysopeia, in which he pretended to teach the art of
making gold, he dedicated to Pope Leo X., in the hope that the pontiff
would reward him handsomely for the compliment; but the pope was too
good a judge of poetry to be pleased with the worse than mediocrity of his
poem, and too good a philosopher to approve of the strange doctrines which
it inculcated; he was, therefore, far from gratified at the dedication. It is
said, that when Augurello applied to him for a reward, the pope, with great
ceremony and much apparent kindness and cordiality, drew an empty purse
from his pocket, and presented it to the alchymist, saying, that since he was
able to make gold, the most appropriate present that could be made him,
was a purse to put it in. This scurvy reward was all that the poor alchymist
ever got either for his poetry or his alchymy. He died in a state of extreme
poverty, in the eighty-third year of his age.
Cornelius Agrippa.
This alchymist has left a distinguished reputation. The most extraordinary
tales were told and believed of his powers. He could turn iron into gold by
his mere word. All the spirits of the air and demons of the earth were under
his command, and bound to obey him in everything. He could raise from
the dead the forms of the great men of other days, and make them appear,
“in their habit as they lived,” to the gaze of the curious who had courage
enough to abide their presence.
CORNELIUS AGRIPPA.
He was born at Cologne in 1486, and began at an early age the study of
chemistry and philosophy. By some means or other, which have never been
very clearly explained, he managed to impress his contemporaries with a
great idea of his wonderful attainments. At the early age of twenty, so great
was his reputation as an alchymist, that the principal adepts of Paris wrote
to Cologne, inviting him to settle in France, and aid them with his
experience in discovering the philosopher’s stone. Honours poured upon
him in thick succession; and he was highly esteemed by all the learned men
of his time. Melancthon speaks of him with respect and commendation.
Erasmus also bears testimony in his favour; and the general voice of his age
proclaimed him a light of literature and an ornament to philosophy. Some
men, by dint of excessive egotism, manage to persuade their
contemporaries that they are very great men indeed: they publish their
acquirements so loudly in people’s ears, and keep up their own praises so
incessantly, that the world’s applause is actually taken by storm. Such
seems to have been the case with Agrippa. He called himself a sublime
theologian, an excellent jurisconsult, an able physician, a great philosopher,
and a successful alchymist. The world at last took him at his word; and
thought that a man who talked so big, must have some merit to recommend
him,—that it was, indeed, a great trumpet which sounded so obstreperous a
blast. He was made secretary to the Emperor Maximilian, who conferred
upon him the title of chevalier, and gave him the honorary command of a
regiment. He afterwards became professor of Hebrew and thebelles lettres
at the University of Dôle, in France; but quarrelling with the Franciscan
monks upon some knotty points of divinity, he was obliged to quit the town.
He took refuge in London, where he taught Hebrew and cast nativities, for
about a year. From London he proceeded to Pavia, and gave lectures upon
the writings, real or supposed, of Hermes Trismegistus; and might have
lived there in peace and honour, had he not again quarrelled with the clergy.
By their means his position became so disagreeable that he was glad to
accept an offer made him by the magistracy of Metz, to become their syndic
and advocate-general. Here, again, his love of disputation made him
enemies: the theological wiseacres of that city asserted that St. Ann had
three husbands, in which opinion they were confirmed by the popular belief
of the day. Agrippa needlessly ran foul of this opinion, or prejudice as he
called it, and thereby lost much of his influence. Another dispute, more
creditable to his character, occurred soon after, and sank him for ever in the
estimation of the Metzians. Humanely taking the part of a young girl who
was accused of witchcraft, his enemies asserted that he was himself a
sorcerer, and raised such a storm over his head, that he was forced to fly the
city. After this he became physician to Louisa de Savoy, mother of King
Francis I. This lady was curious to know the future, and required her
physician to cast her nativity. Agrippa replied that he would not encourage
such idle curiosity. The result was, he lost her confidence, and was
forthwith dismissed. If it had been through his belief in the worthlessness of
astrology, that he had made his answer, we might admire his honest and
fearless independence; but when it is known that, at the very same time, he
was in the constant habit of divination and fortune-telling, and that he was
predicting splendid success, in all his undertakings, to the Constable of
Bourbon, we can only wonder at his thus estranging a powerful friend
through mere petulance and perversity.
He was about this time invited, both by Henry VIII. of England, and
Margaret of Austria, governess of the Low Countries, to fix his residence in
their dominions. He chose the service of the latter, by whose influence he
was made historiographer to the Emperor Charles V. Unfortunately for
Agrippa, he never had stability enough to remain long in one position, and
offended his patrons by his restlessness and presumption. After the death of
Margaret he was imprisoned at Brussels, on a charge of sorcery. He was
released after a year; and quitting the country, experienced many
vicissitudes. He died in great poverty in 1534, aged forty-eight years.
While in the service of Margaret of Austria, he resided principally at
Louvain, in which city he wrote his famous work on the Vanity and
Nothingness of Human Knowledge. He also wrote to please his royal
mistress, a treatise upon the Superiority of the Female Sex, which he
dedicated to her in token of his gratitude for the favours she had heaped
upon him. The reputation he left behind him in these provinces was any
thing but favourable. A great number of the marvellous tales that are told of
him relate to this period of his life. It was said, that the gold which he paid
to the traders with whom he dealt, always looked remarkably bright, but
invariably turned into pieces of slate and stone in the course of four-and-
twenty hours. Of this spurious gold he was believed to have made large
quantities by the aid of the devil, who, it would appear from this, had but a
very superficial knowledge of alchymy, and much less than the Maréchal de
Rays gave him credit for. The Jesuit Delrio, in his book on magic and
sorcery, relates a still more extraordinary story of him. One day, Agrippa
left his house at Louvain, and intending to be absent for some time, gave
the key of his study to his wife, with strict orders that no one should enter it
during his absence. The lady herself, strange as it may appear, had no
curiosity to pry into her husband’s secrets, and never once thought of
entering the forbidden room; but a young student, who had been
accommodated with an attic in the philosopher’s house, burned with a fierce
desire to examine the study; hoping, perchance, that he might purloin some
book or implement which would instruct him in the art of transmuting
metals. The youth, being handsome, eloquent, and, above all, highly
complimentary to the charms of the lady, she was persuaded without much
difficulty to lend him the key, but gave him strict orders not to remove any
thing. The student promised implicit obedience, and entered Agrippa’s
study. The first object that caught his attention was a large grimoire, or
book of spells, which lay open on the philosopher’s desk. He sat himself
down immediately and began to read. At the first word he uttered, he
fancied he heard a knock at the door. He listened, but all was silent.
Thinking that his imagination had deceived him, he read on, when
immediately a louder knock was heard, which so terrified him, that he
started to his feet. He tried to say “Come in,” but his tongue refused its
office, and he could not articulate a sound. He fixed his eyes upon the door,
which, slowly opening, disclosed a stranger of majestic form, but scowling
features, who demanded sternly, why he was summoned? “I did not
summon you,” said the trembling student. “You did!” said the stranger,
advancing angrily; “and the demons are not to be invoked in vain.” The
student could make no reply; and the demon, enraged that one of the
uninitiated should have summoned him out of mere presumption, seized
him by the throat and strangled him. When Agrippa returned, a few days
afterwards, he found his house beset with devils. Some of them were sitting
on the chimney-pots, kicking up their legs in the air; while others were
playing at leapfrog on the very edge of the parapet. His study was so filled
with them, that he found it difficult to make his way to his desk. When, at
last, he had elbowed his way through them, he found his book open, and the
student lying dead upon the floor. He saw immediately how the mischief
had been done; and dismissing all the inferior imps, asked the principal
demon how he could have been so rash as to kill the young man. The
demon replied, that he had been needlessly invoked by an insulting youth,
and could do no less than kill him for his presumption. Agrippa
reprimanded him severely, and ordered him immediately to reanimate the
dead body, and walk about with it in the market-place for the whole of the
afternoon. The demon did so; the student revived, and putting his arm
through that of his unearthly murderer, walked very lovingly with him in
sight of all the people. At sunset, the body fell down again, cold and lifeless
as before, and was carried by the crowd to the hospital, it being the general
opinion that he had expired in a fit of apoplexy. His conductor immediately
disappeared. When the body was examined, marks of strangulation were
found on the neck, and prints of the long claws of the demon on various
parts of it. These appearances, together with a story, which soon obtained
currency, that the companion of the young man had vanished in a cloud of
flame and smoke, opened people’s eyes to the truth. The magistrates of
Louvain instituted inquiries, and the result was, that Agrippa was obliged to
quit the town.
Other authors besides Delrio relate similar stories of this philosopher.
The world in those days was always willing enough to believe in tales of
magic and sorcery; and when, as in Agrippa’s case, the alleged magician
gave himself out for such, and claimed credit for the wonders he worked, it
is not surprising that the age should have allowed his pretensions. It was
dangerous boasting, which sometimes led to the stake or the gallows, and
therefore was thought to be not without foundation. Paulus Jovius, in his
Eulogia Doctorum Virorum, says, that the devil, in the shape of a large
black dog, attended Agrippa wherever he went. Thomas Nash, in his
Adventures of Jack Wilton, relates, that, at the request of Lord Surrey,
Erasmus, and some other learned men, Agrippa called up from the grave
many of the great philosophers of antiquity; among others, Tully, whom he
caused to re-deliver his celebrated oration for Roscius. He also shewed
Lord Surrey, when in Germany, an exact resemblance in a glass of his
mistress, the fair Geraldine. She was represented on a couch weeping for
the absence of her lover. Lord Surrey made a note of the exact time at
which he saw this vision, and ascertained afterwards that his mistress was
actually so employed at the very minute. To Thomas Lord Cromwell,
Agrippa represented King Henry VIII. hunting in Windsor Park, with the
principal lords of his court; and to please the Emperor Charles V. he
summoned King David and King Solomon from the tomb.
Naudé, in his “Apology for the great Men who have been falsely
suspected of Magic,” takes a great deal of pains to clear Agrippa from the
imputations cast upon him by Delrio, Paulus Jovius, and other such ignorant
and prejudiced scribblers. Such stories demanded refutation in the days of
Naudé, but they may now be safely left to decay in their own absurdity.
That they should have attached, however, to the memory of a man who
claimed the power of making iron obey him when he told it to become gold,
and who wrote such a work as that upon magic, which goes by his name, is
not at all surprising.
Paracelsus.
This philosopher, called by Naudé “the zenith and rising sun of all the
alchymists,” was born at Einsiedeln, near Zurich, in the year 1493. His true
name was Hohenheim; to which, as he himself informs us, were prefixed
the baptismal names of Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastes Paracelsus. The
last of these he chose for his common designation while he was yet a boy;
and rendered it, before he died, one of the most famous in the annals of his
time. His father, who was a physician, educated his son for the same
pursuit. The latter was an apt scholar, and made great progress. By chance
the work of Isaac Hollandus fell into his hands, and from that time he
became smitten with the mania of the philosopher’s stone. All his thoughts
henceforth were devoted to metallurgy; and he travelled into Sweden that
he might visit the mines of that country, and examine the ores while they
yet lay in the bowels of the earth. He also visited Trithemius at the
monastery of Spannheim, and obtained instructions from him in the science
of alchymy. Continuing his travels, he proceeded through Prussia and
Austria into Turkey, Egypt, and Tartary, and thence returning to
Constantinople, learned, as he boasted, the art of transmutation, and became
possessed of the elixir vitæ. He then established himself as a physician in
his native Switzerland at Zurich, and commenced writing works upon
alchymy and medicine, which immediately fixed the attention of Europe.
Their great obscurity was no impediment to their fame; for the less the
author was understood, the more the demonologists, fanatics, and
philosopher’s-stone hunters seemed to appreciate him. His fame as a
physician kept pace with that which he enjoyed as an alchymist, owing to
his having effected some happy cures by means of mercury and opium,—
drugs unceremoniously condemned by his professional brethren. In the year
1526, he was chosen professor of physics and natural philosophy in the
University of Basle, where his lectures attracted vast numbers of students.
He denounced the writings of all former physicians as tending to mislead;
and publicly burned the works of Galen and Avicenna, as quacks and
impostors. He exclaimed, in presence of the admiring and half-bewildered
crowd, who assembled to witness the ceremony, that there was more
knowledge in his shoe-strings than in the writings of these physicians.
Continuing in the same strain, he said, all the Universities in the world were
full of ignorant quacks; but that he, Paracelsus, overflowed with wisdom.
“You will all follow my new system,” said he, with furious gesticulations,
“Avicenna, Galen, Rhazis, Montagnana, Memé,—you will all follow me, ye
professors of Paris, Montpellier, Germany, Cologne, and Vienna! and all ye
that dwell on the Rhine and the Danube,—ye that inhabit the isles of the
sea; and ye also, Italians, Dalmatians, Athenians, Arabians, Jews,—ye will
all follow my doctrines, for I am the monarch of medicine!”
PARACELSUS.
But he did not long enjoy the esteem of the good citizens of Basle. It is
said that he indulged in wine so freely, as not unfrequently to be seen in the
streets in a state of intoxication. This was ruinous for a physician, and his
good fame decreased rapidly. His ill fame increased in still greater
proportion, especially when he assumed the airs of a sorcerer. He boasted of
the legions of spirits at his command; and of one especially, which he kept
imprisoned in the hilt of his sword. Wetteras, who lived twenty-seven
months in his service, relates that he often threatened to invoke a whole
army of demons, and shew him the great authority which he could exercise
over them. He let it be believed that the spirit in his sword had custody of
the elixir of life, by means of which he could make any one live to be as old
as the antediluvians. He also boasted that he had a spirit at his command,
called “Azoth,” whom he kept imprisoned in a jewel; and in many of the
old portraits he is represented with a jewel, inscribed with the word “Azoth,
in his hand.”
If a sober prophet has little honour in his own country, a drunken one
has still less. Paracelsus found it at last convenient to quit Basle, and
establish himself at Strasbourg. The immediate cause of this change of
residence was as follows. A citizen lay at the point of death, and was given
over by all the physicians of the town. As a last resource Paracelsus was
called in, to whom the sick man promised a magnificent recompense, if, by
his means, he were cured. Paracelsus gave him two small pills, which the
man took, and rapidly recovered. When he was quite well, Paracelsus sent
for his fee; but the citizen had no great opinion of the value of a cure which
had been so speedily effected. He had no notion of paying a handful of gold
for two pills, although they had saved his life, and he refused to pay more
than the usual fee for a single visit. Paracelsus brought an action against
him, and lost it. This result so exasperated him, that he left Basle in high
dudgeon. He resumed his wandering life, and travelled in Germany and
Hungary, supporting himself as he went on the credulity and infatuation of
all classes of society. He cast nativities—told fortunes—aided those who
had money to throw away upon the experiment, to find the philosopher’s
stone—prescribed remedies for cows and pigs, and aided in the recovery of
stolen goods. After residing successively at Nuremburg, Augsburg, Vienna,
and Mindelheim, he retired in the year 1541 to Saltzbourg, and died in a
state of abject poverty in the hospital of that town.
If this strange charlatan found hundreds of admirers during his life, he
found thousands after his death. A sect of Paracelsists sprang up in France
and Germany, to perpetuate the extravagant doctrines of their founder upon
all the sciences, and upon alchymy in particular. The chief leaders were
Bodenstein and Dorneus. The following is a summary of his doctrine,
founded upon the supposed existence of the philosopher’s stone; it is worth
preserving from its very absurdity, and is altogether unparalleled in the
history of philosophy. First of all, he maintained that the contemplation of
the perfection of the Deity sufficed to procure all wisdom and knowledge;
that the Bible was the key to the theory of all diseases, and that it was
necessary to search into the Apocalypse to know the signification of magic
medicine. The man who blindly obeyed the will of God, and who succeeded
in identifying himself with the celestial intelligences, possessed the
philosopher’s stone—he could cure all diseases, and prolong life to as many
centuries as he pleased; it being by the very same means that Adam and the
antediluvian patriarchs prolonged theirs. Life was an emanation from the
stars—the sun governed the heart, and the moon the brain. Jupiter governed
the liver, Saturn the gall, Mercury the lungs, Mars the bile, and Venus the
loins. In the stomach of every human being there dwelt a demon, or
intelligence, that was a sort of alchymist in his way, and mixed, in their due
proportions, in his crucible, the various aliments that were sent into that
grand laboratory, the belly.40 He was proud of the title of magician, and
boasted that he kept up a regular correspondence with Galen from hell; and
that he often summoned Avicenna from the same regions to dispute with
him on the false notions he had promulgated respecting alchymy, and
especially regarding potable gold and the elixir of life. He imagined that
gold could cure ossification of the heart, and, in fact, all diseases, if it were
gold which had been transmuted from an inferior metal by means of the
philosopher’s stone, and if it were applied under certain conjunctions of the
planets. The mere list of the works in which he advances these frantic
imaginings, which he called a doctrine, would occupy several pages.
George Agricola.
This alchymist was born in the province of Misnia, in 1494. His real name
was Bauer, meaning a husbandman, which, in accordance with the common
fashion of his age, he latinised into Agricola. From his early youth, he
delighted in the visions of the hermetic science. Ere he was sixteen, he
longed for the great elixir which was to make him live for seven hundred
years, and for the stone which was to procure him wealth to cheer him in
his multiplicity of days. He published a small treatise upon the subject at
Cologne, in 1531, which obtained him the patronage of the celebrated
Maurice duke of Saxony. After practising for some years as a physician at
Joachimsthal, in Bohemia, he was employed by Maurice as superintendent
of the silver mines of Chemnitz. He led a happy life among the miners,
making various experiments in alchymy while deep in the bowels of the
earth. He acquired a great knowledge of metals, and gradually got rid of his
extravagant notions about the philosopher’s stone. The miners had no faith
in alchymy; and they converted him to their way of thinking, not only in
that but in other respects. From their legends, he became firmly convinced
that the bowels of the earth were inhabited by good and evil spirits, and that
firedamp and other explosions sprang from no other causes than the
mischievous propensities of the latter. He died in the year 1555, leaving
behind him the reputation of a very able and intelligent man.
Denis Zachaire.
Autobiography, written by a wise man who was once a fool, is not only the
most instructive, but the most delightful of reading. Denis Zachaire, an
alchymist of the sixteenth century, has performed this task, and left a record
of his folly and infatuation in pursuit of the philosopher’s stone, which well
repays perusal. He was born in the year 1510, of an ancient family in
Guienne, and was early sent to the university of Bordeaux, under the care of
a tutor to direct his studies. Unfortunately his tutor was a searcher for the
grand elixir, and soon rendered his pupil as mad as himself upon the
subject. With this introduction, we will allow Denis Zachaire to speak for
himself, and continue his narrative in his own words: “I received from
home,” says he, “the sum of two hundred crowns for the expenses of myself
and master; but before the end of the year, all our money went away in the
smoke of our furnaces. My master, at the same time, died of a fever,
brought on by the parching heat of our laboratory, from which he seldom or
never stirred, and which was scarcely less hot than the arsenal of Venice.
His death was the more unfortunate for me, as my parents took the
opportunity of reducing my allowance, and sending me only sufficient for
my board and lodging, instead of the sum I required to continue my
operations in alchymy.
“To meet this difficulty and get out of leading-strings, I returned home
at the age of twenty-five, and mortgaged part of my property for four
hundred crowns. This sum was necessary to perform an operation of
the science, which had been communicated to me by an Italian at
Toulouse, and who, as he said, had proved its efficacy. I retained this
man in my service, that we might see the end of the experiment. I then,
by means of strong distillations, tried to calcinate gold and silver; but
all my labour was in vain. The weight of the gold I drew out of my
furnace was diminished by one-half since I put it in, and my four
hundred crowns were very soon reduced to two hundred and thirty. I
gave twenty of these to my Italian, in order that he might travel to
Milan, where the author of the receipt resided, and ask him the
explanation of some passages which we thought obscure. I remained at
Toulouse all the winter, in the hope of his return; but I might have
remained there till this day if I had waited for him, for I never saw his
face again.
“In the succeeding summer there was a great plague, which forced
me to quit the town. I did not, however, lose sight of my work. I went
to Cahors, where I remained six months, and made the acquaintance of
an old man, who was commonly known to the people as ‘the
Philosopher;’ a name which, in country places, is often bestowed upon
people whose only merit is, that they are less ignorant than their
neighbours. I shewed him my collection of alchymical receipts, and
asked his opinion upon them. He picked out ten or twelve of them,
merely saying that they were better than the others. When the plague
ceased, I returned to Toulouse, and recommenced my experiments in
search of the stone. I worked to such effect that my four hundred
crowns were reduced to one hundred and seventy.
“That I might continue my work on a safer method, I made
acquaintance, in 1537, with a certain abbé who resided in the
neighbourhood. He was smitten with the same mania as myself, and
told me that one of his friends, who had followed to Rome in the
retinue of the Cardinal d’Armagnac, had sent him from that city a new
receipt which could not fail to transmute iron and copper, but which
would cost two hundred crowns. I provided half this money, and the
abbé the rest; and we began to operate at our joint expense. As we
required spirits of wine for our experiment, I bought a tun of excellent
vin de Gaillac. I extracted the spirit, and rectified it several times. We
took a quantity of this, into which we put four marks of silver and one
of gold that had been undergoing the process of calcination for a
month. We put this mixture cleverly into a sort of horn-shaped vessel,
with another to serve as a retort; and placed the whole apparatus upon
our furnace to produce congelation. This experiment lasted a year; but,
not to remain idle, we amused ourselves with many other less
important operations. We drew quite as much profit from these as from
our great work.
“The whole of the year 1537 passed over without producing any
change whatever; in fact we might have waited till doomsday for the
congelation of our spirits of wine. However, we made a projection with
it upon some heated quicksilver; but all was in vain. Judge of our
chagrin, especially of that of the abbé, who had already boasted to all
the monks of his monastery, that they had only to bring the large pump
which stood in a corner of the cloister, and he would convert it into
gold: but this ill luck did not prevent us from persevering. I once more
mortgaged my paternal lands for four hundred crowns, the whole of
which I determined to devote to a renewal of my search for the great
secret. The abbé contributed the same sum; and with these eight
hundred crowns I proceeded to Paris, a city more abounding with
alchymists than any other in the world, resolved never to leave it until
I had either found the philosopher’s stone or spent all my money. This
journey gave the greatest offence to all my relations and friends, who,
imagining that I was fitted to be a great lawyer, were anxious that I
should establish myself in that profession. For the sake of quietness, I
pretended, at last, that such was my object.
“After travelling for fifteen days, I arrived in Paris on the 9th of
January 1539. I remained for a month almost unknown; but I had no
sooner begun to frequent the amateurs of the science, and visited the
shops of the furnace-makers, than I had the acquaintance of more than
a hundred operative alchymists, each of whom had a different theory
and a different mode of working. Some of them preferred cementation;
others sought the universal alkahest or dissolvent; and some of them
boasted the great efficacy of the essence of emery. Some of them
endeavoured to extract mercury from other metals, to fix it afterwards;
and, in order that each of us should be thoroughly acquainted with the
proceedings of the others, we agreed to meet somewhere every night
and report progress. We met sometimes at the house of one, and
sometimes in the garret of another; not only on week days, but on
Sundays and the great festivals of the Church. ‘Ah!’ one used to say,
‘if I had the means of recommencing this experiment, I should do
something.’ ‘Yes,’ said another, ‘if my crucible had not cracked, I
should have succeeded before now;’ while a third exclaimed, with a
sigh, ‘If I had but had a round copper vessel of sufficient strength, I
would have fixed mercury with silver.’ There was not one among them
who had not some excuse for his failure; but I was deaf to all their
speeches. I did not want to part with my money to any of them,
remembering how often I had been the dupe of such promises.
“A Greek at last presented himself; and with him I worked a long
time uselessly upon nails made of cinnabar or vermilion. I was also
acquainted with a foreign gentleman newly arrived in Paris, and often
accompanied him to the shops of the goldsmiths to sell pieces of gold
and silver, the produce, as he said, of his experiments. I stuck closely
to him for a long time, in the hope that he would impart his secret. He
refused for a long time, but acceded at last on my earnest entreaty, and
I found that it was nothing more than an ingenious trick. I did not fail
to inform my friend the abbé, whom I had left at Toulouse, of all my
adventures; and sent him, among other matters, a relation of the trick
by which this gentleman pretended to turn lead into gold. The abbé
still imagined that I should succeed at last, and advised me to remain
another year in Paris, where I had made so good a beginning. I
remained there three years; but, notwithstanding all my efforts, I had
no more success than I had had elsewhere.
“I had just got to the end of my money, when I received a letter
from the abbé, telling me to leave every thing, and join him
immediately at Toulouse. I went accordingly, and found that he had
received letters from the king of Navarre (grandfather of Henry IV.).
This prince was a great lover of philosophy, full of curiosity, and had
written to the abbé that I should visit him at Pau; and that he would
give me three or four thousand crowns if I would communicate the
secret I had learned from the foreign gentleman. The abbé’s ears were
so tickled with the four thousand crowns, that he let me have no peace
night or day until he had fairly seen me on the road to Pau. I arrived at
that place in the month of May 1542. I worked away, and succeeded,
according to the receipt I had obtained. When I had finished to the
satisfaction of the king, he gave me the reward that I expected.
Although he was willing enough to do me further service, he was
dissuaded from it by the lords of his court; even by many of those who
had been most anxious that I should come. He sent me then about my
business, with many thanks; saying, that if there was any thing in his
kingdom which he could give me—such as the produce of
confiscations or the like—he should be most happy. I thought I might
stay long enough for these prospective confiscations, and never get
them at last; and I therefore determined to go back to my friend the
abbé.
“I learned that, on the road between Pau and Toulouse, there
resided a monk who was very skilful in all matters of natural
philosophy. On my return, I paid him a visit. He pitied me very much,
and advised me, with much warmth and kindness of expression, not to
amuse myself any longer with such experiments as these, which were
all false and sophistical; but that I should read the good books of the
old philosophers, where I might not only find the true matter of the
science of alchymy, but learn also the exact order of operations which
ought to be followed. I very much approved of this wise advice; but
before I acted upon it, I went back to my abbé of Toulouse, to give him
an account of the eight hundred crowns which we had had in common,
and, at the same time, share with him such reward as I had received
from the king of Navarre. If he was little satisfied with the relation of
my adventures since our first separation, he appeared still less satisfied
when I told him I had formed a resolution to renounce the search for
the philosopher’s stone. The reason was that he thought me a good
artist. Of our eight hundred crowns, there remained but one hundred
and seventy-six. When I quitted the abbé, I went to my own house with
the intention of remaining there, till I had read all the old philosophers,
and of then proceeding to Paris.
“I arrived in Paris on the day after All Saints, of the year 1546, and
devoted another year to the assiduous study of great authors. Among
others, the Turba Philosophorum of the Good Trevisan, the
Remonstrance of Nature to the Wandering Alchymist, by Jean de
Meung, and several others of the best books; but, as I had no right
principles, I did not well know what course to follow.
“At last I left my solitude, not to see my former acquaintances, the
adepts and operators, but to frequent the society of true philosophers.
Among them I fell into still greater uncertainties; being, in fact,
completely bewildered by the variety of operations which they shewed
me. Spurred on, nevertheless, by a sort of frenzy or inspiration, I threw
myself into the works of Raymond Lulli and of Arnold de Villeneuve.
The reading of these, and the reflections I made upon them, occupied
me for another year, when I finally determined on the course I should
adopt. I was obliged to wait, however, until I had mortgaged another
very considerable portion of my patrimony. This business was not
settled until the beginning of Lent, 1549, when I commenced my
operations. I laid in a stock of all that was necessary, and began to
work the day after Easter. It was not, however, without some
disquietude and opposition from my friends who came about me; one
asking me what I was going to do, and whether I had not already spent
money enough upon such follies? Another assured me that, if I bought
so much charcoal, I should strengthen the suspicion already existing,
that I was a coiner of base money. Another advised me to purchase
some place in the magistracy, as I was already a Doctor of Laws. My
relations spoke in terms still more annoying to me, and even
threatened that, if I continued to make such a fool of myself, they
would send a posse of police-officers into my house, and break all my
furnaces and crucibles into atoms. I was wearied almost to death by
this continued persecution; but I found comfort in my work and in the
progress of my experiment, to which I was very attentive, and which
went on bravely from day to day. About this time, there was a dreadful
plague in Paris, which interrupted all intercourse between man and
man, and left me as much to myself as I could desire. I soon had the
satisfaction to remark the progress and succession of the three colours
which, according to the philosophers, always prognosticate the
approaching perfection of the work. I observed them distinctly, one
after the other; and next year, being Easter Sunday, 1550, I made the
great trial. Some common quicksilver, which I put into a small crucible
on the fire, was, in less than an hour, converted into very good gold.
You may judge how great was my joy, but I took care not to boast of it.
I returned thanks to God for the favour he had shewn me, and prayed
that I might only be permitted to make such use of it as would redound
to his glory.
“On the following day, I went towards Toulouse to find, the abbé,
in accordance with a mutual promise, that we should communicate our
discoveries to each other. On my way, I called in to see the sage monk
who had assisted me with his counsels; but I had the sorrow to learn
that they were both dead. After this, I would not return to my own
home, but retired to another place, to await one of my relations whom I
had left in charge of my estate. I gave him orders to sell all that
belonged to me, as well movable as immovable—to pay my debts with
the proceeds, and divide all the rest among those in any way related to
me who might stand in need of it, in order that they might enjoy some
share of the good fortune which had befallen me. There was a great
deal of talk in the neighbourhood about my precipitate retreat; the
wisest of my acquaintance imagining that, broken down and ruined by
my mad expenses, I sold my little remaining property, that I might go
and hide my shame in distant countries.
“My relative already spoken of rejoined me on the 1st of July, after
having performed all the business I had entrusted him with. We took
our departure together, to seek a land of liberty. We first retired to
Lausanne, in Switzerland, when, after remaining there for some time,
we resolved to pass the remainder of our days in some of the most
celebrated cities of Germany, living quietly and without splendour.”
Thus ends the story of Denis Zachaire, as written by himself. He has not
been so candid at its conclusion as at its commencement, and has left the
world in doubt as to his real motives for pretending that he had discovered
the philosopher’s stone. It seems probable that the sentence he puts into the
mouths of his wisest acquaintances was the true reason of his retreat; that he
was, in fact, reduced to poverty, and hid his shame in foreign countries.
Nothing further is known of his life, and his real name has never yet been
discovered. He wrote a work on alchymy, entitled The true Natural
Philosophy of Metals.
Dr. Dee and Edward Kelly.
John Dee and Edward Kelly claim to be mentioned together, having been so
long associated in the same pursuits, and undergone so many strange
vicissitudes in each other’s society. Dee was altogether a wonderful man,
and had he lived in an age when folly and superstition were less rife, he
would, with the same powers which he enjoyed, have left behind him a
bright and enduring reputation. He was born in London in the year 1527,
and very early manifested a love for study. At the age of fifteen he was sent
to Cambridge, and delighted so much in his books, that he passed regularly
eighteen hours every day among them. Of the other six, he devoted four to
sleep and two for refreshment. Such intense application did not injure his
health, and could not fail to make him one of the first scholars of his time.
Unfortunately, however, he quitted the mathematics and the pursuits of true
philosophy, to indulge in the unprofitable reveries of the occult sciences. He
studied alchymy, astrology, and magic, and thereby rendered himself
obnoxious to the authorities at Cambridge. To avoid persecution, he was at
last obliged to retire to the university of Louvain; the rumours of sorcery
that were current respecting him rendering his longer stay in England not
altogether without danger. He found at Louvain many kindred spirits who
had known Cornelius Agrippa while he resided among them, and by whom
he was constantly entertained with the wondrous deeds of that great master
of the hermetic mysteries. From their conversation he received much
encouragement to continue the search for the philosopher’s stone, which
soon began to occupy nearly all his thoughts.
DR. DEE.
He did not long remain on the Continent, but returned to England in
1551, being at that time in the twenty-fourth year of his age. By the
influence of his friend Sir John Cheek, he was kindly received at the court
of King Edward VI., and rewarded (it is difficult to say for what) with a
pension of one hundred crowns. He continued for several years to practise
in London as an astrologer; casting nativities, telling fortunes, and pointing
out lucky and unlucky days. During the reign of Queen Mary he got into
trouble, being suspected of heresy, and charged with attempting Mary’s life
by means of enchantments. He was tried for the latter offence, and
acquitted; but was retained in prison on the former charge, and left to the
tender mercies of Bishop Bonner. He had a very narrow escape from being
burned in Smithfield, but he somehow or other contrived to persuade that
fierce bigot that his orthodoxy was unimpeachable, and was set at liberty in
1555.
On the accession of Elizabeth, a brighter day dawned upon him. During
her retirement at Woodstock, her servants appear to have consulted him as
to the time of Mary’s death, which circumstance no doubt first gave rise to
the serious charge for which he was brought to trial. They now came to
consult him more openly as to the fortunes of their mistress; and Robert
Dudley, the celebrated Earl of Leicester, was sent by command of the
Queen herself to know the most auspicious day for her coronation. So great
was the favour he enjoyed, that, some years afterwards, Elizabeth
condescended to pay him a visit at his house in Mortlake, to view his
museum of curiosities, and when he was ill, sent her own physician to
attend upon him.
Astrology was the means whereby he lived, and he continued to practise
it with great assiduity; but his heart was in alchymy. The philosopher’s
stone and the elixir of life haunted his daily thoughts and his nightly
dreams. The Talmudic mysteries, which he had also deeply studied,
impressed him with the belief, that he might hold converse with spirits and
angels, and learn from them all the mysteries of the universe. Holding the
same idea as the then obscure sect of the Rosicrucians, some of whom he
had perhaps encountered in his travels in Germany, he imagined that, by
means of the philosopher’s stone, he could summon these kindly spirits at
his will. By dint of continually brooding upon the subject, his imagination
became so diseased, that he at last persuaded himself that an angel appeared
to him, and promised to be his friend and companion as long as he lived. He
relates that, one day, in November 1582, while he was engaged in fervent
prayer, the window of his museum looking towards the west suddenly
glowed with a dazzling light, in the midst of which, in all his glory, stood
the great angel Uriel. Awe and wonder rendered him speechless; but the
angel smiling graciously upon him, gave him a crystal, of a convex form,
and told him that whenever he wished to hold converse with the beings of
another sphere, he had only to gaze intently upon it, and they would appear
in the crystal, and unveil to him all the secrets of futurity.41 Thus saying, the
angel disappeared. Dee found from experience of the crystal that it was
necessary that all the faculties of the soul should be concentrated upon it,
otherwise the spirits did not appear. He also found that he could never
recollect the conversations he had with the angels. He therefore determined
to communicate the secret to another person, who might converse with the
spirit while he (Dee) sat in another part of the room, and took down in
writing the revelations which they made.
SHEW-STONE OF DR. DEE, IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
He had at this time in his service, as his assistant, one Edward Kelly,
who, like himself, was crazy upon the subject of the philosopher’s stone.
There was this difference, however, between them, that, while Dee was
more of an enthusiast than an impostor, Kelly was more of an impostor than
an enthusiast. In early life he was a notary, and had the misfortune to lose
both his ears for forgery. This mutilation, degrading enough in any man,
was destructive to a philosopher; Kelly, therefore, lest his wisdom should
suffer in the world’s opinion, wore a black skull-cap, which, fitting close to
his head, and descending over both his cheeks, not only concealed his loss,
but gave him a very solemn and oracular appearance. So well did he keep
his secret, that even Dee, with whom he lived so many years, appears never
to have discovered it. Kelly, with this character, was just the man to carry
on any piece of roguery for his own advantage, or to nurture the delusions
of his master for the same purpose. No sooner did Dee inform him of the
visit he had received from the glorious Uriel, than Kelly expressed such a
fervour of belief, that Dee’s heart glowed with delight. He set about
consulting his crystal forthwith, and on the 2d of December, 1581, the
spirits appeared, and held a very extraordinary discourse with Kelly, which
Dee took down in writing. The curious reader may see this farrago of
nonsense among the Harleian Mss. in the British Museum. The later
consultations were published in a folio volume, in 1659, by Dr. Meric
Casaubon, under the title of A true and faithful Relation of what passed
between Dr. John Dee and some Spirits; tending, had it succeeded, to a
general Alteration of most States and Kingdoms in the World.42
The fame of these wondrous colloquies soon spread over the country,
and even reached the Continent. Dee at the same time pretended to be in
possession of the elixir vitæ, which he stated he had found among the ruins
of Glastonbury Abbey, in Somersetshire. People flocked from far and near
to his house at Mortlake to have their nativities cast, in preference to
visiting astrologers of less renown. They also longed to see a man who,
according to his own account, would never die. Altogether, he carried on a
very profitable trade, but spent so much in drugs and metals to work out
some peculiar process of transmutation, that he never became rich.
About this time there came into England a wealthy polish nobleman,
named Albert Laski, Count Palatine of Siradz. His object was principally,
he said, to visit the court of Queen Elizabeth, the fame of whose glory and
magnificence had reached him in distant Poland. Elizabeth received this
flattering stranger with the most splendid hospitality, and appointed her
favourite Leicester to shew him all that was worth seeing in England. He
visited all the curiosities of London and Westminster, and from thence
proceeded to Oxford and Cambridge, that he might converse with some of
the great scholars whose writings shed lustre upon the land of their birth.
He was very much disappointed at not finding Dr. Dee among them, and
told the Earl of Leicester that he would not have gone to Oxford if he had
known that Dee was not there. The earl promised to introduce him to the
great alchymist on their return to London, and the Pole was satisfied. A few
days afterwards, the earl and Laski being in the antechamber of the Queen,
awaiting an audience of her majesty, Dr. Dee arrived on the same errand,
and was introduced to the Pole.43 An interesting conversation ensued, which
ended by the stranger inviting himself to dine with the astrologer at his
house at Mortlake. Dee returned home in some tribulation, for he found he
had not money enough, without pawning his plate, to entertain Count Laski
and his retinue in a manner becoming their dignity. In this emergency he
sent off an express to the Earl of Leicester, stating frankly the
embarrassment he laboured under, and praying his good offices in
representing the matter to her majesty. Elizabeth immediately sent him a
present of twenty pounds.
On the appointed day Count Laski came, attended by a numerous
retinue, and expressed such open and warm admiration of the wonderful
attainments of his host, that Dee turned over in his own mind how he could
bind irretrievably to his interests a man who seemed so well inclined to
become his friend. Long acquaintance with Kelly had imbued him with all
the roguery of that personage, and he resolved to make the Pole pay dearly
for his dinner. He found out before many days that he possessed great
estates in his own country, as well as great influence, but that an
extravagant disposition had reduced him to temporary embarrassment. He
also discovered that he was a firm believer in the philosopher’s stone and
the water of life. He was therefore just the man upon whom an adventurer
might fasten himself. Kelly thought so too; and both of them set to work to
weave a web, in the meshes of which they might firmly entangle the rich
and credulous stranger. They went very cautiously about it; first throwing
out obscure hints of the stone and the elixir, and finally of the spirits, by
means of whom they could turn over the pages of the book of futurity, and
read the awful secrets inscribed therein. Laski eagerly implored that he
might be admitted to one of their mysterious interviews with Uriel and the
angels; but they knew human nature too well to accede at once to the
request. To the count’s entreaties they only replied by hints of the difficulty
or impropriety of summoning the spirits in the presence of a stranger, or of
one who might perchance have no other motive than the gratification of a
vain curiosity; but they only meant to whet the edge of his appetite by this
delay, and would have been sorry indeed if the count had been discouraged.
To shew how exclusively the thoughts both of Dee and Kelly were fixed
upon their dupe at this time, it is only necessary to read the introduction to
their first interview with the spirits, related in the volume of Dr. Casaubon.
The entry made by Dee, under the date of the 25th of May, 1583, says, that
when the spirit appeared to them, “I [John Dee] and E. K. [Edward Kelly]
sat together, conversing of that noble Polonian Albertus Laski, his great
honour here with us obtained, and of his great liking among all sorts of the
people.” No doubt they were discussing how they might make the most of
the “noble Polonian,” and concocting the fine story with which they
afterwards excited his curiosity, and drew him firmly within their toils.
“Suddenly,” says Dee, as they were thus employed, “there seemed to come
out of the oratory a spiritual creature, like a pretty girl of seven or nine
years of age, attired on her head, with her hair rolled up before and hanging
down behind, with a gown of silk, of changeable red and green, and with a
train. She seemed to play up and down, and seemed to go in and out behind
the books; and as she seemed to go between them, the books displaced
themselves, and made way for her.”
With such tales as these they lured on the Pole from day to day, and at
last persuaded him to be a witness of their mysteries. Whether they played
off any optical delusions upon him, or whether, by the force of a strong
imagination, he deluded himself, does not appear, but certain it is that he
became a complete tool in their hands, and consented to do whatever they
wished him. Kelly, at these interviews, placed himself at a certain distance
from the wondrous crystal, and gazed intently upon it, while Dee took his
place in a corner, ready to set down the prophecies as they were uttered by
the spirits. In this manner they prophesied to the Pole that he should
become the fortunate possessor of the philosopher’s stone; that he should
live for centuries, and be chosen King of Poland, in which capacity he
should gain many great victories over the Saracens, and make his name
illustrious over all the earth. For this purpose it was necessary, however,
that Laski should leave England, and take them with him, together with
their wives and families; that he should treat them all sumptuously, and
allow them to want for nothing. Laski at once consented; and very shortly
afterwards they were all on the road to Poland.
It took them upwards of four months to reach the count’s estates in the
neighbourhood of Cracow. In the mean time, they led a pleasant life, and
spent money with an unsparing hand. When once established in the count’s
palace, they commenced the great hermetic operation of transmuting iron
into gold. Laski provided them with all necessary materials, and aided them
himself with his knowledge of alchymy; but, somehow or other, the
experiment always failed at the very moment it ought to have succeeded,
and they were obliged to recommence operations on a grander scale. But
the hopes of Laski were not easily extinguished. Already, in idea, the
possessor of countless millions, he was not to be cast down for fear of
present expenses. He thus continued from day to day, and from month to
month, till he was at last obliged to sell a portion of his deeply-mortgaged
estates to find aliment for the hungry crucibles of Dee and Kelly, and the no
less hungry stomachs of their wives and families. It was not till ruin stared
him in the face that he awoke from his dream of infatuation, too happy,
even then, to find that he had escaped utter beggary. Thus restored to his
senses, his first thought was how to rid himself of his expensive visitors.
Not wishing to quarrel with them, he proposed that they should proceed to
Prague, well furnished with letters of recommendation to the Emperor
Rudolph. Our alchymists too plainly saw that nothing more was to be made
of the almost destitute Count Laski. Without hesitation, therefore, they
accepted the proposal, and set out forthwith to the imperial residence. They
had no difficulty, on their arrival at Prague, in obtaining an audience of the
emperor. They found him willing enough to believe that such a thing as the
philosopher’s stone existed, and flattered themselves that they had made a
favourable impression upon him; but, from some cause or other—perhaps
the look of low cunning and quackery upon the face of Kelly—the emperor
conceived no very high opinion of their abilities. He allowed them,
however, to remain for some months at Prague, feeding themselves upon
the hope that he would employ them; but the more he saw of them, the less
he liked them; and, when the pope’s nuncio represented to him that he
ought not to countenance such heretic magicians, he gave orders that they
should quit his dominions within four-and-twenty hours. It was fortunate
for them that so little time was given them; for, had they remained six hours
longer, the nuncio had received orders to procure a perpetual dungeon or the
stake for them.
Not knowing well whither to direct their steps, they resolved to return to
Cracow, where they had still a few friends; but, by this time, the funds they
had drawn from Laski were almost exhausted, and they were many days
obliged to go dinnerless and supperless. They had great difficulty to keep
their poverty a secret from the world; but they managed to bear privation
without murmuring, from a conviction that if the fact were known, it would
militate very much against their pretensions. Nobody would believe that
they were possessors of the philosopher’s stone, if it were once suspected
that they did not know how to procure bread for their subsistence. They still
gained a little by casting nativities, and kept starvation at arm’s length, till a
new dupe, rich enough for their purposes, dropped into their toils, in the
shape of a royal personage. Having procured an introduction to Stephen
king of Poland, they predicted to him that the Emperor Rudolph would
shortly be assassinated, and that the Germans would look to Poland for his
successor. As this prediction was not precise enough to satisfy the king,
they tried their crystal again, and a spirit appeared who told them that the
new sovereign of Germany would be Stephen of Poland. Stephen was
credulous enough to believe them, and was once present when Kelly held
his mystic conversations with the shadows of his crystal. He also appears to
have furnished them with money to carry on their experiments in alchymy;
but he grew tired, at last, of their broken promises and their constant drains
upon his pocket, and was on the point of discarding them with disgrace,
when they met with another dupe, to whom they eagerly transferred their
services. This was Count Rosenberg, a nobleman of large estates at Trebona
in Bohemia. So comfortable did they find themselves in the palace of this
munificent patron, that they remained nearly four years with him, faring
sumptuously, and having an almost unlimited command of his money. The
count was more ambitious than avaricious: he had wealth enough, and did
not care for the philosopher’s stone on account of the gold, but of the length
of days it would bring him. They had their predictions, accordingly, all
ready framed to suit his character. They prophesied that he should be
chosen king of Poland; and promised, moreover, that he should live for five
hundred years to enjoy his dignity, provided always that he found them
sufficient money to carry on their experiments.
But now, while fortune smiled upon them, while they revelled in the
rewards of successful villany, retributive justice came upon them in a shape
they had not anticipated. Jealousy and mistrust sprang up between the two
confederates, and led to such violent and frequent quarrels, that Dee was in
constant fear of exposure. Kelly imagined himself a much greater personage
than Dee; measuring, most likely, by the standard of impudent roguery; and
was displeased that on all occasions, and from all persons, Dee received the
greater share of honour and consideration. He often threatened to leave Dee
to shift for himself; and the latter, who had degenerated into the mere tool
of his more daring associate, was distressed beyond measure at the prospect
of his desertion. His mind was so deeply imbued with superstition, that he
believed the rhapsodies of Kelly to be, in a great measure, derived from his
intercourse with angels; and he knew not where, in the whole world, to look
for a man of depth and wisdom enough to succeed him. As their quarrels
every day became more and more frequent, Dee wrote letters to Queen
Elizabeth to secure a favourable reception on his return to England, whither
he intended to proceed if Kelly forsook him. He also sent her a round piece
of silver, which he pretended he had made of a portion of brass cut out of a
warming-pan. He afterwards sent her the warming-pan also, that she might
convince herself that the piece of silver corresponded exactly with the hole
which was cut into the brass. While thus preparing for the worst, his chief
desire was to remain in Bohemia with Count Rosenberg, who treated him
well, and reposed much confidence in him. Neither had Kelly any great
objection to remain; but a new passion had taken possession of his breast,
and he was laying deep schemes to gratify it. His own wife was ill-favoured
and ill-natured; Dee’s was comely and agreeable; and he longed to make an
exchange of partners without exciting the jealousy or shocking the morality
of Dee. This was a difficult matter; but to a man like Kelly, who was as
deficient in rectitude and right feeling as he was full of impudence and
ingenuity, the difficulty was not insurmountable. He had also deeply studied
the character and the foibles of Dee; and he took his measures accordingly.
The next time they consulted the spirits, Kelly pretended to be shocked at
their language, and refused to tell Dee what they had said. Dee insisted, and
was informed that they were henceforth to have their wives in common.
Dee, a little startled, inquired whether the spirits might not mean that they
were to live in common harmony and good-will? Kelly tried again, with
apparent reluctance, and said the spirits insisted upon the literal
interpretation. The poor fanatic Dee resigned himself to their will; but it
suited Kelly’s purpose to appear coy a little longer. He declared that the
spirits must be spirits not of good, but of evil; and refused to consult them
any more. He thereupon took his departure, saying that he would never
return.
Dee, thus left to himself, was in sore trouble and distress of mind. He
knew not on whom to fix as the successor to Kelly for consulting the spirits;
but at last chose his son Arthur, a boy of eight years of age. He consecrated
him to this service with great ceremony, and impressed upon the child’s
mind the dignified and awful nature of the duties he was called upon to
perform; but the poor boy had neither the imagination, the faith, nor the
artifice of Kelly. He looked intently upon the crystal as he was told; but
could see nothing and hear nothing. At last, when his eyes ached, he said he
could see a vague indistinct shadow, but nothing more. Dee was in despair.
The deception had been carried on so long, that he was never so happy as
when he fancied he was holding converse with superior beings; and he
cursed the day that had put estrangement between him and his dear friend
Kelly. This was exactly what Kelly had foreseen; and, when he thought the
doctor had grieved sufficiently for his absence, he returned unexpectedly,
and entered the room where the little Arthur was in vain endeavouring to
distinguish something in the crystal. Dee, in entering this circumstance in
his journal, ascribes this sudden return to a “miraculous fortune” and a
“divine fate;” and goes on to record that Kelly immediately saw the spirits
which had remained invisible to little Arthur. One of these spirits reiterated
the previous command, that they should have their wives in common. Kelly
bowed his head and submitted; and Dee, in all humility, consented to the
arrangement.
This was the extreme depth of the wretched man’s degradation. In this
manner they continued to live for three or four months, when, new quarrels
breaking out, they separated once more. This time their separation was
final. Kelly, taking the elixir which he had found in Glastonbury Abbey,
proceeded to Prague, forgetful of the abrupt mode in which he had
previously been expelled from that city. Almost immediately after his
arrival, he was seized by order of the Emperor Rudolph, and thrown into
prison. He was released after some months’ confinement, and continued for
five years to lead a vagabond life in Germany, telling fortunes at one place,
and pretending to make gold at another. He was a second time thrown into
prison, on a charge of heresy and sorcery; and he then resolved, if ever he
obtained his liberty, to return to England. He soon discovered that there was
no prospect of this, and that his imprisonment was likely to be for life. He
twisted his bed-clothes into a rope, one stormy night in February 1595, and
let himself down from the window of his dungeon, situated at the top of a
very high tower. Being a corpulent man, the rope gave way, and he was
precipitated to the ground. He broke two of his ribs and both his legs; and
was otherwise so much injured, that he expired a few days afterwards.
Dee, for a while, had more prosperous fortune. The warming-pan he had
sent to Queen Elizabeth was not without effect. He was rewarded soon after
Kelly had left him with an invitation to return to England. His pride, which
had been sorely humbled, sprang up again to its pristine dimensions, and he
set out from Bohemia with a train of attendants becoming an ambassador.
How he procured the money does not appear, unless from the liberality of
the rich Bohemian Rosenberg, or perhaps from his plunder. He travelled
with three coaches for himself and family, and three wagons to carry his
baggage. Each coach had four horses, and the whole train was protected by
a guard of four and twenty soldiers. This statement may be doubted; but it is
on the authority of Dee himself, who made it on oath before the
commissioners appointed by Elizabeth to inquire into his circumstances. On
his arrival in England he had an audience of the queen, who received him
kindly as far as words went, and gave orders that he should not be molested
in his pursuits of chemistry and philosophy. A man who boasted of the
power to turn baser metals into gold, could not, thought Elizabeth, be in
want of money; and she therefore gave him no more substantial marks of
her approbation than her countenance and protection.
Thrown thus unexpectedly upon his own resources, Dee began in
earnest the search for the philosopher’s stone. He worked incessantly
among his furnaces, retorts, and crucibles, and almost poisoned himself
with deleterious fumes. He also consulted his miraculous crystal; but the
spirits appeared not to him. He tried one Bartholomew to supply the place
of the invaluable Kelly; but he being a man of some little probity, and of no
imagination at all, the spirits would not hold any communication with him.
Dee then tried another pretender to philosophy, of the name of Hickman,
but had no better fortune. The crystal had lost its power since the departure
of its great high priest. From this quarter, then, Dee could get no
information on the stone or elixir of the alchymists, and all his efforts to
discover them by other means were not only fruitless but expensive. He was
soon reduced to great distress, and wrote piteous letters to the queen
praying relief. He represented that, after he left England with Count Laski,
the mob had pillaged his house at Mortlake, accusing him of being a
necromancer and a wizard; and had broken all his furniture, burned his
library, consisting of four thousand rare volumes, and destroyed all the
philosophical instruments and curiosities in his museum. For this damage
he claimed compensation; and furthermore stated, that, as he had come to
England by the queen’s command, she ought to pay the expenses of his
journey. Elizabeth sent him small sums of money at various times; but Dee
still continuing his complaints, a commission was appointed to inquire into
his circumstances. He finally obtained a small appointment as Chancellor of
St. Paul’s cathedral, which he exchanged, in 1595, for the wardenship of the
college at Manchester. He remained in this capacity till 1602 or 1603, when,
his strength and intellect beginning to fail him, he was compelled to resign.
He retired to his old dwelling at Mortlake, in a state not far removed from
actual want, supporting himself as a common fortune-teller, and being often
obliged to sell or pawn his books to procure a dinner. James I. was often
applied to on his behalf, but he refused to do any thing for him. It may be
said to the discredit of this king, that the only reward he would grant the
indefatigable Stowe, in his days of old age and want, was the royal
permission to beg; but no one will blame him for neglecting such a quack as
John Dee. He died in 1608, in the eighty-first year of his age, and was
buried at Mortlake.
The Cosmopolite.
Many disputes have arisen as to the real name of the alchymist who wrote
several works under the above designation. The general opinion is that he
was a Scotsman named Seton, and that by a fate very common to
alchymists who boasted too loudly of their powers of transmutation, he
ended his days miserably in a dungeon, into which he was thrown by a
German potentate until he made a million of gold to pay his ransom. By
some he has been confounded with Michael Sendivog, or Sendivogius, a
Pole, a professor of the same art, who made a great noise in Europe at the
commencement of the seventeenth century. Lenglet du Fresnoy, who is in
general well informed with respect to the alchymists, inclines to the belief
that these personages were distinct; and gives the following particulars of
the Cosmopolite, extracted from George Morhoff, in his Epistola ad
Langelottum, and other writers.
About the year 1600, one Jacob Haussen, a Dutch pilot, was
shipwrecked on the coast of Scotland. A gentleman, named Alexander
Seton, put off in a boat, and saved him from drowning, and afterwards
entertained him hospitably for many weeks at his house on the shore.
Haussen saw that he was addicted to the pursuits of chemistry, but no
conversation on the subject passed between them at the time. About a year
and a half afterwards, Haussen being then at home at Enkhuysen, in
Holland, received a visit from his former host. He endeavoured to repay the
kindness that had been shewn him; and so great a friendship arose between
them that Seton, on his departure, offered to make him acquainted with the
great secret of the philosopher’s stone. In his presence the Scotsman
transmuted a great quantity of base metal into pure gold, and gave it him as
a mark of his esteem. Seton then took leave of his friend, and travelled into
Germany. At Dresden he made no secret of his wonderful powers, having, it
is said, performed transmutation successfully before a great assemblage of
the learned men of that city. The circumstance coming to the ears of the
Duke or Elector of Saxony, he gave orders for the arrest of the alchymist.
He caused him to be imprisoned in a high tower, and set a guard of forty
men to watch that he did not escape, and that no strangers were admitted to
his presence. The unfortunate Seton received several visits from the elector,
who used every art of persuasion to make him divulge his secret. Seton
obstinately refused either to communicate his secret, or to make any gold
for the tyrant; on which he was stretched upon the rack, to see if the
argument of torture would render him more tractable. The result was still
the same; neither hope of reward nor fear of anguish could shake him. For
several months he remained in prison, subjected alternately to a sedative
and a violent regimen, till his health broke, and he wasted away almost to a
skeleton.
There happened at that time to be in Dresden a learned Pole, named
Michael Sendivogius, who had wasted a good deal of his time and
substance in the unprofitable pursuits of alchymy. He was touched with pity
for the hard fate, and admiration for the intrepidity of Seton; and
determined, if possible, to aid him in escaping from the clutch of his
oppressor. He requested the elector’s permission to see the alchymist, and
obtained it with some difficulty. He found him in a state of great
wretchedness, shut up from the light of day in a noisome dungeon, and with
no better couch or fare than those allotted to the worst of criminals. Seton
listened eagerly to the proposal of escape, and promised the generous Pole
that he would make him richer than an eastern monarch if by his means he
were liberated. Sendivogius immediately commenced operations; he sold
some property which he possessed near Cracow, and with the proceeds led a
merry life at Dresden. He gave the most elegant suppers, to which he
regularly invited the officers of the guard, and especially those who did
duty at the prison of the alchymist. He insinuated himself at last into their
confidence, and obtained free ingress to his friend as often as he pleased;
pretending that he was using his utmost endeavours to conquer his
obstinacy and worm his secret out of him. When their project was ripe, a
day was fixed upon for the grand attempt; and Sendivogius was ready with
a post-chariot to convey him with all speed into Poland. By drugging some
wine which he presented to the guards of the prison, he rendered them so
drowsy that he easily found means to scale a wall unobserved, with Seton,
and effect his escape. Seton’s wife was in the chariot awaiting him, having
safely in her possession a small packet of a black powder, which was, in
fact, the philosopher’s stone, or ingredient for the transmutation of iron and
copper into gold. They all arrived in safety at Cracow; but the frame of
Seton was so wasted by torture of body and starvation, to say nothing of the
anguish of mind he had endured, that he did not long survive. He died in
Cracow, in 1603 or 1604, and was buried under the cathedral church of that
city. Such is the story related of the author of the various works which bear
the name of the Cosmopolite. A list of them may be found in the third
volume of the History of the Hermetic Philosophy.
Sendivogius.
On the death of Seton, Sendivogius married his widow, hoping to learn
from her some of the secrets of her deceased lord in the art of
transmutation. The ounce of black powder stood him, however, in better
service; for the alchymists say, that by its means he converted great
quantities of quicksilver into the purest gold. It is also said that he
performed this experiment successfully before the Emperor Rudolph II., at
Prague; and that the emperor, to commemorate the circumstance, caused a
marble tablet to be affixed to the wall of the room in which it was
performed, bearing this inscription, “Faciat hoc quispiam alius, quod fecit
Sendivogius Polonus.” M. Desnoyers, secretary to the Princess Mary of
Gonzaga, Queen of Poland, writing from Warsaw in 1651, says that he saw
this tablet, which existed at that time, and was often visited by the curious.
The after-life of Sendivogius is related in a Latin memoir of him by one
Brodowski, his steward; and is inserted by Pierre Borel in his Treasure of
Gaulish Antiquities. The Emperor Rudolph, according to this authority, was
so well pleased with his success, that he made him one of his councillors of
state, and invited him to fill a station in the royal household and inhabit the
palace. But Sendivogius loved his liberty, and refused to become a courtier.
He preferred to reside on his own patrimonial estate of Gravarna, where, for
many years, he exercised a princely hospitality. His philosophic powder,
which, his steward says, was red, and not black, he kept in a little box of
gold; and with one grain of it he could make five hundred ducats, or a
thousand rix-dollars. He generally made his projection upon quicksilver.
When he travelled, he gave this box to his steward, who hung it round his
neck by a gold chain next his skin. But the greatest part of the powder he
used to hide in a secret place cut into the step of his chariot. He thought
that, if attacked at any time by robbers, they would not search such a place
as that. When he anticipated any danger, he would dress himself in his
valet’s clothes, and, mounting the coach-box, put the valet inside. He was
induced to take these precautions, because it was no secret that he possessed
the philosopher’s stone; and many unprincipled adventurers were on the
watch for an opportunity to plunder him. A German prince, whose name
Brodowski has not thought fit to chronicle, served him a scurvy trick, which
ever afterwards put him on his guard. This prince went on his knees to
Sendivogius, and entreated him in the most pressing terms to satisfy his
curiosity, by converting some quicksilver into gold before him.
Sendivogius, wearied by his importunity, consented, upon a promise of
inviolable secrecy. After his departure, the prince called a German
alchymist, named Muhlenfels, who resided in his house, and told him all
that had been done. Muhlenfels entreated that he might have a dozen
mounted horsemen at his command, that he might instantly ride after the
philosopher, and either rob him of all his powder, or force from him the
secret of making it. The prince desired nothing better; Muhlenfels, being
provided with twelve men well mounted and armed, pursued Sendivogius in
hot haste. He came up with him at a lonely inn by the road-side, just as he
was sitting down to dinner. He at first endeavoured to persuade him to
divulge the secret; but finding this of no avail, he caused his accomplices to
strip the unfortunate Sendivogius and tie him naked to one of the pillars of
the house. He then took from him his golden box, containing a small
quantity of the powder; a manuscript book on the philosopher’s stone; a
golden medal, with its chain, presented to him by the Emperor Rudolph;
and a rich cap, ornamented with diamonds, of the value of one hundred
thousand rix-dollars. With this booty he decamped, leaving Sendivogius
still naked and firmly bound to the pillar. His servants had been treated in a
similar manner; but the people of the inn released them all as soon as the
robbers were out of sight.
Sendivogius proceeded to Prague, and made his complaint to the
emperor. An express was instantly sent off to the prince, with orders that he
should deliver up Muhlenfels and all his plunder. The prince, fearful of the
emperor’s wrath, caused three large gallows to be erected in his court-yard;
on the highest of which he hanged Muhlenfels, with another thief on each
side of him. He thus propitiated the emperor, and got rid of an ugly witness
against himself. He sent back, at the same time, the bejewelled hat, the
medal and chain, and the treatise upon the philosopher’s stone, which had
been stolen from Sendivogius. As regarded the powder, he said he had not
seen it, and knew nothing about it.
This adventure made Sendivogius more prudent; he would no longer
perform the process of transmutation before any strangers, however highly
recommended. He pretended also to be very poor; and sometimes lay in bed
for weeks together, that people might believe he was suffering from some
dangerous malady, and could not therefore, by any possibility, be the owner
of the philosopher’s stone. He would occasionally coin false money, and
pass it off as gold; preferring to be esteemed a cheat rather than a successful
alchymist.
Many other extraordinary tales are told of this personage by his steward
Brodowski, but they are not worth repeating. He died in 1636, aged
upwards of eighty, and was buried in his own chapel at Gravarna. Several
works upon alchymy have been published under his name.
The Rosicrucians.
It was during the time of the last-mentioned author that the sect of the
Rosicrucians first began to create a sensation in Europe. The influence
which they exercised upon opinion during their brief career, and the
permanent impression which they have left upon European literature, claim
for them especial notice. Before their time, alchymy was but a grovelling
delusion; and theirs is the merit of having spiritualised and refined it. They
also enlarged its sphere, and supposed the possession of the philosopher’s
stone to be, not only the means of wealth, but of health and happiness, and
the instrument by which man could command the services of superior
beings, control the elements to his will, defy the obstructions of time and
space, and acquire the most intimate knowledge of all the secrets of the
universe. Wild and visionary as they were, they were not without their uses;
if it were only for having purged the superstitions of Europe of the dark and
disgusting forms with which the monks had peopled it, and substituted, in
their stead, a race of mild, graceful, and beneficent beings.
They are said to have derived their name from Christian Rosencreutz, or
“Rose-cross,” a German philosopher, who travelled in the Holy Land
towards the close of the fourteenth century. While dangerously ill at a place
called Damcar, he was visited by some learned Arabs, who claimed him as
their brother in science, and unfolded to him, by inspiration, all the secrets
of his past life, both of thought and of action. They restored him to health
by means of the philosopher’s stone, and afterwards instructed him in all
their mysteries. He returned to Europe in 1401, being then only twenty-
three years of age; and drew a chosen number of his friends around him,
whom he initiated into the new science, and bound by solemn oaths to keep
it secret for a century. He is said to have lived eighty-three years after this
period, and to have died in 1484.
Many have denied the existence of such a personage as Rosencreutz,
and have fixed the origin of this sect at a much later epoch. The first
dawning of it, they say, is to be found in the theories of Paracelsus and the
dreams of Dr. Dee, who, without intending it, became the actual, though
never the recognised founders of the Rosicrucian philosophy. It is now
difficult, and indeed impossible, to determine whether Dee and Paracelsus
obtained their ideas from the then obscure and unknown Rosicrucians, or
whether the Rosicrucians did but follow and improve upon them. Certain it
is, that their existence was never suspected till the year 1605, when they
began to excite attention in Germany. No sooner were their doctrines
promulgated, than all the visionaries, Paracelsists, and alchymists, flocked
around their standard, and vaunted Rosencreutz as the new regenerator of
the human race. Michael Mayer, a celebrated physician of that day, and who
had impaired his health and wasted his fortune in searching for the
philosopher’s stone, drew up a report of the tenets and ordinances of the
new fraternity, which was published at Cologne, in the year 1615. They
asserted, in the first place, “that the meditations of their founders surpassed
every thing that had ever been imagined since the creation of the world,
without even excepting the revelations of the Deity; that they were destined
to accomplish the general peace and regeneration of man before the end of
the world arrived; that they possessed all wisdom and piety in a supreme
degree; that they possessed all the graces of nature, and could distribute
them among the rest of mankind according to their pleasure; that they were
subject to neither hunger, nor thirst, nor disease, nor old age, nor to any
other inconvenience of nature; that they knew by inspiration, and at the first
glance, every one who was worthy to be admitted into their society; that
they had the same knowledge then which they would have possessed if they
had lived from the beginning of the world, and had been always acquiring
it; that they had a volume in which they could read all that ever was or ever
would be written in other books till the end of time; that they could force to,
and retain in their service the most powerful spirits and demons; that, by the
virtue of their songs, they could attract pearls and precious stones from the
depths of the sea or the bowels of the earth; that God had covered them with
a thick cloud, by means of which they could shelter themselves from the
malignity of their enemies, and that they could thus render themselves
invisible from all eyes; that the first eight brethren of the ‘Rose-cross’ had
power to cure all maladies; that, by means of the fraternity, the triple
diadem of the pope would be reduced into dust; that they only admitted two
sacraments, with the ceremonies of the primitive Church, renewed by them;
that they recognised the Fourth Monarchy and the Emperor of the Romans
as their chief and the chief of all Christians; that they would provide him
with more gold, their treasures being inexhaustible, than the King of Spain
had ever drawn from the golden regions of Eastern and Western Ind.” This
was their confession of faith. Their rules of conduct were six in number, and
as follow:
First. That, in their travels, they should gratuitously cure all
diseases.
Secondly. That they should always dress in conformity to the
fashion of the country in which they resided.
Thirdly. That they should, once every year, meet together in
the place appointed by the fraternity, or send in writing an
available excuse.
Fourthly. That every brother, whenever he felt inclined to
die, should choose a person worthy to succeed him.
Fifthly. That the words “Rose-cross” should be the marks by
which they should recognise each other.
Sixthly. That their fraternity should be kept secret for six
times twenty years.
They asserted that these laws had been found inscribed in a golden book
in the tomb of Rosencreutz, and that the six times twenty years from his
death expired in 1604. They were consequently called upon from that time
forth to promulgate their doctrine for the welfare of mankind44.
For eight years these enthusiasts made converts in Germany, but they
excited little or no attention in other parts of Europe. At last they made their
appearance in Paris, and threw all the learned, all the credulous, and all the
lovers of the marvellous into commotion. In the beginning of March 1623,
the good folks of that city, when they arose one morning, were surprised to
find all their walls placarded with the following singular manifesto:
“We, the deputies of the principal College of the Brethren of the Rose-
cross, have taken up our abode, visible and invisible, in this city, by the
grace of the Most High, towards whom are turned the hearts of the
just. We shew and teach without books or signs, and speak all sorts of
languages in the countries where we dwell, to draw mankind, our
fellows, from error and from death.”
For a long time this strange placard was the sole topic of conversation in
all public places. Some few wondered, but the greater number only laughed
at it. In the course of a few weeks two books were published, which raised
the first alarm respecting this mysterious society, whose dwelling-place no
one knew, and no members of which had ever been seen. The first was
called a history of The frightful Compacts entered into between the Devil
and the pretended ‘Invisibles;’ with their damnable Instructions, the
deplorable Ruin of their Disciples, and their miserable end. The other was
called an Examination of the new and unknown Cabala of the Brethren of
the Rose-cross, who have lately inhabited the City of Paris; with the History
of their Manners, the Wonders worked by them, and many other particulars.
These books sold rapidly. Every one was anxious to know something of
this dreadful and secret brotherhood. The badauds of Paris were so alarmed
that they daily expected to see the arch-enemy walking in propria persona
among them. It was said in these volumes that the Rosicrucian society
consisted of six-and-thirty persons in all, who had renounced their baptism
and hope of resurrection. That it was not by means of good angels, as they
pretended, that they worked their prodigies; but that it was the devil who
gave them power to transport themselves from one end of the world to the
other with the rapidity of thought; to speak all languages; to have their
purses always full of money, however much they might spend; to be
invisible, and penetrate into the most secret places, in spite of fastenings of
bolts and bars; and to be able to tell the past and future. These thirty-six
brethren were divided into bands or companies: six of them only had been
sent on the mission to Paris, six to Italy, six to Spain, six to Germany, four
to Sweden, and two into Switzerland, two into Flanders, two into Lorraine,
and two into Franche Comté. It was generally believed that the missionaries
to France resided somewhere in the Marais du Temple. That quarter of Paris
soon acquired a bad name, and people were afraid to take houses in it, lest
they should be turned out by the six invisibles of the Rose-cross. It was
believed by the populace, and by many others whose education should have
taught them better, that persons of a mysterious aspect used to visit the inns
and hotels of Paris, and eat of the best meats and drink of the best wines,
and then suddenly melt away into thin air when the landlord came with the
reckoning. That gentle maidens, who went to bed alone, often awoke in the
night and found men in bed with them, of shape more beautiful than the
Grecian Apollo, who immediately became invisible when an alarm was
raised. It was also said that many persons found large heaps of gold in their
houses without knowing from whence they came. All Paris was in alarm.
No man thought himself secure of his goods, no maiden of her virginity, or
wife of her chastity, while these Rosicrucians were abroad. In the midst of
the commotion, a second placard was issued to the following effect:
“If any one desires to see the brethren of the Rose-cross from curiosity
only, he will never communicate with us. But if his will really induces
him to inscribe his name in the register of our brotherhood, we, who
can judge of the thoughts of all men, will convince him of the truth of
our promises. For this reason we do not publish to the world the place
of our abode. Thought alone, in unison with the sincere will of those
who desire to know us, is sufficient to make us known to them, and
them to us.”
Though the existence of such a society as that of the Rose-cross was
problematical, it was quite evident that somebody or other was concerned in
the promulgation of these placards, which were stuck up on every wall in
Paris. The police endeavoured in vain to find out the offenders, and their
want of success only served to increase the perplexity of the public. The
Church very soon took up the question; and the Abbé Gaultier, a Jesuit,
wrote a book to prove that, by their enmity to the pope, they could be no
other than disciples of Luther, sent to promulgate his heresy. Their very
name, he added, proved that they were heretics; a cross surmounted by a
rose being the heraldic device of the arch-heretic Luther. One Garasse said
they were a confraternity of drunken impostors; and that their name was
derived from the garland of roses, in the form of a cross, hung over the
tables of taverns in Germany as the emblem of secrecy, and from whence
was derived the common saying, when one man communicated a secret to
another, that it was said “under the rose.” Others interpreted the letters F. R.
C. to mean, not Brethren of the Rose-cross, but Fratres Roris Cocti, or
Brothers of Boiled Dew; and explained this appellation by alleging that they
collected large quantities of morning dew, and boiled it, in order to extract a
very valuable ingredient in the composition of the philosopher’s stone and
the water of life.
The fraternity thus attacked defended themselves as well as they were
able. They denied that they used magic of any kind, or that they consulted
the devil. They said they were all happy; that they had lived more than a
century, and expected to live many centuries more; and that the intimate
knowledge which they possessed of all nature was communicated to them
by God himself as a reward for their piety and utter devotion to his service.
Those were in error who derived their name from a cross of roses, or called
them drunkards. To set the world right on the first point, they reiterated that
they derived their name from Christian Rosencreutz, their founder; and to
answer the latter charge, they repeated that they knew not what thirst was,
and had higher pleasures than those of the palate. They did not desire to
meddle with the politics or religion of any man or set of men, although they
could not help denying the supremacy of the pope, and looking upon him as
a tyrant. Many slanders, they said, had been repeated respecting them, the
most unjust of which was, that they indulged in carnal appetites, and, under
the cloak of their invisibility, crept into the chambers of beautiful maidens.
They asserted, on the contrary, that the first vow they took on entering the
society was a vow of chastity, and that any one among them who
transgressed in that particular would immediately lose all the advantages he
enjoyed, and be exposed once more to hunger, woe, disease, and death, like
other men. So strongly did they feel on the subject of chastity, that they
attributed the fall of Adam solely to his want of this virtue. Besides
defending themselves in this manner, they entered into a further confession
of their faith. They discarded for ever all the old tales of sorcery and
witchcraft, and communion with the devil. They said there were no such
horrid, unnatural, and disgusting beings as the incubi and succubi, and the
innumerable grotesque imps that men had believed in for so many ages.
Man was not surrounded with enemies like these, but with myriads of
beautiful and beneficent beings, all anxious to do him service. The air was
peopled with sylphs, the water with undines or naiads, the bowels of the
earth with gnomes, and the fire with salamanders. All these beings were the
friends of man, and desired nothing so much as that men should purge
themselves of all uncleanness, and thus be enabled to see and converse with
them. They possessed great power, and were unrestrained by the barriers of
space or the obstructions of matter. But man was in one particular their
superior. He had an immortal soul, and they had not. They might, however,
become sharers in man’s immortality if they could inspire one of that race
with the passion of love towards them. Hence it was the constant endeavour
of the female spirits to captivate the admiration of men, and of the male
gnomes, sylphs, salamanders, and undines to be beloved by a woman. The
object of this passion, in returning their love, imparted a portion of that
celestial fire, the soul; and from that time forth the beloved became equal to
the lover, and both, when their allotted course was run, entered together into
the mansions of felicity. These spirits, they said, watched constantly over
mankind by night and day. Dreams, omens, and presentiments were all their
works, and the means by which they gave warning of the approach of
danger. But though so well inclined to befriend man for their own sakes, the
want of a soul rendered them at times capricious and revengeful; they took
offence on slight causes, and heaped injuries instead of benefits on the
heads of those who extinguished the light of reason that was in them by
gluttony, debauchery, and other appetites of the body.
The excitement produced in Paris by the placards of the brotherhood
and the attacks of the clergy wore itself away after a few months. The
stories circulated about them became at last too absurd even for that age of
absurdity, and men began to laugh once more at those invisible gentlemen
and their fantastic doctrines. Gabriel Naudé at that conjuncture brought out
his Avis à la France sur les Frères de la Rose-croix, in which he very
successfully exposed the folly of the new sect. This work, though not well
written, was well timed. It quite extinguished the Rosicrucians of France;
and after that year little more was heard of them. Swindlers in different
parts of the country assumed the name at times to cloak their depredations;
and now and then one of them was caught and hanged for his too great
ingenuity in enticing pearls and precious stones from the pockets of other
people into his own, or for passing off lumps of gilded brass for pure gold,
made by the agency of the philosopher’s stone. With these exceptions,
oblivion shrouded them.
The doctrine was not confined to a sphere so narrow as France alone; it
still nourished in Germany, and drew many converts in England. The latter
countries produced two great masters in the persons of Jacob Böhmen and
Robert Fludd—pretended philosophers, of whom it is difficult to say which
was the more absurd and extravagant. It would appear that the sect was
divided into two classes—the brothers Roseæ Crucis, who devoted
themselves to the wonders of this sublunary sphere, and the brothers Aureæ
Crucis, who were wholly occupied in the contemplation of things divine.
Fludd belonged to the first class, and Böhmen to the second. Fludd may be
called the father of the English Rosicrucians, and as such merits a
conspicuous niche in the temple of Folly.
He was born in the year 1574 at Milgate, in Kent, and was the son of Sir
Thomas Fludd, Treasurer of War to Queen Elizabeth. He was originally
intended for the army; but he was too fond of study, and of a disposition too
quiet and retiring, to shine in that sphere. His father would not therefore
press him to adopt a course of life for which he was unsuited, and
encouraged him in the study of medicine, for which he early manifested a
partiality. At the age of twenty-five he proceeded to the continent; and being
fond of the abstruse, the marvellous, and the incomprehensible, he became
an ardent disciple of the school of Paracelsus, whom he looked upon as the
regenerator not only of medicine, but of philosophy. He remained six years
in Italy, France, and Germany, storing his mind with fantastic notions, and
seeking the society of enthusiasts and visionaries. On his return to England
in 1605, he received the degree of Doctor of Medicine from the University
of Oxford, and began to practise as a physician in London.
He soon made himself conspicuous. He latinised his name from Robert
Fludd into Robertus à Fluctibus, and began the promulgation of many
strange doctrines. He avowed his belief in the philosopher’s stone, the water
of life, and the universal alkahest; and maintained that there were but two
principles of all things,—which were, condensation, the boreal or northern
virtue; and rarefaction, the southern or austral virtue. A number of demons,
he said, ruled over the human frame, whom he arranged in their places in a
rhomboid. Every disease had its peculiar demon who produced it, which
demon could only be combated by the aid of the demon whose place was
directly opposite to his in the rhomboidal figure. Of his medical notions we
shall have further occasion to speak in another part of this book, when we
consider him in his character as one of the first founders of the magnetic
delusion, and its offshoot, animal magnetism, which has created so much
sensation in our own day.
As if the doctrines already mentioned were not wild enough, he joined
the Rosicrucians as soon as they began to make a sensation in Europe, and
succeeded in raising himself to high consideration among them. The
fraternity having been violently attacked by several German authors, and
among others by Libavius, Fludd volunteered a reply, and published, in
1616, his defence of the Rosicrucian philosophy, under the title of the
Apologia compendiaria Fraternitatem de Rosea-cruce suspicionis et
infamiæ maculis aspersam abluens. This work immediately procured him
great renown upon the Continent, and he was henceforth looked upon as
one of the high-priests of the sect. Of so much importance was he
considered, that Keppler and Gassendi thought it necessary to refute him;
and the latter wrote a complete examination of his doctrine. Mersenne also,
the friend of Descartes, and who had defended that philosopher when
accused of having joined the Rosicrucians, attacked Dr. à Fluctibus, as he
preferred to be called, and shewed the absurdity of the brothers of the Rose-
cross in general, and of Dr. à Fluctibus in particular. Fluctibus wrote a long
reply, in which he called Mersenne an ignorant calumniator, and reiterated
that alchymy was a profitable science, and the Rosicrucians worthy to be
the regenerators of the world. This book was published at Frankfort, and
was entitled Summum Bonum, quod est Magiæ, Cabalæ, Alchimiæ,
Fratrum, Roseæ-Crucis verorum, et adversus Mersenium Calumniatorem.
Besides this, he wrote several other works upon alchymy, a second answer
to Libavius upon the Rosicrucians, and many medical works. He died in
London in 1637.
After his time there was some diminution of the sect in England. They
excited but little attention, and made no effort to bring themselves into
notice. Occasionally some obscure and almost incomprehensible work
made its appearance, to shew the world that the folly was not extinguished.
Eugenius Philalethes, a noted alchymist, who has veiled his real name under
this assumed one, translated The Fame and Confession of the Brethren of
the Rosie Cross, which was published in London in 1652. A few years
afterwards, another enthusiast, named John Heydon, wrote two works on
the subject: the one entitled The Wise Man’s Crown, or the Glory of the
Rosie Cross; and the other, The Holy Guide, leading the way to unite Art
and Nature with the Rosie Crosse uncovered. Neither of these attracted
much notice. A third book was somewhat more successful; it was called A
new Method of Rosicrucian Physic; by John Heydon, the servant of God
and the Secretary of Nature. A few extracts will shew the ideas of the
English Rosicrucians about this period. Its author was an attorney,
“practising (to use his own words) at Westminster Hall all term times as
long as he lived, and in the vacations devoting himself to alchymical and
Rosicrucian meditation.” In his preface, called by him an Apologue for an
Epilogue, he enlightens the public upon the true history and tenets of his
sect. Moses, Elias, and Ezekiel were, he says, the most ancient masters of
the Rosicrucian philosophy. Those few then existing in England and the rest
of Europe, were as the eyes and ears of the great king of the universe,
seeing and hearing all things; seraphically illuminated; companions of the
holy company of unbodied souls and immortal angels; turning themselves,
Proteus-like, into any shape, and having the power of working miracles.
The most pious and abstracted brethren could slack the plague in cities,
silence the violent winds and tempests, calm the rage of the sea and rivers,
walk in the air, frustrate the malicious aspect of witches, cure all diseases,
and turn all metals into gold. He had known in his time two famous
brethren of the Rosie Cross, named Walfourd and Williams, who had
worked miracles in his sight, and taught him many excellent predictions of
astrology and earthquakes. “I desired one of these to tell me,” says he,
“whether my complexion were capable of the society of my good genius.
‘When I see you again,’ said he (which was when he pleased to come to me,
for I knew not where to go to him), ‘I will tell you.’ When I saw him
afterwards, he said, ‘You should pray to God; for a good and holy man can
offer no greater or more acceptable service to God than the oblation of
himself—his soul.’ He said also, that the good genii were the benign eyes of
God, running to and fro in the world, and with love and pity beholding the
innocent endeavours of harmless and single-hearted men, ever ready to do
them good and to help them.”
Heydon held devoutly true that dogma of the Rosicrucians which said
that neither eating nor drinking was necessary to men. He maintained that
any one might exist in the same manner as that singular people dwelling
near the source of the Ganges, of whom mention was made in the travels of
his namesake, Sir Christopher Heydon, who had no mouths, and therefore
could not eat, but lived by the breath of their nostrils; except when they
took a far journey, and then they mended their diet with the smell of
flowers. He said that in really pure air “there was a fine foreign fatness,”
with which it was sprinkled by the sunbeams, and which was quite
sufficient for the nourishment of the generality of mankind. Those who had
enormous appetites, he had no objection to see take animal food, since they
could not do without it; but he obstinately insisted that there was no
necessity why they should eat it. If they put a plaster of nicely-cooked meat
upon their epigastrium, it would be sufficient for the wants of the most
robust and voracious! They would by that means let in no diseases, as they
did at the broad and common gate, the mouth, as any one might see by
example of drink; for all the while a man sat in water, he was never athirst.
He had known, he said, many Rosicrucians, who by applying wine in this
manner, had fasted for years together. In fact, quoth Heydon, we may easily
fast all our life, though it be three hundred years, without any kind of meat,
and so cut off all danger of disease.
This “sage philosopher” further informed his wondering contemporaries
that the chiefs of the doctrine always carried about with them to their place
of meeting their symbol, called the R. C. which was an ebony cross,
flourished and decked with roses of gold; the cross typifying Christ’s
sufferings upon the cross for our sins, and the roses of gold the glory and
beauty of his Resurrection. This symbol was carried alternately to Mecca,
Mount Calvary, Mount Sinai, Haran, and to three other places, which must
have been in mid-air, called Cascle, Apamia and Chaulateau Virissa
Caunuch, where the Rosicrucian brethren met when they pleased, and made
resolution of all their actions. They always took their pleasures in one of
these places, where they resolved all questions of whatsoever had been
done, was done, or should be done in the world, from the beginning to the
end thereof. “And these,” he concludes, “are the men called Rosicrucians!”
Towards the end of the seventeenth century, more rational ideas took
possession of the sect, which still continued to boast of a few members.
They appear to have considered that contentment was the true philosopher’s
stone, and to have abandoned the insane search for a mere phantom of the
imagination. Addison, in The Spectator,45 gives an account of his
conversation with a Rosicrucian; from which it may be inferred that the sect
had grown wiser in their deeds, though in their talk they were as foolish as
ever. “I was once,” says he, “engaged in discourse with a Rosicrucian about
the great secret. He talked of the secret as of a spirit which lived within an
emerald, and converted every thing that was near it to the highest perfection
that it was capable of. ‘It gives a lustre,’ says he, ‘to the sun, and water to
the diamond. It irradiates every metal, and enriches lead with all the
properties of gold. It heightens smoke into flame, flame into light, and light
into glory.’ He further added, ‘that a single ray of it dissipates pain and care
and melancholy from the person on whom it falls. In short,’ says he, ‘its
presence naturally changes every place into a kind of heaven.’ After he had
gone on for some time in this unintelligible cant, I found that he jumbled
natural and moral ideas together into the same discourse, and that his great
secret was nothing else but content.”
Jacob Böhmen.
It is now time to speak of Jacob Böhmen, who thought he could discover
the secret of the transmutation of metals in the Bible, and who invented a
strange heterogeneous doctrine of mingled alchymy and religion, and
founded upon it the sect of the Aurea-crucians. He was born at Görlitz, in
Upper Lusatia, in 1575, and followed till his thirtieth year the occupation of
a shoemaker. In this obscurity he remained, with the character of a
visionary and a man of unsettled mind, until the promulgation of the
Rosicrucian philosophy in his part of Germany, toward the year 1607 or
1608. From that time he began to neglect his leather, and buried his brain
under the rubbish of metaphysics. The works of Paracelsus fell into his
hands; and these, with the reveries of the Rosicrucians, so completely
engrossed his attention, that he abandoned his trade altogether, sinking, at
the same time, from a state of comparative independence into poverty and
destitution. But he was nothing daunted by the miseries and privations of
the flesh; his mind was fixed upon the beings of another sphere, and in
thought he was already the new apostle of the human race. In the year 1612,
after a meditation of four years, he published his first work, entitled Aurora,
or the Rising of the Sun; embodying the ridiculous notions of Paracelsus,
and worse confounding the confusion of that writer. The philosopher’s
stone might, he contended, be discovered by a diligent search of the Old
and New Testaments, and more especially of the Apocalypse, which alone
contained all the secrets of alchymy. He contended that the divine grace
operated by the same rules, and followed the same methods, that the divine
providence observed in the natural world; and that the minds of men were
purged from their vices and corruptions in the very same manner that metals
were purified from their dross, namely, by fire.
Besides 
the 
sylphs, 
gnomes, 
undines, 
and 
salamanders, 
he
acknowledged various ranks and orders of demons. He pretended to
invisibility and absolute chastity. He also said that, if it pleased him, he
could abstain for years from meat and drink, and all the necessities of the
body. It is needless, however, to pursue his follies any further. He was
reprimanded for writing this work by the magistrates of Görlitz, and
commanded to leave the pen alone and stick to his wax, that his family
might not become chargeable to the parish. He neglected this good advice,
and continued his studies; burning minerals and purifying metals one day,
and mystifying the Word of God on the next. He afterwards wrote three
other works, as sublimely ridiculous as the first. The one was entitled
Metallurgia, and has the slight merit of being the least obscure of his
compositions. Another was called The Temporal Mirror of Eternity; and the
last his Theosophy revealed, full of allegories and metaphors,
“All strange and geason,
Devoid of sense and ordinary reason.”
Böhmen died in 1624, leaving behind him a considerable number of
admiring disciples. Many of them became, during the seventeenth century,
as distinguished for absurdity as their master; amongst whom may be
mentioned Gifftheil, Wendenhagen, John Jacob Zimmermann, and Abraham
Frankenberg. Their heresy rendered them obnoxious to the Church of
Rome; and many of them suffered long imprisonment and torture for their
faith. One, named Kuhlmann, was burned alive at Moscow, in 1684, on a
charge of sorcery. Böhmen’s works were translated into English, and
published, many years afterwards, by an enthusiast named William Law.
Mormius.
Peter Mormius, a notorious alchymist and contemporary of Böhmen,
endeavoured, in 1630, to introduce the Rosicrucian philosophy into
Holland. He applied to the States-General to grant him a public audience,
that he might explain the tenets of the sect, and disclose a plan for rendering
Holland the happiest and richest country on the earth, by means of the
philosopher’s stone and the service of the elementary spirits. The States-
General wisely resolved to have nothing to do with him. He thereupon
determined to shame them by printing his book, which he did at Leyden the
same year. It was entitled The Book of the most Hidden Secrets of Nature,
and was divided into three parts; the first treating of “perpetual motion;” the
second of the “transmutation of metals;” and the third of the “universal
medicine.” He also published some German works upon the Rosicrucian
philosophy, at Frankfort, in 1617.
Poetry and romance are deeply indebted to the Rosicrucians for many a
graceful creation. The literature of England, France, and Germany contains
hundreds of sweet fictions, whose machinery has been borrowed from their
day-dreams. The “delicate Ariel” of Shakspeare stands pre-eminent among
the number. From the same source Pope drew the airy tenants of Belinda’s
dressing-room, in his charming Rape of the Lock; and La Motte Fouqué, the
beautiful and capricious water-nymph Undine, around whom he has thrown
more grace and loveliness, and for whose imaginary woes he has excited
more sympathy, than ever were bestowed on a supernatural being. Sir
Walter Scott also endowed the White Lady of Avenel with many of the
attributes of the undines or water-sprites. German romance and lyrical
poetry teem with allusions to sylphs, gnomes, undines, and salamanders;
and the French have not been behind in substituting them, in works of
fiction, for the more cumbrous mythology of Greece and Rome. The sylphs,
more especially, have been the favourites of the bards, and have become so
familiar to the popular mind as to be, in a manner, confounded with that
other race of ideal beings, the fairies, who can boast of an antiquity much
more venerable in the annals of superstition. Having these obligations to the
Rosicrucians, no lover of poetry can wish, however absurd they were, that
such a sect of philosophers had never existed.
Borri.
Just at the time that Michael Mayer was making known to the world the
existence of such a body as the Rosicrucians, there was born in Italy a man
who was afterwards destined to become the most conspicuous member of
the fraternity. The alchymic mania never called forth the ingenuity of a
more consummate or more successful impostor than Joseph Francis Borri.
He was born in 1616, according to some authorities, and in 1627 according
to others, at Milan; where his father, the Signor Branda Borri, practised as a
physician. At the age of sixteen Joseph was sent to finish his education at
the Jesuits’ college in Rome, where he distinguished himself by his
extraordinary memory. He learned every thing to which he applied himself
with the utmost ease. In the most voluminous works no fact was too minute
for his retention, and no study was so abstruse but that he could master it;
but any advantages he might have derived from this facility were
neutralised by his ungovernable passions and his love of turmoil and
debauchery. He was involved in continual difficulty, as well with the heads
of the college as with the police of Rome, and acquired so bad a character
that years could not remove it. By the aid of his friends he established
himself as a physician in Rome, and also obtained some situation in the
pope’s household. In one of his fits of studiousness he grew enamoured of
alchymy, and determined to devote his energies to the discovery of the
philosopher’s stone. Of unfortunate propensities he had quite sufficient,
besides this, to bring him to poverty. His pleasures were as expensive as his
studies, and both were of a nature to destroy his health and ruin his fair
fame. At the age of thirty-seven he found that he could not live by the
practice of medicine, and began to look about for some other employment.
He became, in 1653, private secretary to the Marquis di Mirogli, the
minister of the Archduke of Innsprück at the court of Rome. He continued
in this capacity for two years; leading, however, the same abandoned life as
heretofore, frequenting the society of gamesters, debauchees, and loose
women, involving himself in disgraceful street quarrels, and alienating the
patrons who were desirous to befriend him.
All at once a sudden change was observed in his conduct. The
abandoned rake put on the outward sedateness of a philosopher; the
scoffing sinner proclaimed that he had forsaken his evil ways, and would
live thenceforth a model of virtue. To his friends this reformation was as
pleasing as it was unexpected; and Borri gave obscure hints that it had been
brought about by some miraculous manifestation of a superior power. He
pretended that he held converse with beneficent spirits; that the secrets of
God and nature were revealed to him; and that he had obtained possession
of the philosopher’s stone. Like his predecessor, Jacob Böhmen, he mixed
up religious questions with his philosophical jargon, and took measures for
declaring himself the founder of a new sect. This, at Rome itself, and in the
very palace of the pope, was a hazardous proceeding; and Borri just awoke
to a sense of it in time to save himself from the dungeons of the Castle of
St. Angelo. He fled to Innsprück, where he remained about a year, and then
returned to his native city of Milan.
INNSPRUCK.
The reputation of his great sanctity had gone before him; and he found
many persons ready to attach themselves to his fortunes. All who were
desirous of entering into the new communion took an oath of poverty, and
relinquished their possessions for the general good of the fraternity. Borri
told them that he had received from the archangel Michael a heavenly
sword, upon the hilt of which were engraven the names of the seven
celestial intelligences. “Whoever shall refuse,” said he, “to enter into my
new sheepfold shall be destroyed by the papal armies, of whom God has
predestined me to be the chief. To those who follow me all joy shall be
granted. I shall soon bring my chemical studies to a happy conclusion, by
the discovery of the philosopher’s stone, and by this means we shall all
have as much gold as we desire. I am assured of the aid of the angelic hosts,
and more especially of the archangel Michael’s. When I began to walk in
the way of the spirit, I had a vision of the night, and was assured by an
angelic voice that I should become a prophet. In sign of it I saw a palm-tree,
surrounded with all the glory of paradise. The angels come to me whenever
I call, and reveal to me all the secrets of the universe. The sylphs and
elementary spirits obey me, and fly to the uttermost ends of the world to
serve me, and those whom I delight to honour.” By force of continually
repeating such stories as these, Borri soon found himself at the head of a
very considerable number of adherents. As he figures in these pages as an
alchymist, and not as a religious sectarian, it will be unnecessary to repeat
the doctrines which he taught with regard to some of the dogmas of the
Church of Rome, and which exposed him to the fierce resentment of the
papal authority. They were to the full as ridiculous as his philosophical
pretensions. As the number of his followers increased, he appears to have
cherished the idea of becoming one day a new Mahomet, and of founding,
in his native city of Milan, a monarchy and religion of which he should be
the king and the prophet. He had taken measures, in the year 1658, for
seizing the guards at all the gates of that city, and formally declaring
himself the monarch of the Milanese. Just as he thought the plan ripe for
execution, it was discovered. Twenty of his followers were arrested, and he
himself managed, with the utmost difficulty, to escape to the neutral
territory of Switzerland, where the papal displeasure could not reach him.
The trial of his followers commenced forthwith, and the whole of them
were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment. Borri’s trial proceeded in
his absence, and lasted for upwards of two years. He was condemned to
death as a heretic and sorcerer in 1661, and was burned in effigy in Rome
by the common hangman.
Borri, in the mean time, lived quietly in Switzerland, indulging himself
in railing at the Inquisition and its proceedings. He afterwards went to
Strasbourg, intending to fix his residence in that town. He was received
with great cordiality, as a man persecuted for his religious opinions, and
withal a great alchymist. He found that sphere too narrow for his aspiring
genius, and retired in the same year to the more wealthy city of Amsterdam.
He there hired a magnificent house, established an equipage which eclipsed
in brilliancy those of the richest merchants, and assumed the title of
Excellency. Where he got the money to live in this expensive style was long
a secret: the adepts in alchymy easily explained it, after their fashion.
Sensible people were of opinion that he had come by it in a less wonderful
manner; for it was remembered that among his unfortunate disciples in
Milan, there were many rich men, who, in conformity with one of the
fundamental rules of the sect, had given up all their earthly wealth into the
hands of their founder. In whatever manner the money was obtained, Borri
spent it in Holland with an unsparing hand, and was looked up to by the
people with no little respect and veneration. He performed several able
cures, and increased his reputation so much that he was vaunted as a
prodigy. He continued diligently the operations of alchymy, and was in
daily expectation that he should succeed in turning the inferior metals into
gold. This hope never abandoned him, even in the worst extremity of his
fortunes; and in his prosperity it led him into the most foolish expenses: but
he could not long continue to live so magnificently upon the funds he had
brought from Italy; and the philosopher’s stone, though it promised all for
the wants of the morrow, never brought any thing for the necessities of to-
day. He was obliged in a few months to retrench, by giving up his large
house, his gilded coach and valuable blood-horses, his liveried domestics,
and his luxurious entertainments. With this diminution of splendour came a
diminution of renown. His cures did not appear so miraculous, when he
went out on foot to perform them, as they had seemed when “his
Excellency” had driven to a poor man’s door in his carriage with six horses.
He sank from a prodigy into an ordinary man. His great friends shewed him
the cold shoulder, and his humble flatterers carried their incense to some
other shrine. Borri now thought it high time to change his quarters. With
this view he borrowed money wherever he could get it, and succeeded in
obtaining two hundred thousand florins from a merchant named De Meer,
to aid, as he said, in discovering the water of life. He also obtained six
diamonds of great value, on pretence that he could remove the flaws from
them without diminishing their weight. With this booty he stole away
secretly by night, and proceeded to Hamburgh.
On his arrival in that city, he found the celebrated Christina, the ex-
queen of Sweden. He procured an introduction to her, and requested her
patronage in his endeavour to discover the philosopher’s stone. She gave
him some encouragement; but Borri, fearing that the merchants of
Amsterdam, who had connexions in Hamburgh, might expose his
delinquencies if he remained in the latter city, passed over to Copenhagen,
and sought the protection of Frederick III., the king of Denmark.
This prince was a firm believer in the transmutation of metals. Being in
want of money, he readily listened to the plans of an adventurer who had
both eloquence and ability to recommend him. He provided Borri with the
means to make experiments, and took a great interest in the progress of his
operations. He expected every month to possess riches that would buy Peru;
and, when he was disappointed, accepted patiently the excuses of Borri,
who, upon every failure, was always ready with some plausible explanation.
He became in time much attached to him; and defended him from the
jealous attacks of his courtiers, and the indignation of those who were
grieved to see their monarch the easy dupe of a charlatan. Borri
endeavoured, by every means in his power, to find aliment for this good
opinion. His knowledge of medicine was useful to him in this respect, and
often stood between him and disgrace. He lived six years in this manner at
the court of Frederick; but that monarch dying in 1670 he was left without a
protector.
As he had made more enemies than friends in Copenhagen, and had
nothing to hope from the succeeding sovereign, he sought an asylum in
another country. He went first to Saxony; but met so little encouragement,
and encountered so much danger from the emissaries of the Inquisition, that
he did not remain there many months. Anticipating nothing but persecution
in every country that acknowledged the spiritual authority of the pope, he
appears to have taken the resolution to dwell in Turkey, and turn
Mussulman. On his arrival at the Hungarian frontier, on his way to
Constantinople, he was arrested on suspicion of being concerned in the
conspiracy of the Counts Nadasdi and Frangipani, which had just been
discovered. In vain he protested his innocence, and divulged his real name
and profession. He was detained in prison, and a letter despatched to the
Emperor Leopold, to know what should be done with him. The star of his
fortunes was on the decline. The letter reached Leopold at an unlucky
moment. The pope’s nuncio was closeted with his majesty; and he no
sooner heard the name of Joseph Francis Borri, than he demanded him as a
prisoner of the Holy See. The request was complied with; and Borri, closely
manacled, was sent under an escort of soldiers to the prison of the
Inquisition at Rome. He was too much of an impostor to be deeply tinged
with fanaticism, and was not unwilling to make a public recantation of his
heresies, if he could thereby save his life. When the proposition was made
to him, he accepted it with eagerness. His punishment was to be commuted
into the hardly less severe one of perpetual imprisonment; but he was too
happy to escape the clutch of the executioner at any price, and he made the
amende honorable in face of the assembled multitudes of Rome on the 27th
of October 1672. He was then transferred to the prisons of the Castle of St.
Angelo, where he remained till his death, twenty-three years afterwards. It
is said that, towards the close of his life, considerable indulgence was
granted him; that he was allowed to have a laboratory, and to cheer the
solitude of his dungeon by searching for the philosopher’s stone. Queen
Christina, during her residence at Rome, frequently visited the old man, to
converse with him upon chemistry and the doctrines of the Rosicrucians.
She even obtained permission that he should leave his prison occasionally
for a day or two, and reside in her palace, she being responsible for his
return to captivity. She encouraged him to search for the great secret of the
alchymists, and provided him with money for the purpose. It may well be
supposed that Borri benefited most by this acquaintance, and that Christina
got nothing but experience. It is not sure that she gained even that; for until
her dying day she was convinced of the possibility of finding the
philosopher’s stone, and ready to assist any adventurer either zealous or
impudent enough to pretend to it.
After Borri had been about eleven years in confinement, a small volume
was published at Cologne, entitled The Key of the Cabinet of the Chevalier
Joseph Francis Borri, in which are contained many curious Letters upon
Chemistry and other Sciences, written by him, together with a Memoir of
his Life. This book contained a complete exposition of the Rosicrucian
philosophy, and afforded materials to the Abbé de Villars for his interesting
Count de Gabalis, which excited so much attention at the close of the
seventeenth century.
Borri lingered in the prison of St. Angelo till 1695, when he died, in his
eightieth year. Besides The Key of the Cabinet, written originally in
Copenhagen, in 1666, for the edification of King Frederick III., he
published a work upon alchymy and the secret sciences, under the title of
The Mission of Romulus to the Romans.
Inferior Alchymists of the Seventeenth Century.
Besides the pretenders to the philosopher’s stone whose lives have been
already narrated, this and the preceding century produced a great number of
writers, who inundated literature with their books upon the subject. In fact,
most of the learned men of that age had some faith in it. Van Helmont,
Borrichius, Kircher, Boerhaave, and a score of others, though not professed
alchymists, were fond of the science, and countenanced its professors.
Helvetius, the grandfather of the celebrated philosopher of the same name,
asserts that he saw an inferior metal turned into gold by a stranger, at the
Hague, in 1666. He says, that, sitting one day in his study, a man, who was
dressed as a respectable burgher of North Holland, and very modest and
simple in his appearance, called upon him, with the intention of dispelling
his doubts relative to the philosopher’s stone. He asked Helvetius if he
thought he should know that rare gem if he saw it. To which Helvetius
replied, that he certainly should not. The burgher immediately drew from
his pocket a small ivory box, containing three pieces of metal, of the colour
of brimstone, and extremely heavy; and assured Helvetius, that of them he
could make as much as twenty tons of gold. Helvetius informs us, that he
examined them very attentively; and seeing that they were very brittle, he
took the opportunity to scrape off a small portion with his thumb-nail. He
then returned them to the stranger, with an entreaty that he would perform
the process of transmutation before him. The stranger replied, that he was
not allowed to do so, and went away. After his departure, Helvetius
procured a crucible and a portion of lead, into which, when in a state of
fusion, he threw the stolen grain from the philosopher’s stone. He was
disappointed to find that the grain evaporated altogether, leaving the lead in
its original state.
Some weeks afterwards, when he had almost forgotten the subject, he
received another visit from the stranger. He again entreated him to explain
the processes by which he pretended to transmute lead. The stranger at last
consented, and informed him, that one grain was sufficient; but that it was
necessary to envelope it in a ball of wax before throwing it on the molten
metal; otherwise its extreme volatility would cause it to go off in vapour.
They tried the experiment, and succeeded to their heart’s content. Helvetius
repeated the experiment alone, and converted six ounces of lead into very
pure gold.
The fame of this event spread all over the Hague, and all the notable
persons of the town flocked to the study of Helvetius to convince
themselves of the fact. Helvetius performed the experiment again, in the
presence of the Prince of Orange, and several times afterwards, until he
exhausted the whole of the powder he had received from the stranger, from
whom it is necessary to state, he never received another visit; nor did he
ever discover his name or condition. In the following year, Helvetius
published his Golden Calf,46 in which he detailed the above circumstances.
About the same time, the celebrated Father Kircher published his
Subterranean World, in which he called the alchymists a congregation of
knaves and impostors, and their science a delusion. He admitted that he had
himself been a diligent labourer in the field, and had only come to this
conclusion after mature consideration and repeated fruitless experiments.
All the alchymists were in arms immediately, to refute this formidable
antagonist. One Solomon de Blauenstein was the first to grapple with him,
and attempted to convict him of wilful misrepresentation, by recalling to his
memory the transmutations by Sendivogius, before the Emperor Frederick
III. and the Elector of Mayence, all performed within a recent period.
Zwelfer and Glauber also entered into the dispute, and attributed the enmity
of Father Kircher to spite and jealousy against adepts who had been more
successful than himself.
It was also pretended that Gustavus Adolphus transmuted a quantity of
quicksilver into pure gold. The learned Borrichius relates, that he saw coins
which had been struck of this gold; and Lenglet du Fresnoy deposes to the
same circumstance. In the Travels of Monconis the story is told in the
following manner: “A merchant of Lubeck, who carried on but little trade,
but who knew how to change lead into very good gold, gave the King of
Sweden a lingot which he had made, weighing at least one hundred pounds.
The king immediately caused it to be coined into ducats; and because he
knew positively that its origin was such as had been stated to him, he had
his own arms graven upon the one side, and emblematical figures of
Mercury and Venus on the other. I (continued Monconis) have one of these
ducats in my possession; and was credibly informed that, after the death of
the Lubeck merchant, who had never appeared very rich, a sum of no less
than one million seven hundred thousand crowns was found in his
coffers.”47
Such stories as these, confidently related by men high in station, tended
to keep up the infatuation of the alchymists in every country of Europe. It is
astonishing to see the number of works which were written upon the subject
during the seventeenth century alone, and the number of clever men who
sacrificed themselves to the delusion. Gabriel de Castaigne, a monk of the
order of St. Francis, attracted so much notice in the reign of Louis XIII.,
that that monarch secured him in his household, and made him his Grand
Almoner. He pretended to find the elixir of life, and Louis expected by his
means to have enjoyed the crown for a century. Van Helmont also pretended
to have once performed with success the process of transmuting quicksilver,
and was in consequence invited by the Emperor Rudolph II. to fix his
residence at the court of Vienna. Glauber, the inventor of the salts which
still bear his name, and who practised as a physician at Amsterdam about
the middle of the seventeenth century, established a public school in that
city for the study of alchymy, and gave lectures himself upon the science.
John Joachim Becher of Spire acquired great reputation at the same period,
and was convinced that much gold might be made out of flint-stones by a
peculiar process, and the aid of that grand and incomprehensible substance
the philosopher’s stone. He made a proposition to the Emperor Leopold of
Austria to aid him in these experiments; but the hope of success was too
remote, and the present expense too great, to tempt that monarch, and he
therefore gave Becher much of his praise, but none of his money. Becher
afterwards tried the States-General of Holland with no better success.
With regard to the innumerable tricks by which impostors persuaded the
world that they had succeeded in making gold, and of which so many
stories were current about this period, a very satisfactory report was read by
M. Geoffroy the elder, at the sitting of the Royal Academy of Sciences at
Paris, on the 15th of April, 1722. As it relates principally to the alchymic
cheats of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the following abridgment
of it may not be out of place in this portion of our history. The instances of
successful transmutation were so numerous, and apparently so well
authenticated, that nothing short of so able an exposure as that of M.
Geoffroy could disabuse the public mind. The trick to which they oftenest
had recourse was to use a double-bottomed crucible, the under surface
being of iron or copper, and the upper one of wax, painted to resemble the
same metal. Between the two they placed as much gold or silver dust as was
necessary for their purpose. They then put in their lead, quicksilver, or other
ingredients, and placed their pot upon the fire. Of course, when the
experiment was concluded, they never failed to find a lump of gold at the
bottom. The same result was produced in many other ways. Some of them
used a hollow wand, filled with gold or silver dust, and stopped at the ends
with wax or butter. With this they stirred the boiling metal in their crucibles,
taking care to accompany the operation with many ceremonies, to divert
attention from the real purpose of the manœuvre. They also drilled holes in
lumps of lead, into which they poured molten gold, and carefully closed the
aperture with the original metal. Sometimes they washed a piece of gold
with quicksilver. When in this state, they found no difficulty in palming it
off upon the uninitiated as an inferior metal, and very easily transmuted it
into fine sonorous gold again with the aid of a little aquafortis.
Others imposed by means of nails, half iron and half gold or silver.
They pretended that they really transmuted the precious half from iron, by
dipping it in a strong alcohol. M. Geoffroy produced several of these nails
to the Academy of Sciences, and shewed how nicely the two parts were
soldered together. The golden or silver half was painted black to resemble
iron, and the colour immediately disappeared when the nail was dipped into
aquafortis. A nail of this description was, for a long time, in the cabinet of
the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Such also, said M. Geoffroy, was the knife
presented by a monk to Queen Elizabeth of England; the blade of which
was half gold and half steel. Nothing at one time was more common than to
see coins, half gold and half silver, which had been operated upon by
alchymists, for the same purposes of trickery. In fact, says M. Geoffroy, in
concluding his long report, there is every reason to believe that all the
famous histories which have been handed down to us about the
transmutation of metals into gold or silver, by means of the powder of
projection or philosophical elixirs, are founded upon some successful
deception of the kind above narrated. These pretended philosophers
invariably disappeared after the first or second experiment, or their powders
or elixirs have failed to produce their effect, either because attention being
excited they have found no opportunity to renew the trick without being
discovered, or because they have not had sufficient gold dust for more than
one trial.
The disinterestedness of these would-be philosophers looked, at first
sight, extremely imposing. Instances were not rare in which they generously
abandoned all the profits of their transmutations—even the honour of the
discovery. But this apparent disinterestedness was one of the most cunning
of their manœuvres. It served to keep up the popular expectation; it seemed
to shew the possibility of discovering the philosopher’s stone, and provided
the means of future advantages, which they were never slow to lay hold of
—such as entrances into royal households, maintenance at the public
expense, and gifts from ambitious potentates, too greedy after the gold they
so easily promised.
It now only remains to trace the progress of the delusion from the
commencement of the eighteenth century until the present day. It will be
seen that, until a very recent period, there were but slight signs of a return to
reason.
Jean Delisle.
In the year 1705, there was much talk in France of a blacksmith, named
Delisle, who had discovered the philosopher’s stone, and who went about
the country turning lead into gold. He was a native of Provence, from which
place his fame soon spread to the capital. His early life is involved in
obscurity; but Lenglet du Fresnoy has industriously collected some
particulars of his later career, which possess considerable interest. He was a
man without any education, and had been servant in his youth to an
alchymist, from whom he learned many of the tricks of the fraternity. The
name of his master has never been discovered; but it is pretended that he
rendered himself in some manner obnoxious to the government of Louis
XIV., and was obliged, in consequence, to take refuge in Switzerland.
Delisle accompanied him as far as Savoy, and there, it is said, set upon him
in a solitary mountain-pass, and murdered and robbed him. He then
disguised himself as a pilgrim, and returned to France. At a lonely inn, by
the road-side, where he stopped for the night, he became acquainted with a
woman, named Aluys; and so sudden a passion was enkindled betwixt
them, that she consented to leave all, follow him, and share his good or evil
fortune wherever he went. They lived together for five or six years in
Provence, without exciting any attention, apparently possessed of a decent
independence. At last, in 1706, it was given out that he was the possessor of
the philosopher’s stone; and people from far and near came flocking to his
residence, at the Château de la Palu, at Sylanez, near Barjaumont, to
witness the wealth he could make out of pumps and fire-shovels. The
following account of his operations is given in a letter addressed by M. de
Cerisy, the Prior of Châteauneuf, in the Diocese of Riez, in Provence, to the
Vicar of St. Jacques du Hautpas, at Paris, and dated the 18th of November,
1706:
“I have something to relate to you, my dear cousin, which will be
interesting to you and your friends. The philosopher’s stone, which so
many persons have looked upon as a chimera, is at last found. It is a
man named Delisle, of the parish of Sylanez, and residing within a
quarter of a league of me, that has discovered this great secret. He
turns lead into gold, and iron into silver, by merely heating these
metals red hot, and pouring upon them in that state some oil and
powder he is possessed of; so that it would not be impossible for any
man to make a million a day, if he had sufficient of this wondrous
mixture. Some of the pale gold which he had made in this manner, he
sent to the jewellers of Lyons, to have their opinion on its quality. He
also sold twenty pounds weight of it to a merchant of Digne, named
Taxis. All the jewellers say they never saw such fine gold in their lives.
He makes nails, part gold, part iron, and part silver. He promised to
give me one of them, in a long conversation which I had with him the
other day, by order of the Bishop of Senés, who saw his operations
with his own eyes, and detailed all the circumstances to me.
“The Baron and Baroness de Rheinwald shewed me a lingot of
gold made out of pewter before their eyes by M. Delisle. My brother-
in-law Sauveur, who has wasted fifty years of his life in this great
study, brought me the other day a nail which he had seen changed into
gold by Delisle, and fully convinced me that all his previous
experiments were founded on an erroneous principle. This excellent
workman received, a short time ago, a very kind letter from the
superintendent of the royal household, which I read. He offered to use
all his influence with the ministers to prevent any attempts upon his
liberty, which has twice been attacked by the agents of government. It
is believed that the oil he makes use of, is gold or silver reduced to that
state. He leaves it for a long time exposed to the rays of the sun. He
told me that it generally took him six months to make all his
preparations. I told him that, apparently, the king wanted to see him.
He replied that he could not exercise his art in every place, as a certain
climate and temperature were absolutely necessary to his success. The
truth is, that this man appears to have no ambition. He only keeps two
horses and two men-servants. Besides, he loves his liberty, has no
politeness, and speaks very bad French; but his judgment seems to be
solid. He was formerly no more than a blacksmith, but excelled in that
trade without having been taught it. All the great lords and seigneurs
from far and near come to visit him, and pay such court to him, that it
seems more like idolatry than any thing else. Happy would France be
if this man would discover his secret to the king, to whom the
superintendent has already sent some lingots! But the happiness is too
great to be hoped for; for I fear that the workman and his secret will
expire together. There is no doubt that this discovery will make a great
noise in the kingdom, unless the character of the man, which I have
just depicted to you, prevent it. At all events, posterity will hear of
him.”
In another letter to the same person, dated the 27th of January 1707, M.
de Cerisy says, “My dear cousin, I spoke to you in my last letter of the
famous alchymist of Provence, M. Delisle. A good deal of that was only
hearsay, but now I am enabled to speak from my own experience. I have in
my possession a nail, half iron and half silver, which I made myself. That
great and admirable workman also bestowed a still greater privilege upon
me—he allowed me turn a piece of lead which I had brought with me into
pure gold, by means of his wonderful oil and powder. All the country have
their eyes upon this gentleman; some deny loudly, others are incredulous;
but those who have seen acknowledge the truth. I have read the passport
that has been sent to him from court, with orders that he should present
himself at Paris early in the spring. He told me that he would go willingly,
and that it was himself who fixed the spring for his departure; as he wanted
to collect his materials, in order that, immediately on his introduction to the
king, he might make an experiment worthy of his majesty, by converting a
large quantity of lead into the finest gold. I sincerely hope that he will not
allow his secret to die with him, but that he will communicate it to the king.
As I had the honour to dine with him on Thursday last, the 20th of this
month, being seated at his side, I told him in a whisper that he could, if he
liked, humble all the enemies of France. He did not deny it, but began to
smile. In fact, this man is the miracle of art. Sometimes he employs the oil
and powder mixed, sometimes the powder only; but in so small a quantity
that, when the lingot which I made was rubbed all over with it, it did not
shew at all.”
This soft-headed priest was by no means the only person in the
neighbourhood who lost his wits in hopes of the boundless wealth held out
by this clever impostor. Another priest, named De Lions, a chanter in the
cathedral of Grenoble, writing on the 30th January 1707, says: “M.
Mesnard, the curate of Montier, has written to me, stating that there is a
man, about thirty-five years of age, named Delisle, who turns lead and iron
into gold and silver; and that this transmutation is so veritable and so true,
that the goldsmiths affirm that his gold and silver are the purest and finest
they ever saw. For five years this man was looked upon as a madman or a
cheat; but the public mind is now disabused with respect to him. He now
resides with M. de la Palu, at the château of the same name. M. de la Palu is
not very easy in his circumstances, and wants money to portion his
daughters, who have remained single till middle age, no man being willing
to take them without a dowry. M. Delisle has promised to make them the
richest girls in the province before he goes to court, having been sent for by
the king. He has asked for a little time before his departure, in order that he
may collect powder enough to make several quintals of gold before the eyes
of his majesty, to whom he intends to present them. The principal matter of
his wonderful powder is composed of simples, principally the herbs
Lunaria major and minor. There is a good deal of the first planted by him in
the gardens of La Palu; and he gets the other from the mountains that
stretch about two leagues from Montier. What I tell you now is not a mere
story invented for your diversion: M. Mesnard can bring forward many
witnesses to its truth; among others, the Bishop of Senés, who saw these
surprising operations performed; and M. de Cerisy, whom you know well.
Delisle transmutes his metals in public. He rubs the lead or iron with his
powder, and puts it over burning charcoal. In a short time it changes colour;
the lead becomes yellow, and is found to be converted into excellent gold;
the iron becomes white, and is found to be pure silver. Delisle is altogether
an illiterate person. M. de St. Auban endeavoured to teach him to read and
write, but he profited very little by his lessons. He is unpolite, fantastic, and
a dreamer, and acts by fits and starts.”
Delisle, it would appear, was afraid of venturing to Paris. He knew that
his sleight of hand would be too narrowly watched in the royal presence;
and upon some pretence or other he delayed the journey for more than two
years. Desmarets, the Minister of Finance to Louis XIV., thinking the
“philosopher” dreaded foul play, twice sent him a safe conduct under the
king’s seal; but Delisle still refused. Upon this, Desmarets wrote to the
Bishop of Senés for his real opinion as to these famous transmutations. The
following was the answer of that prelate:
“Copy of a report addressed to M. Desmarets, Comptroller-General of
the Finances to His Majesty Louis XIV., by the Bishop of Senés, dated
March 1709.
“Sir,—A twelvemonth ago, or a little more, I expressed to you my
joy at hearing of your elevation to the ministry; I have now the honour
to write you my opinion of the Sieur Delisle, who has been working at
the transmutation of metals in my diocese. I have, during the last two
years, spoken of him several times to the Count de Pontchartrain,
because he asked me; but I have not written to you, sir, or to M. de
Chamillart, because you neither of you requested my opinion upon the
subject. Now, however, that you have given me to understand that you
wish to know my sentiments on the matter, I will unfold myself to you
in all sincerity, for the interests of the king and the glory of your
ministry.
“There are two things about the Sieur Delisle which, in my
opinion, should be examined without prejudice: the one relates to his
secret; the other, to his person; that is to say, whether his
transmutations are real, and whether his conduct has been regular. As
regards the secret of the philosopher’s stone, I deemed it impossible,
for a long time; and for more than three years I was more mistrustful
of the pretensions of this Sieur Delisle than of any other person.
During this period I afforded him no countenance; I even aided a
person, who was highly recommended to me by an influential family
of this province, to prosecute Delisle for some offence or other which
it was alleged he had committed. But this person, in his anger against
him, having told me that he had himself been several times the bearer
of gold and silver to the goldsmiths of Nice, Aix, and Avignon, which
had been transmuted by Delisle from lead and iron, I began to waver a
little in my opinions respecting him. I afterwards met Delisle at the
house of one of my friends. To please me, the family asked Delisle to
operate before me, to which he immediately consented. I offered him
some iron nails, which he changed into silver in the chimney-place
before six or seven credible witnesses. I took the nails thus transmuted,
and sent them by my almoner to Imbert, the jeweller of Aix, who,
having subjected them to the necessary trial, returned them to me,
saying they were very good silver. Still, however, I was not quite
satisfied. M. de Pontchartrain having hinted to me, two years
previously, that I should do a thing agreeable to his majesty if I
examined into this business of Delisle, I resolved to do so now. I
therefore summoned the alchymist to come to me at Castellane. He
came; and I had him escorted by eight or ten vigilant men, to whom I
had given notice to watch his hands strictly. Before all of us he
changed two pieces of lead into gold and silver. I sent them both to M.
de Pontchartrain; and he afterwards informed me by a letter, now lying
before me, that he had shewn them to the most experienced goldsmiths
of Paris, who unanimously pronounced them to be gold and silver of
the very purest quality, and without alloy. My former bad opinion of
Delisle was now indeed shaken. It was much more so when he
performed transmutation five or six times before me at Senés, and
made me perform it myself before him without his putting his hand to
any thing. You have seen, sir, the letter of my nephew, the Père Berard,
of the Oratoire at Paris, on the experiment that he performed at
Castellane, and the truth of which I hereby attest. Another nephew of
mine, the Sieur Bourget, who was here three weeks ago, performed the
same experiment in my presence, and will detail all the circumstances
to you personally at Paris. A hundred persons in my diocese have been
witnesses of these things. I confess to you, sir, that, after the testimony
of so many spectators and so many goldsmiths, and after the
repeatedly successful experiments that I saw performed, all my
prejudices vanished. My reason was convinced by my eyes; and the
phantoms of impossibility which I had conjured up were dissipated by
the work of my own hands.
“It now only remains for me to speak to you on the subject of his
person and conduct. Three suspicions have been excited against him:
the first, that he was implicated in some criminal proceeding at
Cisteron, and that he falsified the coin of the realm; the second, that
the king sent him two safe-conducts without effect; and the third, that
he still delays going to court to operate before the king. You may see,
sir, that I do not hide or avoid any thing. As regards the business at
Cisteron, the Sieur Delisle has repeatedly assured me that there was
nothing against him which could reasonably draw him within the pale
of justice, and that he had never carried on any calling injurious to the
king’s service. It was true that, six or seven years ago, he had been to
Cisteron to gather herbs necessary for his powder, and that he had
lodged at the house of one Pelouse, whom he thought an honest man.
Pelouse was accused of clipping Louis-d’ors; and as he had lodged
with him, he was suspected of being his accomplice. This mere
suspicion, without any proof whatever, had caused him to be
condemned for contumacy; a common case enough with judges, who
always proceed with much rigour against those who are absent. During
my own sojourn at Aix, it was well known that a man, named André
Aluys, had spread about reports injurious to the character of Delisle,
because he hoped thereby to avoid paying him a sum of forty Louis
that he owed him. But permit me, sir, to go further, and to add that,
even if there were well-founded suspicions against Delisle, we should
look with some little indulgence on the faults of a man who possesses
a secret so useful to the state. As regards the two safe-conducts sent
him by the king, I think I can answer certainly that it was through no
fault of his that he paid so little attention to them. His year, strictly
speaking, consists only of the four summer months; and when by any
means he is prevented from making the proper use of them, he loses a
whole year. Thus the first safe-conduct became useless by the irruption
of the Duke of Savoy in 1707 and the second had hardly been
obtained, at the end of June 1708, when the said Delisle was insulted
by a party of armed men, pretending to act under the authority of the
Count de Grignan, to whom he wrote several letters of complaint,
without receiving any answer, or promise that his safety would be
attended to. What I have now told you, sir, removes the third objection,
and is the reason why, at the present time, he cannot go to Paris to the
king, in fulfilment of his promises made two years ago. Two, or even
three, summers have been lost to him, owing to the continual
inquietude he has laboured under. He has, in consequence, been unable
to work, and has not collected a sufficient quantity of his oil and
powder, or brought what he has got to the necessary degree of
perfection. For this reason also he could not give the Sieur de Bourget
the portion he promised him for your inspection. If the other day he
changed some lead into gold with a few grains of his powder, they
were assuredly all he had; for he told me that such was the fact long
before he knew my nephew was coming. Even if he had preserved this
small quantity to operate before the king, I am sure that, on second
thoughts, he would never have adventured with so little; because the
slightest obstacles in the metals (their being too hard or too soft, which
is only discovered in operating,) would have caused him to be looked
upon as an impostor, if, in case his first powder had proved ineffectual,
he had not been possessed of more to renew the experiment and
surmount the difficulty.
“Permit me, sir, in conclusion, to repeat, that such an artist as this
should not be driven to the last extremity, nor forced to seek an asylum
offered to him in other countries, but which he has despised, as much
from his own inclinations as from the advice I have given him. You
risk nothing in giving him a little time, and in hurrying him you may
lose a great deal. The genuineness of his gold can no longer be
doubted, after the testimony of so many jewellers of Aix, Lyons, and
Paris in its favour. As it is not his fault that the previous safe-conducts
sent to him have been of no service, it will be necessary to send him
another; for the success of which I will be answerable, if you will
confide the matter to me, and trust to my zeal for the service of his
majesty, to whom I pray you to communicate this letter, that I may be
spared the just reproaches he might one day heap upon me if he
remained ignorant of the facts I have now written to you. Assure him,
if you please, that, if you send me such a safe-conduct, I will oblige the
Sieur Delisle to depose with me such precious pledges of his fidelity as
shall enable me to be responsible myself to the king. These are my
sentiments, and I submit them to your superior knowledge; and have
the honour to remain, with much respect, &c.
“✠ John Bishop of Senes.
“To M. Desmarets, Minister of State, and Comptroller-General of the
Finances, at Paris.”
That Delisle was no ordinary impostor, but a man of consummate
cunning and address, is very evident from this letter. The bishop was fairly
taken in by his clever legerdemain, and when once his first distrust was
conquered, appeared as anxious to deceive himself as even Delisle could
have wished. His faith was so abundant that he made the case of his protégé
his own, and would not suffer the breath of suspicion to be directed against
him. Both Louis and his minister appear to have been dazzled by the
brilliant hopes he had excited, and a third pass, or safe-conduct, was
immediately sent to the alchymist, with a command from the king that he
should forthwith present himself at Versailles, and make public trial of his
oil and powder. But this did not suit the plans of Delisle. In the provinces he
was regarded as a man of no small importance; the servile flattery that
awaited him wherever he went was so grateful to his mind that he could not
willingly relinquish it, and run upon certain detection at the court of the
monarch. Upon one pretext or another he delayed his journey,
notwithstanding the earnest solicitations of his good friend the bishop. The
latter had given his word to the minister, and pledged his honour that he
would induce Delisle to go, and he began to be alarmed when he found he
could not subdue the obstinacy of that individual. For more than two years
he continued to remonstrate with him, and was always met by some excuse,
that there was not sufficient powder, or that it had not been long enough
exposed to the rays of the sun. At last his patience was exhausted; and
fearful that he might suffer in the royal estimation by longer delay, he wrote
to the king for a lettre de cachet, in virtue of which the alchymist was
seized at the castle of La Palu, in the month of June 1711, and carried off to
be imprisoned in the Bastille.
The gendarmes were aware that their prisoner was supposed to be the
lucky possessor of the philosopher’s stone, and on the road they conspired
to rob and murder him. One of them pretended to be touched with pity for
the misfortunes of the philosopher, and offered to give him an opportunity
of escape whenever he could divert the attention of his companions. Delisle
was profuse in his thanks, little dreaming of the snare that was laid for him.
His treacherous friend gave notice of the success of the stratagem so far;
and it was agreed that Delisle should be allowed to struggle with and
overthrow one of them while the rest were at some distance. They were then
to pursue him and shoot him through the heart; and after robbing the corpse
of the philosopher’s stone, convey it to Paris on a cart, and tell M.
Desmarets that the prisoner had attempted to escape, and would have
succeeded if they had not fired after him and shot him through the body. At
a convenient place the scheme was executed. On a given signal from the
friendly gendarme, Delisle fled, while another gendarme took aim and shot
him through the thigh. Some peasants arriving at the instant, they were
prevented from killing him as they intended, and he was transported to
Paris, maimed and bleeding. He was thrown into a dungeon in the Bastille,
and obstinately tore away the bandages which the surgeons applied to his
wound. He never afterwards rose from his bed.
The Bishop of Senés visited him in prison, and promised him his liberty
if he would transmute a certain quantity of lead into gold before the king.
The unhappy man had no longer the means of carrying on the deception; he
had no gold, and no double-bottomed crucible or hollow wand to conceal it
in, even if he had. He would not, however, confess that he was an impostor;
but merely said he did not know how to make the powder of projection, but
had received a quantity from an Italian philosopher, and had used it all in
his various transmutations in Provence. He lingered for seven or eight
months in the Bastille, and died from the effects of his wound, in the forty-
first year of his age.
Albert Aluys.
This pretender to the philosopher’s stone was the son, by a former husband,
of the woman Aluys, with whom Delisle became acquainted at the
commencement of his career, in the cabaret by the road-side, and whom he
afterwards married. Delisle performed the part of a father towards him, and
thought he could shew no stronger proof of his regard, than by giving him
the necessary instructions to carry on the deception which had raised
himself to such a pitch of greatness. The young Aluys was an apt scholar,
and soon mastered all the jargon of the alchymists. He discoursed learnedly
upon projections, cimentations, sublimations, the elixir of life, and the
universal alkahest; and on the death of Delisle gave out that the secret of
that great adept had been communicated to him, and to him only. His
mother aided in the fraud, with the hope they might both fasten themselves,
in the true alchymical fashion, upon some rich dupe, who would entertain
them magnificently while the operation was in progress. The fate of Delisle
was no inducement for them to stop in France. The Provençals, it is true,
entertained as high an opinion as ever of his skill, and were well inclined to
believe the tales of the young adept on whom his mantle had fallen; but the
dungeons of the Bastille were yawning for their prey, and Aluys and his
mother decamped with all convenient expedition. They travelled about the
Continent for several years, sponging upon credulous rich men, and now
and then performing successful transmutations by the aid of double-
bottomed crucibles and the like. In the year 1726, Aluys, without his
mother, who appears to have died in the interval, was at Vienna, where he
introduced himself to the Duke de Richelieu, at that time ambassador from
the court of France. He completely deceived this nobleman; he turned lead
into gold (apparently) on several occasions, and even made the ambassador
himself turn an iron nail into a silver one. The duke afterwards boasted to
Lenglet du Fresnoy of his achievements as an alchymist, and regretted that
he had not been able to discover the secret of the precious powder by which
he performed them.
Aluys soon found that, although he might make a dupe of the Duke de
Richelieu, he could not get any money from him. On the contrary, the duke
expected all his pokers and fire-shovels to be made silver, and all his pewter
utensils gold; and thought the honour of his acquaintance was reward
sufficient for a roturier, who could not want wealth since he possessed so
invaluable a secret. Aluys, seeing that so much was expected of him, bade
adieu to his excellency, and proceeded to Bohemia accompanied by a pupil,
and by a young girl who had fallen in love with him in Vienna. Some
noblemen in Bohemia received him kindly, and entertained him at their
houses for months at a time. It was his usual practice to pretend that he
possessed only a few grains of his powder, with which he would operate in
any house where he intended to fix his quarters for the season. He would
make the proprietor the present of a piece of gold thus transmuted, and
promise him millions, if he could only be provided with leisure to gather his
lunaria major and minor on their mountain-tops, and board, lodging, and
loose cash for himself, his wife, and his pupil, in the interval.
He exhausted in this manner the patience of some dozen of people,
when, thinking that there was less danger for him in France under the young
king Louis XV. than under his old and morose predecessor, he returned to
Provence. On his arrival at Aix, he presented himself before M. le Bret, the
president of the province, a gentleman who was much attached to the
pursuits of alchymy, and had great hopes of being himself able to find the
philosopher’s stone. M. le Bret, contrary to his expectation, received him
very coolly, in consequence of some rumours that were spread abroad
respecting him; and told him to call upon him on the morrow. Aluys did not
like the tone of the voice, or the expression of the eye of the learned
president, as that functionary looked down upon him. Suspecting that all
was not right, he left Aix secretly the same evening, and proceeded to
Marseilles. But the police were on the watch for him; and he had not been
there four-and-twenty hours, before he was arrested on a charge of coining,
and thrown into prison.
As the proofs against him were too convincing to leave him much hope
of an acquittal, he planned an escape from durance. It so happened that the
gaoler had a pretty daughter, and Aluys soon discovered that she was
tender-hearted. He endeavoured to gain her in his favour, and succeeded.
The damsel, unaware that he was a married man, conceived and encouraged
a passion for him, and generously provided him with the means of escape.
After he had been nearly a year in prison he succeeded in getting free,
leaving the poor girl behind to learn that he was already married, and to
lament in solitude that she had given her heart to an ungrateful vagabond.
When he left Marseilles, he had not a shoe to his foot or a decent
garment to his back, but was provided with some money and clothes by his
wife in a neighbouring town. They then found their way to Brussels, and by
dint of excessive impudence, brought themselves into notice. He took a
house, fitted up a splendid laboratory, and gave out that he knew the secret
of transmutation. In vain did M. Percel, the brother-in-law of Lenglet du
Fresnoy, who resided in that city, expose his pretensions, and hold him up to
contempt as an ignorant impostor: the world believed him not. They took
the alchymist at his word, and besieged his doors to see and wonder at the
clever legerdemain by which he turned iron nails into gold and silver. A rich
greffier paid him a large sum of money that he might be instructed in the
art, and Aluys gave him several lessons on the most common principles of
chemistry. The greffier studied hard for a twelvemonth, and then discovered
that his master was a quack. He demanded his money back again; but Aluys
was not inclined to give it him, and the affair was brought before the civil
tribunal of the province. In the mean time, however, the greffier died
suddenly; poisoned, according to the popular rumour, by his debtor, to
avoid repayment. So great an outcry arose in the city, that Aluys, who may
have been innocent of the crime, was nevertheless afraid to remain and
brave it. He withdrew secretly in the night, and retired to Paris. Here all
trace of him is lost. He was never heard of again; but Lenglet du Fresnoy
conjectures that he ended his days in some obscure dungeon, into which he
was cast for coining or other malpractices.
The Count de St. Germain.
This adventurer was of a higher grade than the last, and played a
distinguished part at the court of Louis XV. He pretended to have
discovered the elixir of life, by means of which he could make any one live
for centuries; and allowed it to believed that his own age was upwards of
two thousand years. He entertained many of the opinions of the
Rosicrucians; boasted of his intercourse with sylphs and salamanders; and
of his power of drawing diamonds from the earth, and pearls from the sea,
by the force of his incantations. He did not lay claim to the merit of having
discovered the philosopher’s stone; but devoted so much of his time to the
operations of alchymy, that it was very generally believed, that if such a
thing as the philosopher’s stone had ever existed, or could be called into
existence, he was the man to succeed in finding it.
It has never yet been discovered what was his real name, or in what
country he was born. Some believed, from the Jewish cast of his handsome
countenance, that he was the “wandering Jew;” others asserted that he was
the issue of an Arabian princess, and that his father was a salamander; while
others, more reasonable, affirmed him to be the son of a Portuguese Jew
established at Bourdeaux. He first carried on his imposture in Germany,
where he made considerable sums by selling an elixir to arrest the progress
of old age. The Maréchal de Belle-Isle purchased a dose of it; and was so
captivated with the wit, learning, and good manners of the charlatan, and so
convinced of the justice of his most preposterous pretensions, that he
induced him to fix his residence in Paris. Under the marshal’s patronage, he
first appeared in the gay circles of that capital. Every one was delighted
with the mysterious stranger; who, at this period of his life, appears to have
been about seventy years of age, but did not look more than forty-five. His
easy assurance imposed upon most people. His reading was extensive, and
his memory extraordinarily tenacious of the slightest circumstances. His
pretension to have lived for so many centuries naturally exposed him to
some puzzling questions, as to the appearance, life, and conversation of the
great men of former days; but he was never at a loss for an answer. Many
who questioned him for the purpose of scoffing at him, refrained in
perplexity, quite bewildered by his presence of mind, his ready replies, and
his astonishing accuracy on every point mentioned in history. To increase
the mystery by which he was surrounded, he permitted no person to know
how he lived. He dressed in a style of the greatest magnificence; sported
valuable diamonds in his hat, on his fingers, and in his shoe-buckles; and
sometimes made the most costly presents to the ladies of the court. It was
suspected by many that he was a spy, in the pay of the English ministry; but
there never was a tittle of evidence to support the charge. The king looked
upon him with marked favour, was often closeted with him for hours
together, and would not suffer any body to speak disparagingly of him.
Voltaire constantly turned him into ridicule; and, in one of his letters to the
King of Prussia, mentions him as “un comte pour rire;” and states that he
pretended to have dined with the holy fathers at the Council of Trent!
In the Memoirs of Madame du Hausset, chamber-woman to Madame du
Pompadour, there are some amusing anecdotes of this personage. Very soon
after his arrival in Paris, he had the entrée of her dressing-room; a favour
only granted to the most powerful lords at the court of her royal lover.
Madame was fond of conversing with him; and, in her presence, he thought
fit to lower his pretensions very considerably; but he often allowed her to
believe that he had lived two or three hundred years at least. “One day,”
says Madame du Hausset, “madame said to him, in my presence, ‘What was
the personal appearance of Francis I.? He was a king I should have liked.’
‘He was, indeed, very captivating,’ replied St. Germain; and he proceeded
to describe his face and person, as that of a man whom he had accurately
observed. ‘It is a pity he was too ardent. I could have given him some good
advice, which would have saved him from all his misfortunes: but he would
not have followed it; for it seems as if a fatality attended princes, forcing
them to shut their ears to the wisest counsel.’ ‘Was his court very brilliant?’
inquired Madame du Pompadour. ‘Very,’ replied the count; ‘but those of his
grandsons surpassed it. In the time of Mary Stuart and Margaret of Valois, it
was a land of enchantment—a temple sacred to pleasures of every kind.’
Madame said, laughing, ‘You seem to have seen all this.’ ‘I have an
excellent memory,’ said he, ‘and have read the history of France with great
care. I sometimes amuse myself, not by making, but by letting, it be
believed that I lived in old times.’
“‘But you do not tell us your age,’ said Madame du Pompadour to him
on another occasion; ‘and yet you pretend you are very old. The Countess
de Gergy, who was, I believe, ambassadress at Vienna some fifty years ago,
says she saw you there, exactly the same as you now appear.’
“‘It is true, madame,’ replied St. Germain; ‘I knew Madame de Gergy
many years ago.’
“‘But, according to her account, you must be more than a hundred years
old?’
“‘That is not impossible,’ said he, laughing; ‘but it is much more
possible that the good lady is in her dotage.’
“‘You gave her an elixir, surprising for the effects it produced; for she
says, that during a length of time, she only appeared to be eighty-four; the
age at which she took it. Why don’t you give it to the king?’
“‘Oh, madam,’ he exclaimed, ‘the physicians would have me broken on
the wheel, were I to think of drugging his majesty.’”
When the world begins to believe extraordinary things of an individual,
there is no telling where its extravagance will stop. People, when once they
have taken the start, vie with each other who shall believe most. At this
period all Paris resounded with the wonderful adventures of the Count de
St. Germain; and a company of waggish young men tried the following
experiment upon its credulity: A clever mimic, who, on account of the
amusement he afforded, was admitted into good society, was taken by them,
dressed as the Count de St. Germain, into several houses in the Rue du
Marais. He imitated the count’s peculiarities admirably, and found his
auditors open-mouthed to believe any absurdity he chose to utter. No fiction
was too monstrous for their all-devouring credulity. He spoke of the
Saviour of the world in terms of the greatest familiarity; said he had supped
with him at the marriage in Canaan of Galilee, where the water was
miraculously turned into wine. In fact, he said he was an intimate friend of
his, and had often warned him to be less romantic and imprudent, or he
would finish his career miserably. This infamous blasphemy, strange to say,
found believers; and ere three days had elapsed, it was currently reported
that St. Germain was born soon after the deluge, and that he would never
die!
St. Germain himself was too much a man of the world to assert any
thing so monstrous; but he took no pains to contradict the story. In all his
conversations with persons of rank and education, he advanced his claims
modestly, and as if by mere inadvertency, and seldom pretended to a
longevity beyond three hundred years, except when he found he was in
company with persons who would believe any thing. He often spoke of
Henry VIII. as if he had known him intimately, and of the Emperor Charles
V. as if that monarch had delighted in his society. He would describe
conversations which took place with such an apparent truthfulness, and be
so exceedingly minute and particular as to the dress and appearance of the
individuals, and even the weather at the time and the furniture of the room,
that three persons out of four were generally inclined to credit him. He had
constant applications from rich old women for an elixir to make them
young again, and it would appear gained large sums in this manner. To
those whom he was pleased to call his friends he said his mode of living
and plan of diet were far superior to any elixir, and that any body might
attain a patriarchal age by refraining from drinking at meals, and very
sparingly at any other time. The Baron de Gleichen followed this system,
and took great quantities of senna leaves, expecting to live for two hundred
years. He died, however, at seventy-three. The Duchess de Choiseul was
desirous of following the same system, but the duke her husband in much
wrath forbade her to follow any system prescribed by a man who had so
equivocal a reputation as M. de St. Germain.
Madame du Hausset says she saw St. Germain and conversed with him
several times. He appeared to her to be about fifty years of age, was of the
middle size, and had fine expressive features. His dress was always simple,
but displayed much taste. He usually wore diamond rings of great value,
and his watch and snuff-box were ornamented with a profusion of precious
stones. One day, at Madame du Pompadour’s apartments, where the
principal courtiers were assembled, St. Germain made his appearance in
diamond knee and shoe buckles of so fine a water, that madame said she did
not think the king had any equal to them. He was entreated to pass into the
antechamber and undo them, which he did, and brought them to madame
for closer inspection. M. de Gontant, who was present, said their value
could not be less than two hundred thousand livres, or upwards of eight
thousand pounds sterling. The Baron de Gleichen, in his Memoirs, relates
that the count one day shewed him so many diamonds, that he thought he
saw before him all the treasures of Aladdin’s lamp; and adds, that he had
had great experience in precious stones, and was convinced that all those
possessed by the count were genuine. On another occasion St. Germain
shewed Madame du Pompadour a small box, containing topazes, emeralds,
and diamonds worth half a million of livres. He affected to despise all this
wealth, to make the world more easily believe that he could, like the
Rosicrucians, draw precious stones out of the earth by the magic of his
song. He gave away a great number of these jewels to the ladies of the
court; and Madame du Pompadour was so charmed with his generosity, that
she gave him a richly enamelled snuff-box as a token of her regard, on the
lid of which was beautifully painted a portrait of Socrates, or some other
Greek sage, to whom she compared him. He was not only lavish to the
mistresses, but to the maids. Madame du Hausset says: “The count came to
see Madame du Pompadour, who was very ill, and lay on the sofa. He
shewed her diamonds enough to furnish a king’s treasury. Madame sent for
me to see all those beautiful things. I looked at them with an air of the
utmost astonishment; but I made signs to her that I thought them all false.
The count felt for something in a pocket-book about twice as large as a
spectacle-case, and at length drew out two or three little paper packets,
which he unfolded, and exhibited a superb ruby. He threw on the table, with
a contemptuous air, a little cross of green and white stones. I looked at it,
and said it was not to be despised. I then put it on, and admired it greatly.
The count begged me to accept it; I refused. He urged me to take it. At
length he pressed so warmly, that madame, seeing it could not be worth
more than a thousand livres, made me a sign to accept it. I took the cross,
much pleased with the count’s politeness.”
How the adventurer obtained his wealth remains a secret. He could not
have made it all by the sale of his elixir vitæ in Germany, though no doubt
some portion of it was derived from that source. Voltaire positively says he
was in the pay of foreign governments; and in his letter to the King of
Prussia, dated the 5th of April 1758, says that he was initiated in all the
secrets of Choiseul, Kaunitz, and Pitt. Of what use he could be to any of
those ministers, and to Choiseul especially, is a mystery of mysteries.
There appears no doubt that he possessed the secret of removing spots
from diamonds; and in all probability he gained considerable sums by
buying at inferior prices such as had flaws in them, and afterwards
disposing of them at a profit of cent per cent. Madame du Hausset relates
the following anecdote on this particular: “The king,” says she, “ordered a
middling-sized diamond, which had a flaw in it, to be brought to him. After
having it weighed, his majesty said to the count, ‘The value of this diamond
as it is, and with the flaw in it, is six thousand livres; without the flaw, it
would be worth at least ten thousand. Will you undertake to make me a
gainer of four thousand livres?’ St. Germain examined it very attentively,
and said, ‘It is possible; it may be done. I will bring it you again in a
month.’ At the time appointed the count brought back the diamond without
a spot, and gave it to the king. It was wrapped in a cloth of amianthos,
which he took off. The king had it weighed immediately, and found it very
little diminished. His majesty then sent it to his jeweller by M. de Gontant,
without telling him of any thing that had passed. The jeweller gave nine
thousand six hundred livres for it. The king, however, sent for the diamond
back again, and said he would keep it as a curiosity. He could not overcome
his surprise, and said M. de St. Germain must be worth millions, especially
if he possessed the secret of making large diamonds out of small ones. The
count neither said that he could or could not, but positively asserted that he
knew how to make pearls grow, and give them the finest water. The king
paid him great attention, and so did Madame du Pompadour. M. du
Quesnoy once said that St. Germain was a quack, but the king reprimanded
him. In fact, his majesty appears infatuated by him, and sometimes talks of
him as if his descent were illustrious.”
St. Germain had a most amusing vagabond for a servant, to whom he
would often appeal for corroboration, when relating some wonderful event
that happened centuries before. The fellow, who was not without ability,
generally corroborated him in a most satisfactory manner. Upon one
occasion, his master was telling a party of ladies and gentlemen, at dinner,
some conversation he had had in Palestine with King Richard I. of England,
whom he described as a very particular friend of his. Signs of astonishment
and incredulity were visible on the faces of the company; upon which St.
Germain very coolly turned to his servant, who stood behind his chair, and
asked him if he had not spoken truth? “I really cannot say,” replied the man,
without moving a muscle; “you forget, sir, I have only been five hundred
years in your service!” “Ah! true,” said his master; “I remember now; it was
a little before your time!”
Occasionally, when with men whom he could not so easily dupe, he
gave utterance to the contempt with which he could scarcely avoid
regarding such gaping credulity. “These fools of Parisians,” said he to the
Baron de Gleichen, “believe me to be more than five hundred years old;
and, since they will have it so, I confirm them in their idea. Not but that I
really am much older than I appear.”
Many other stories are related of this strange impostor; but enough have
been quoted to shew his character and pretensions. It appears that he
endeavoured to find the philosopher’s stone; but never boasted of
possessing it. The Prince of Hesse Cassel, whom he had known years
before, in Germany, wrote urgent letters to him, entreating him to quit Paris,
and reside with him. St. Germain at last consented. Nothing further is
known of his career. There were no gossipping memoir-writers at the court
of Hesse Cassel to chronicle his sayings and doings. He died at Sleswig,
under the roof of his friend the prince, in the year 1784.
Cagliostro.
This famous charlatan, the friend and successor of St. Germain, ran a career
still more extraordinary. He was the arch-quack of his age, the last of the
great pretenders to the philosopher’s stone and the water of life, and during
his brief season of prosperity, one of the most conspicuous characters of
Europe.
His real name was Joseph Balsamo. He was born at Palermo, about the
year 1743, of humble parentage. He had the misfortune to lose his father
during his infancy, and his education was left in consequence to some
relatives of his mother, the latter being too poor to afford him any
instruction beyond mere reading and writing. He was sent in his fifteenth
year to a monastery, to be taught the elements of chemistry and physic; but
his temper was so impetuous, his indolence so invincible, and his vicious
habits so deeply rooted, that he made no progress. After remaining some
years, he left it with the character of an uninformed and dissipated young
man, with good natural talents but a bad disposition. When he became of
age, he abandoned himself to a life of riot and debauchery, and entered
himself, in fact, into that celebrated fraternity, known in France and Italy as
the “Knights of Industry,” and in England as the “Swell Mob.” He was far
from being an idle or unwilling member of the corps. The first way in
which he distinguished himself was by forging orders of admission to the
theatres. He afterwards robbed his uncle, and counterfeited a will. For acts
like these, he paid frequent compulsory visits to the prisons of Palermo.
Somehow or other he acquired the character of a sorcerer—of a man who
had failed in discovering the secrets of alchymy, and had sold his soul to the
devil for the gold which he was not able to make by means of
transmutation. He took no pains to disabuse the popular mind on this
particular, but rather encouraged the belief than otherwise. He at last made
use of it to cheat a silversmith named Marano, of about sixty ounces of
gold, and was in consequence obliged to leave Palermo. He persuaded this
man that he could shew him a treasure hidden in a cave, for which service
he was to receive the sixty ounces of gold, while the silversmith was to
have all the treasure for the mere trouble of digging it up. They went
together at midnight to an excavation in the vicinity of Palermo, where
Balsamo drew a magic circle, and invoked the devil to shew his treasures.
Suddenly there appeared half a dozen fellows, the accomplices of the
swindler, dressed to represent devils, with horns on their heads, claws to
their fingers, and vomiting apparently red and blue flame. They were armed
with pitchforks, with which they belaboured poor Marano till he was almost
dead, and robbed him of his sixty ounces of gold and all the valuables he
carried about his person. They then made off, accompanied by Balsamo,
leaving the unlucky silversmith to recover or die at his leisure. Nature chose
the former course; and soon after daylight he was restored to his senses,
smarting in body from his blows and in spirit for the deception of which he
had been the victim. His first impulse was to denounce Balsamo to the
magistrates of the town; but on further reflection he was afraid of the
ridicule that a full exposure of all the circumstances would draw upon him;
he therefore took the truly Italian resolution of being revenged on Balsamo,
by murdering him at the first convenient opportunity. Having given
utterance to this threat in the hearing of a friend of Balsamo, it was reported
to the latter, who immediately packed up his valuables and quitted Europe.
He chose Medina, in Arabia, for his future dwelling-place, and there
became acquainted with a Greek named Altotas, a man exceedingly well
versed in all the languages of the East, and an indefatigable student of
alchymy. He possessed an invaluable collection of Arabian manuscripts on
his favourite science, and studied them with such unremitting industry that
he found he had not sufficient time to attend to his crucibles and furnaces
without neglecting his books. He was looking about for an assistant when
Balsamo opportunely presented himself, and made so favourable an
impression that he was at once engaged in that capacity. But the relation of
master and servant did not long subsist between them; Balsamo was too
ambitious and too clever to play a secondary part, and within fifteen days of
their first acquaintance they were bound together as friends and partners.
Altotas, in the course of a long life devoted to alchymy, had stumbled upon
some valuable discoveries in chemistry, one of which was an ingredient for
improving the manufacture of flax, and imparting to goods of that material
a gloss and softness almost equal to silk. Balsamo gave him the good advice
to leave the philosopher’s stone for the present undiscovered, and make
gold out of their flax. The advice was taken, and they proceeded together to
Alexandria to trade, with a large stock of that article. They stayed forty days
in Alexandria, and gained a considerable sum by their venture. They
afterwards visited other cities in Egypt, and were equally successful. They
also visited Turkey, where they sold drugs and amulets. On their return to
Europe, they were driven by stress of weather into Malta, and were
hospitably received by Pinto, the Grand Master of the Knights, and a
famous alchymist. They worked in his laboratory for some months, and
tried hard to change a pewter platter into a silver one. Balsamo, having less
faith than his companions, was sooner wearied; and obtaining from his host
many letters of introduction to Rome and Naples, he left him and Altotas to
find the philosopher’s stone and transmute the pewter platter without him.
He had long since dropped the name of Balsamo on account of the
many ugly associations that clung to it; and during his travels had assumed
at least half a score others, with titles annexed to them. He called himself
sometimes the Chevalier de Fischio, the Marquis de Melissa, the Baron de
Belmonte, de Pelligrini, d’Anna, de Fenix, de Harat, but most commonly
the Count de Cagliostro. Under the latter title he entered Rome, and never
afterwards changed it. In this city he gave himself out as the restorer of the
Rosicrucian philosophy; said he could transmute all metals into gold; that
he could render himself invisible, cure all diseases, and administer an elixir
against old age and decay. His letters from the Grand Master Pinto procured
him an introduction into the best families. He made money rapidly by the
sale of his elixir vitæ; and, like other quacks, performed many remarkable
cures by inspiring his patients with the most complete faith and reliance
upon his powers; an advantage which the most impudent charlatans often
possess over the regular practitioner.
While thus in a fair way of making his fortune he became acquainted
with the beautiful Lorenza Feliciana, a young lady of noble birth, but
without fortune. Cagliostro soon discovered that she possessed
accomplishments that were invaluable. Besides her ravishing beauty, she
had the readiest wit, the most engaging manners, the most fertile
imagination, and the least principle of any of the maidens of Rome. She was
just the wife for Cagliostro, who proposed himself to her, and was accepted.
After their marriage, he instructed his fair Lorenza in all the secrets of his
calling—taught her pretty lips to invoke angels, and genii, sylphs,
salamanders, and undines, and, when need required, devils and evil spirits.
Lorenza was an apt scholar; she soon learned all the jargon of the
alchymists and all the spells of the enchanters; and thus accomplished the
hopeful pair set out on their travels, to levy contributions on the
superstitious and the credulous.
They first went to Sleswig on a visit to the Count de St. Germain, their
great predecessor in the art of making dupes, and were received by him in
the most magnificent manner. They no doubt fortified their minds for the
career they had chosen by the sage discourse of that worshipful gentleman;
for immediately after they left him, they began their operations. They
travelled for three or four years in Russia, Poland, and Germany,
transmuting metals, telling fortunes, raising spirits, and selling the elixir
vitæ wherever they went; but there is no record of their doings from whence
to draw a more particular detail. It was not until they made their appearance
in England in 1776, that the names of the Count and Countess di Cagliostro
began to acquire a European reputation. They arrived in London in the July
of that year, possessed of property, in plate, jewels, and specie, to the
amount of about three thousand pounds. They hired apartments in
Whitcombe Street, and lived for some months quietly. In the same house
there lodged a Portuguese woman, named Blavary, who, being in
necessitous circumstances, was engaged by the count as interpreter. She
was constantly admitted into his laboratory, where he spent much of his
time in search of the philosopher’s stone. She spread abroad the fame of her
entertainer in return for his hospitality, and laboured hard to impress every
body with as full a belief in his extraordinary powers as she felt herself; but
as a female interpreter of the rank and appearance of Madame Blavary did
not exactly correspond with the count’s notions either of dignity or
decorum, he hired a person named Vitellini, a teacher of languages, to act in
that capacity. Vitellini was a desperate gambler, a man who had tried almost
every resource to repair his ruined fortunes, including among the rest the
search for the philosopher’s stone. Immediately that he saw the count’s
operations, he was convinced that the great secret was his, and that the
golden gates of the palace of fortune were open to let him in. With still
more enthusiasm than Madame Blavary, he held forth to his acquaintance,
and in all public places, that the count was an extraordinary man, a true
adept, whose fortune was immense, and who could transmute into pure and
solid gold as much lead, iron, and copper as he pleased. The consequence
was, that the house of Cagliostro was besieged by crowds of the idle, the
credulous, and the avaricious, all eager to obtain a sight of the
“philosopher,” or to share in the boundless wealth which he could call into
existence.
Unfortunately for Cagliostro, he had fallen into evil hands. Instead of
duping the people of England, as he might have done, he became himself
the victim of a gang of swindlers, who, with the fullest reliance on his
occult powers, only sought to make money of him. Vitellini introduced to
him a ruined gambler like himself, named Scot, whom he represented as a
Scottish nobleman, attracted to London solely by his desire to see and
converse with the extraordinary man whose fame had spread to the distant
mountains of the north. Cagliostro received him with great kindness and
cordiality; and “Lord” Scot thereupon introduced a woman named Fry as
Lady Scot, who was to act as chaperone to the Countess di Cagliostro, and
make her acquainted with all the noble families of Britain. Thus things went
swimmingly. “His lordship,” whose effects had not arrived from Scotland,
and who had no banker in London, borrowed two hundred pounds of the
count. They were lent without scruple, so flattered was Cagliostro by the
attentions they paid him, the respect, nay veneration they pretended to feel
for him, and the complete deference with which they listened to every word
that fell from his lips.
Superstitious like all desperate gamesters, Scot had often tried magical
and cabalistic numbers, in the hope of discovering lucky numbers in the
lottery or at the roulette-tables. He had in his possession a cabalistic
manuscript, containing various arithmetical combinations of the kind,
which he submitted to Cagliostro, with an urgent request that he would
select a number. Cagliostro took the manuscript and studied it, but, as he
himself informs us, with no confidence in its truth. He, however, predicted
twenty as the successful number for the 6th of November following. Scot
ventured a small sum upon this number out of the two hundred pounds he
had borrowed, and won. Cagliostro, incited by this success, prognosticated
number twenty-five for the next drawing. Scot tried again, and won a
hundred guineas. The numbers fifty-five and fifty-seven were announced
with equal success for the 18th of the same month, to the no small
astonishment and delight of Cagliostro, who thereupon resolved to try
fortune for himself, and not for others. To all the entreaties of Scot and his
lady that he would predict more numbers for them, he turned a deaf ear,
even while he still thought him a lord and a man of honour; but when he
discovered that he was a mere swindler, and the pretended Lady Scot an
artful woman of the town, he closed his door upon them and on all their
gang.
Having complete faith in the supernatural powers of the count, they
were in the deepest distress at having lost his countenance. They tried by
every means their ingenuity could suggest to propitiate him again. They
implored, they threatened, and endeavoured to bribe him; but all was vain.
Cagliostro would neither see nor correspond with them. In the mean time
they lived extravagantly, and in the hope of future, exhausted all their
present gains. They were reduced to the last extremity, when Miss Fry
obtained access to the countess, and received a guinea from her on the
representation that she was starving. Miss Fry, not contented with this,
begged her to intercede with her husband, that for the last time he would
point out a lucky number in the lottery. The countess promised to exert her
influence; and Cagliostro, thus entreated, named the number eight, at the
same time reiterating his determination to have no more to do with any of
them. By an extraordinary hazard, which filled Cagliostro with surprise and
pleasure, number eight was the greatest prize in the lottery. Miss Fry and
her associates cleared fifteen hundred guineas by the adventure, and became
more than ever convinced of the occult powers of Cagliostro, and
strengthened in their determination never to quit him until they had made
their fortunes. Out of the proceeds Miss Fry bought a handsome necklace at
a pawnbroker’s for ninety guineas. She then ordered a richly-chased gold
box, having two compartments, to be made at a jeweller’s, and putting the
necklace in the one, filled the other with a fine aromatic snuff. She then
sought another interview with Madame di Cagliostro, and urged her to
accept the box as a small token of her esteem and gratitude, without
mentioning the valuable necklace that was concealed in it. Madame di
Cagliostro accepted the present, and was from that hour exposed to the most
incessant persecution from all the confederates—Blavary, Vitellini, and the
pretended Lord and Lady Scot. They flattered themselves they had regained
their lost footing in the house, and came day after day to know lucky
numbers in the lottery, sometimes forcing themselves up the stairs, and into
the count’s laboratory, in spite of the efforts of the servants to prevent them.
Cagliostro, exasperated at their pertinacity, threatened to call in the
assistance of the magistrates, and taking Miss Fry by the shoulders, pushed
her into the street.
From that time may be dated the misfortunes of Cagliostro. Miss Fry, at
the instigation of her paramour, determined on vengeance. Her first act was
to swear a debt of two hundred pounds against Cagliostro, and to cause him
to be arrested for that sum. While he was in custody in a sponging-house,
Scot, accompanied by a low attorney, broke into his laboratory, and carried
off a small box, containing, as they believed, the powder of transmutation,
and a number of cabalistic manuscripts and treatises upon alchymy. They
also brought an action against him for the recovery of the necklace; and
Miss Fry accused both him and his countess of sorcery and witchcraft, and
of foretelling numbers in the lottery by the aid of the Devil. This latter
charge was actually heard before Mr. Justice Miller. The action of trover for
the necklace was tried before the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
who recommended the parties to submit to arbitration. In the mean time
Cagliostro remained in prison for several weeks, till having procured bail,
he was liberated. He was soon after waited upon by an attorney named
Reynolds, also deep in the plot, who offered to compromise all the actions
upon certain conditions. Scot, who had accompanied him, concealed
himself behind the door, and suddenly rushing out, presented a pistol at the
heart of Cagliostro, swearing he would shoot him instantly, if he would not
tell him truly the art of predicting lucky numbers and of transmuting metals.
Reynolds pretending to be very angry, disarmed his accomplice, and
entreated the count to satisfy them by fair means, and disclose his secrets,
promising that if he would do so, they would discharge all the actions, and
offer him no further molestation. Cagliostro replied, that threats and
entreaties were alike useless; that he knew no secrets; and that the powder
of transmutation of which they had robbed him, was of no value to any
body but himself. He offered, however, if they would discharge the actions,
and return the powder and the manuscripts, to forgive them all the money
they had swindled him out of. These conditions were refused; and Scot and
Reynolds departed, swearing vengeance against him.
Cagliostro appears to have been quite ignorant of the forms of law in
England, and to have been without a friend to advise him as to the best
course he should pursue. While he was conversing with his countess on the
difficulties that beset them, one of his bail called, and invited him to ride in
a hackney coach to the house of a person who would see him righted.
Cagliostro consented, and was driven to the King’s Bench prison, where his
friend left him. He did not discover for several hours that he was a prisoner,
or, in fact, understand the process of being surrendered by one’s bail.
He regained his liberty in a few weeks; and the arbitrators between him
and Miss Fry made their award against him. He was ordered to pay the two
hundred pounds she had sworn against him, and to restore the necklace and
gold box which had been presented to the countess. Cagliostro was so
disgusted, that he determined to quit England. His pretensions, besides, had
been unmercifully exposed by a Frenchman, named Morande, the editor of
the Courrier de l’Europe, published in London. To add to his distress, he
was recognised in Westminster Hall as Joseph Balsamo, the swindler of
Palermo. Such a complication of disgrace was not to be borne. He and his
countess packed up their small effects, and left England with no more than
fifty pounds, out of the three thousand they had brought with them.
They first proceeded to Brussels, where fortune was more auspicious.
They sold considerable quantities of the elixir of life, performed many
cures, and recruited their finances. They then took their course through
Germany to Russia, and always with the same success. Gold flowed into
their coffers faster than they could count it. They quite forgot all the woes
they had endured in England, and learned to be more circumspect in the
choice of their acquaintance.
In the year 1780, they made their appearance in Strasbourg. Their fame
had reached that city before them. They took a magnificent hotel, and
invited all the principal persons of the place to their table. Their wealth
appeared to be boundless, and their hospitality equal to it. Both the count
and countess acted as physicians, and gave money, advice, and medicine to
all the necessitous and suffering of the town. Many of the cures they
performed astonished those regular practitioners who did not make
sufficient allowance for the wonderful influence of imagination in certain
cases. The countess, who at this time was not more than five-and-twenty,
and all radiant with grace, beauty, and cheerfulness, spoke openly of her
eldest son as a fine young man of eight-and-twenty, who had been for some
years a captain in the Dutch service. The trick succeeded to admiration. All
the ugly old women in Strasbourg, and for miles around, thronged the
saloon of the countess to purchase the liquid which was to make them as
blooming as their daughters; the young women came in equal abundance,
that they might preserve their charms, and when twice as old as Ninon de
l’Enclos, be more captivating than she; while men were not wanting who
were fools enough to imagine that they might keep off the inevitable stroke
of the grim foe by a few drops of the same incomparable elixir. The
countess, sooth to say, looked like an incarnation of immortal loveliness, a
very goddess of youth and beauty; and it is possible that the crowds of
young men and old, who at all convenient seasons haunted the perfumed
chambers of this enchantress, were attracted less by their belief in her occult
powers than from admiration of her languishing bright eyes and sparkling
conversation. But amid all the incense that was offered at her shrine,
Madame di Cagliostro was ever faithful to her spouse. She encouraged
hopes, it is true, but she never realised them; she excited admiration, yet
kept it within bounds; and made men her slaves, without ever granting a
favour of which the vainest might boast.
In this city they made the acquaintance of many eminent persons, and,
among others, of the Cardinal Prince de Rohan, who was destined
afterwards to exercise so untoward an influence over their fate. The
cardinal, who seems to have had great faith in him as a philosopher,
persuaded him to visit Paris in his company, which he did, but remained
only thirteen days. He preferred the society of Strasbourg, and returned
thither with the intention of fixing his residence far from the capital. But he
soon found that the first excitement of his arrival had passed away. People
began to reason with themselves, and to be ashamed of their own
admiration. The populace, among whom he had lavished his charity with a
bountiful hand, accused him of being the Antichrist, the Wandering Jew, the
man of fourteen hundred years of age, a demon in human shape, sent to lure
the ignorant to their destruction; while the more opulent and better informed
called him a spy in the pay of foreign governments, an agent of the police, a
swindler, and a man of evil life. The outcry grew at last so strong, that he
deemed it prudent to try his fortune elsewhere.
He went first to Naples, but that city was too near Palermo; he dreaded
recognition from some of his early friends, and, after a short stay, returned
to France. He chose Bourdeaux as his next dwelling-place, and created as
great a sensation there as he had done in Strasbourg. He announced himself
as the founder of a new school of medicine and philosophy, boasted of his
ability to cure all diseases, and invited the poor and suffering to visit him,
and he would relieve the distress of the one class, and cure the ailings of the
other. All day long the street opposite his magnificent hotel was crowded by
the populace; the halt and the blind, women with sick babes in their arms,
and persons suffering under every species of human infirmity, flocked to
this wonderful doctor. The relief he afforded in money more than
counterbalanced the failure of his nostrums; and the affluence of people
from all the surrounding country became so great, that the jurats of the city
granted him a military guard, to be stationed day and night before his door,
to keep order. The anticipations of Cagliostro were realised. The rich were
struck with admiration of his charity and benevolence, and impressed with a
full conviction of his marvellous powers. The sale of the elixir went on
admirably. His saloons were thronged with wealthy dupes who came to
purchase immortality. Beauty, that would endure for centuries, was the
attraction for the fair sex; health and strength for the same period were the
baits held out to the other. His charming countess, in the meantime, brought
grist to the mill by telling fortunes and casting nativities, or granting
attendant sylphs to any ladies who would pay sufficiently for their services.
What was still better, as tending to keep up the credit of her husband, she
gave the most magnificent parties in Bourdeaux.
But as at Strasbourg, the popular delusion lasted for a few months only,
and burned itself out; Cagliostro forgot, in the intoxication of success, that
there was a limit to quackery which once passed inspired distrust. When he
pretended to call spirits from the tomb, people became incredulous. He was
accused of being an enemy to religion, of denying Christ, and of being the
Wandering Jew. He despised these rumours as long as they were confined to
a few; but when they spread over the town, when he received no more fees,
when his parties were abandoned, and his acquaintance turned away when
they met him in the street, he thought it high time to shift his quarters.
HOUSE OF CAGLIOSTRO, PARIS.
He was by this time wearied of the provinces, and turned his thoughts to
the capital. On his arrival he announced himself as the restorer of Egyptian
Freemasonry, and the founder of a new philosophy. He immediately made
his way into the best society by means of his friend the Cardinal de Rohan.
His success as a magician was quite extraordinary: the most considerable
persons of the time visited him. He boasted of being able, like the
Rosicrucians, to converse with the elementary spirits; to invoke the mighty
dead from the grave, to transmute metals, and to discover occult things by
means of the special protection of God towards him. Like Dr. Dee, he
summoned the angels to reveal the future; and they appeared and conversed
with him in crystals and under glass bells.48 “There was hardly,” says the
Biographie des Contemporains, “a fine lady in Paris who would not sup
with the shade of Lucretius in the apartments of Cagliostro; a military
officer who would not discuss the art of war with Cæsar, Hannibal, or
Alexander; or an advocate or counsellor who would not argue legal points
with the ghost of Cicero.” These interviews with the departed were very
expensive; for, as Cagliostro said, the dead would not rise for nothing. The
countess, as usual, exercised all her ingenuity to support her husband’s
credit. She was a great favourite with her own sex, to many a delighted and
wondering auditory of whom she detailed the marvellous powers of
Cagliostro. She said he could render himself invisible, traverse the world
with the rapidity of thought, and be in several places at the same time.49
He had not been long at Paris before he became involved in the
celebrated affair of the queen’s necklace. His friend the Cardinal de Rohan,
enamoured of the charms of Marie Antoinette, was in sore distress at her
coldness, and the displeasure she had so often manifested against him.
There was at that time a lady named La Motte in the service of the queen, of
whom the cardinal was foolish enough to make a confidant. Madame de la
Motte, in return, endeavoured to make a tool of the cardinal, and succeeded
but too well in her projects. In her capacity of chamber-woman, or lady of
honour to the queen, she was present at an interview between her majesty
and M. Boehmer, a wealthy jeweller of Paris, when the latter offered for
sale a magnificent diamond necklace, valued at 1,600,000 francs, or about
64,000l. sterling. The queen admired it greatly, but dismissed the jeweller,
with the expression of her regret that she was too poor to purchase it.
Madame de la Motte formed a plan to get this costly ornament into her own
possession, and determined to make the Cardinal de Rohan the instrument
by which to effect it. She therefore sought an interview with him, and
pretending to sympathise in his grief for the queen’s displeasure, told him
she knew a way by which he might be restored to favour. She then
mentioned the necklace, and the sorrow of the queen that she could not
afford to buy it. The cardinal, who was as wealthy as he was foolish,
immediately offered to purchase the necklace, and make a present of it to
the queen. Madame de la Motte told him by no means to do so, as he would
thereby offend her majesty. His plan would be to induce the jeweller to give
her majesty credit, and accept her promissory note for the amount at a
certain date, to be hereafter agreed upon. The cardinal readily agreed to the
proposal, and instructed the jeweller to draw up an agreement, and he
would procure the queen’s signature. He placed this in the hands of
Madame de la Motte, who returned it shortly afterwards, with the words,
“Bon, bon—approuvé—Marie Antoinette,” written in the margin. She told
him at the same time that the queen was highly pleased with his conduct in
the matter, and would appoint a meeting with him in the gardens of
Versailles, when she would present him with a flower, as a token of her
regard. The cardinal shewed the forged document to the jeweller, obtained
the necklace, and delivered it into the hands of Madame de la Motte. So far
all was well. Her next object was to satisfy the cardinal, who awaited
impatiently the promised interview with his royal mistress. There was at
that time in Paris a young woman named D’Oliva, noted for her
resemblance to the queen; and Madame de la Motte, on the promise of a
handsome reward, found no difficulty in persuading her to personate Marie
Antoinette, and meet the Cardinal de Rohan at the evening twilight in the
gardens of Versailles. The meeting took place accordingly. The cardinal was
deceived by the uncertain light, the great resemblance of the counterfeit,
and his own hopes; and having received the flower from Mademoiselle
D’Oliva, went home with a lighter heart than had beat in his bosom for
many a day.50
In the course of time the forgery of the queen’s signature was
discovered. Boehmer the jeweller immediately named the Cardinal de
Rohan and Madame de la Motte as the persons with whom he had
negotiated, and they were both arrested and thrown into the Bastille. La
Motte was subjected to a rigorous examination, and the disclosures she
made implicating Cagliostro, he was seized, along with his wife, and also
sent to the Bastille. A story involving so much scandal necessarily excited
great curiosity. Nothing was to be heard of in Paris but the queen’s
necklace, with surmises of the guilt or innocence of the several parties
implicated. The husband of Madame de la Motte escaped to England, and in
the opinion of many took the necklace with him, and there disposed of it to
different jewellers in small quantities at a time. But Madame de la Motte
insisted that she had entrusted it to Cagliostro, who had seized and taken it
to pieces, to “swell the treasures of his immense unequalled fortune.” She
spoke of him as “an empiric, a mean alchymist, a dreamer on the
philosopher’s stone, a false prophet, a profaner of the true worship, the self-
dubbed Count Cagliostro!” She further said that he originally conceived the
project of ruining the Cardinal de Rohan; that he persuaded her, by the
exercise of some magic influence over her mind, to aid and abet the
scheme; and that he was a robber, a swindler, and a sorcerer!
After all the accused parties had remained for upwards of six months in
the Bastille, the trial commenced. The depositions of the witnesses having
been heard, Cagliostro, as the principal culprit, was first called upon for his
defence. He was listened to with the most breathless attention. He put
himself into a theatrical attitude, and thus began:—“I am oppressed!—I am
accused!—I am calumniated! Have I deserved this fate? I descend into my
conscience, and I there find the peace that men refuse me! I have travelled a
great deal—I am known over all Europe, and a great part of Asia and
Africa. I have every where shewn myself the friend of my fellow-creatures.
My knowledge, my time, my fortune have ever been employed in the relief
of distress. I have studied and practised medicine; but I have never
degraded that most noble and most consoling of arts by mercenary
speculations of any kind. Though always giving, and never receiving, I have
preserved my independence. I have even carried my delicacy so far as to
refuse the favours of kings. I have given gratuitously my remedies and my
advice to the rich; the poor have received from me both remedies and
money. I have never contracted any debts, and my manners are pure and
uncorrupted.” After much more self-laudation of the same kind, he went on
to complain of the great hardships he had endured in being separated for so
many months from his innocent and loving wife, who, as he was given to
understand, had been detained in the Bastille, and perhaps chained in an
unwholesome dungeon. He denied unequivocally that he had the necklace,
or that he had ever seen it; and to silence the rumours and accusations
against him, which his own secrecy with regard to the events of his life had
perhaps originated, he expressed himself ready to satisfy the curiosity of the
public, and to give a plain and full account of his career. He then told a
romantic and incredible tale, which imposed upon no one. He said he
neither knew the place of his birth nor the name of his parents, but that he
spent his infancy in Medina, in Arabia, and was brought up under the name
of Acharat. He lived in the palace of the Great Muphti in that city, and
always had three servants to wait upon him, besides his preceptor, named
Althotas. This Althotas was very fond of him, and told him that his father
and mother, who were Christians and nobles, died when he was three
months old, and left him in the care of the Muphti. He could never, he said,
ascertain their names, for whenever he asked Althotas the question, he was
told that it would be dangerous for him to know. Some incautious
expressions dropped by his preceptor gave him reason to think they were
from Malta. At the age of twelve he began his travels, and learned the
various languages of the East. He remained three years in Mecca, where the
cherif, or governor, shewed him so much kindness, and spoke to him so
tenderly and affectionately, that he sometimes thought that personage was
his father. He quitted this good man with tears in his eyes, and never saw
him afterwards; but he was convinced that he was, even at that moment,
indebted to his care for all the advantages he enjoyed. Whenever he arrived
in any city, either of Europe or Asia, he found an account opened for him at
the principal bankers’ or merchants’. He could draw upon them to the
amount of thousands and hundreds of thousands; and no questions were
ever asked beyond his name. He had only to mention the word ‘Acharat,’
and all his wants were supplied. He firmly believed that the Cherif of
Mecca was the friend to whom all was owing. This was the secret of his
wealth, and he had no occasion to resort to swindling for a livelihood. It
was not worth his while to steal a diamond necklace when he had wealth
enough to purchase as many as he pleased, and more magnificent ones than
had ever been worn by a queen of France. As to the other charges brought
against him by Madame de la Motte, he had but a short answer to give. She
had called him an empiric. He was not unfamiliar with the word. If it meant
a man who, without being a physician, had some knowledge of medicine,
and took no fees—who cured both rich and poor, and took no money from
either, he confessed that he was such a man, that he was an empiric. She
had also called him a mean alchymist. Whether he were an alchymist or not,
the epithet mean could only be applied to those who begged and cringed,
and he had never done either. As regarded his being a dreamer about the
philosopher’s stone, whatever his opinions upon that subject might be, he
had been silent, and had never troubled the public with his dreams. Then, as
to his being a false prophet, he had not always been so; for he had
prophesied to the Cardinal de Rohan, that Madame de la Motte would prove
a dangerous woman, and the result had verified the prediction. He denied
that he was a profaner of the true worship, or that he had ever striven to
bring religion into contempt; on the contrary, he respected every man’s
religion, and never meddled with it. He also denied that he was a
Rosicrucian, or that he had ever pretended to be three hundred years of age,
or to have had one man in his service for a hundred and fifty years. In
conclusion, he said every statement that Madame de la Motte had made
regarding him was false, and that she was mentiris impudentissime, which
two words he begged her counsel to translate for her, as it was not polite to
tell her so in French.
Such was the substance of his extraordinary answer to the charges
against him; an answer which convinced those who were before doubtful
that he was one of the most impudent impostors that had ever run the career
of deception. Counsel were then heard on behalf of the Cardinal de Rohan
and Madame de la Motte. It appearing clearly that the cardinal was himself
the dupe of a vile conspiracy, and there being no evidence against
Cagliostro, they were both acquitted. Madame de la Motte was found guilty,
and sentenced to be publicly whipped, and branded with a hot iron on the
back.
Cagliostro and his wife were then discharged from custody. On applying
to the officers of the Bastille for the papers and effects which had been
seized at his lodgings, he found that many of them had been abstracted. He
thereupon brought an action against them for the recovery of his Mss. and a
small portion of the powder of transmutation. Before the affair could be
decided, he received orders to quit Paris within four-and-twenty hours.
Fearing that if he were once more enclosed in the dungeons of the Bastille
he should never see daylight again, he took his departure immediately and
proceeded to England. On his arrival in London he made the acquaintance
of the notorious Lord George Gordon, who espoused his cause warmly, and
inserted a letter in the public papers, animadverting upon the conduct of the
Queen of France in the affair of the necklace, and asserting that she was
really the guilty party. For this letter Lord George was exposed to a
prosecution at the instance of the French ambassador, found guilty of libel,
and sentenced to fine and a long imprisonment.
Cagliostro and the countess afterwards travelled in Italy, where they
were arrested by the Papal government in 1789, and condemned to death.
The charges against him were, that he was a freemason, a heretic, and a
sorcerer. This unjustifiable sentence was afterwards commuted into one of
perpetual imprisonment in the Castle of St. Angelo. His wife was allowed to
escape severer punishment by immuring herself in a nunnery. Cagliostro did
not long survive. The loss of liberty preyed upon his mind—accumulated
misfortunes had injured his health and broken his spirit, and he died early in
1790. His fate may have been no better than he deserved, but it is
impossible not to feel that his sentence for the crimes assigned was utterly
disgraceful to the government that pronounced it.
Present State of Alchymy.
We have now finished the list of the persons who have most distinguished
themselves in this unprofitable pursuit. Among them are men of all ranks,
characters, and conditions: the truth-seeking but erring philosopher; the
ambitious prince and the needy noble, who have believed in it; as well as
the designing charlatan, who has not believed in it, but has merely made the
pretension to it the means of cheating his fellows, and living upon their
credulity. One or more of all these classes will be found in the foregoing
pages. It will be seen, from the record of their lives, that the delusion was
not altogether without its uses. Men, in striving to gain too much, do not
always overreach themselves; if they cannot arrive at the inaccessible
mountain-top, they may perhaps get half way towards it, and pick up some
scraps of wisdom and knowledge on the road. The useful science of
chemistry is not a little indebted to its spurious brother of alchymy. Many
valuable discoveries have been made in that search for the impossible,
which might otherwise have been hidden for centuries yet to come. Roger
Bacon, in searching for the philosopher’s stone, discovered gunpowder, a
still more extraordinary substance. Van Helmont, in the same pursuit,
discovered the properties of gas; Geber made discoveries in chemistry
which were equally important; and Paracelsus, amidst his perpetual visions
of the transmutation of metals, found that mercury was a remedy for one of
the most odious and excruciating of all the diseases that afflict humanity.
In our day little mention is made in Europe of any new devotees of the
science, though it is affirmed that one or two of our most illustrious men of
science do not admit the pursuit to be so absurd and vain as it has been
commonly considered in recent times. The belief in witchcraft, which is
scarcely more absurd, still lingers in the popular mind; but few are so
credulous as to believe that any elixir could make man live for centuries, or
turn all our iron and pewter into gold. Alchymy, in Europe, may be said to
be almost wholly exploded; but in the East it still flourishes in as great
repute as ever. Recent travellers make constant mention of it, especially in
China, Hindostan, Persia, Tartary, Egypt, and Arabia.
Modern Prophecies
Table of Contents
An epidemic terror of the end of the world has several times spread over the
nations. The most remarkable was that which seized Christendom about the
middle of the tenth century. Numbers of fanatics appeared in France,
Germany, and Italy at that time, preaching that the thousand years
prophesied in the Apocalypse as the term of the world’s duration were about
to expire, and that the Son of Man would appear in the clouds to judge the
godly and the ungodly. The delusion appears to have been discouraged by
the Church, but it nevertheless spread rapidly among the people.51
The scene of the last judgment was expected to be at Jerusalem. In the
year 999, the number of pilgrims proceeding eastward, to await the coming
of the Lord in that city, was so great that they were compared to a
desolating army. Most of them sold their goods and possessions before they
quitted Europe, and lived upon the proceeds in the Holy Land. Buildings of
every sort were suffered to fall into ruins. It was thought useless to repair
them, when the end of the world was so near. Many noble edifices were
deliberately pulled down. Even churches, usually so well maintained,
shared the general neglect. Knights, citizens, and serfs, travelled eastwards
in company, taking with them their wives and children, singing psalms as
they went, and looking with fearful eyes upon the sky, which they expected
each minute to open, to let the Son of God descend in his glory.
During the thousandth year the number of pilgrims increased. Most of
them were smitten with terror as with a plague. Every phenomenon of
nature filled them with alarm. A thunder-storm sent them all upon their
knees in mid-march. It was the opinion that thunder was the voice of God,
announcing the day of judgment. Numbers expected the earth to open, and
give up its dead at the sound. Every meteor in the sky seen at Jerusalem
brought the whole Christian population into the streets to weep and pray.
The pilgrims on the road were in the same alarm:
“Lorsque, pendant la nuit, un globe de lumière
S’échappa quelquefois de la voûte de cieux,
Et traça dans sa chûte un long sillon de feux,
La troupe suspendit sa marche solitaire.”52
Fanatic preachers kept up the flame of terror. Every shooting star
furnished occasion for a sermon, in which the sublimity of the approaching
judgment was the principal topic.
The appearance of comets has been often thought to foretell the speedy
dissolution of this world. Part of this belief still exists; but the comet is no
longer looked upon as the sign, but the agent of destruction. So lately as in
the year 1832 the greatest alarm spread over the continent of Europe,
especially in Germany, lest the comet, whose appearance was then foretold
by astronomers, should destroy the earth. The danger of our globe was
gravely discussed. Many persons refrained from undertaking or concluding
any business during that year, in consequence solely of their apprehension
that this terrible comet would dash us and our world to atoms.
During seasons of great pestilence, men have often believed the
prophecies of crazed fanatics, that the end of the world was come. Credulity
is always greatest in times of calamity. During the great plague, which
ravaged all Europe between the years 1345 and 1350, it was generally
considered that the end of the world was at hand. Pretended prophets were
to be found in all the principal cities of Germany, France, and Italy,
predicting that within ten years the trump of the archangel would sound,
and the Saviour appear in the clouds to call the earth to judgment.
No little consternation was created in London in 1736 by the prophecy
of the famous Whiston, that the world would be destroyed in that year, on
the 13th of October. Crowds of people went out on the appointed day to
Islington, Hampstead, and the fields intervening, to see the destruction of
London, which was to be the “beginning of the end.” A satirical account of
this folly is given in Swift’s Miscellanies, vol. iii., entitled A true and
faithful Narrative of what passed in London on a Rumour of the Day of
Judgment. An authentic narrative of this delusion would be interesting; but
this solemn witticism of Pope and Gay is not to be depended upon.
In the year 1761 the citizens of London were alarmed by two shocks of
an earthquake, and the prophecy of a third, which was to destroy them
altogether. The first shock was felt on the 8th of February, and threw down
several chimneys in the neighbourhood of Limehouse and Poplar; the
second happened on the 8th of March, and was chiefly felt in the north of
London, and towards Hampstead and Highgate. It soon became the subject
of general remark, that there was exactly an interval of a month between the
shocks; and a crack-brained fellow, named Bell, a soldier in the Life
Guards, was so impressed with the idea that there would be a third in
another month, that he lost his senses altogether, and ran about the streets
predicting the destruction of London on the 5th of April. Most people
thought that the first would have been a more appropriate day; but there
were not wanting thousands who confidently believed the prediction, and
took measures to transport themselves and families from the scene of the
impending calamity. As the awful day approached, the excitement became
intense, and great numbers of credulous people resorted to all the villages
within a circuit of twenty miles, awaiting the doom of London. Islington,
Highgate, Hampstead, Harrow, and Blackheath, were crowded with panic-
stricken fugitives, who paid exorbitant prices for accommodation to the
housekeepers of these secure retreats. Such as could not afford to pay for
lodgings at any of those places, remained in London until two or three days
before the time, and then encamped in the surrounding fields, awaiting the
tremendous shock which was to lay their high city all level with the dust. As
happened during a similar panic in the time of Henry VIII., the fear became
contagious, and hundreds who had laughed at the prediction a week before,
packed up their goods, when they saw others doing so, and hastened away.
The river was thought to be a place of great security, and all the merchant-
vessels in the port were filled with people, who passed the night between
the 4th and 5th on board, expecting every instant to see St. Paul’s totter, and
the towers of Westminster Abbey rock in the wind and fall amid a cloud of
dust. The greater part of the fugitives returned on the following day,
convinced that the prophet was a false one; but many judged it more
prudent to allow a week to elapse before they trusted their dear limbs in
London. Bell lost all credit in a short time, and was looked upon even by
the most credulous as a mere madman. He tried some other prophecies, but
nobody was deceived by them; and, in a few months afterwards, he was
confined in a lunatic asylum.
A panic terror of the end of the world seized the good people of Leeds
and its neighbourhood in the year 1806. It arose from the following
circumstances. A hen, in a village close by, laid eggs, on which were
inscribed the words, “Christ is coming.” Great numbers visited the spot, and
examined these wondrous eggs, convinced that the day of judgment was
near at hand. Like sailors in a storm, expecting every instant to go to the
bottom, the believers suddenly became religious, prayed violently, and
flattered themselves that they repented them of their evil courses. But a
plain tale soon put them down, and quenched their religion entirely. Some
gentlemen, hearing of the matter, went one fine morning, and caught the
poor hen in the act of laying one of her miraculous eggs. They soon
ascertained beyond doubt that the egg had been inscribed with some
corrosive ink, and cruelly forced up again into the bird’s body. At this
explanation, those who had prayed, now laughed, and the world wagged as
merrily as of yore.
At the time of the plague in Milan, in 1630, of which so affecting a
description has been left us by Ripamonte, in his interesting work, De Peste
Mediolani, the people, in their distress, listened with avidity to the
predictions of astrologers and other impostors. It is singular enough that the
plague was foretold a year before it broke out. A large comet appearing in
1628, the opinions of astrologers were divided with regard to it. Some
insisted that it was a forerunner of a bloody war; others maintained that it
predicted a great famine; but the greater number, founding their judgment
upon its pale colour, thought it portended a pestilence. The fulfilment of
their prediction brought them into great repute while the plague was raging.
Other prophecies were current, which were asserted to have been
delivered hundreds of years previously. They had a most pernicious effect
upon the mind of the vulgar, as they induced a belief in fatalism. By taking
away the hope of recovery—that greatest balm in every malady—they
increased threefold the ravages of the disease. One singular prediction
almost drove the unhappy people mad. An ancient couplet, preserved for
ages by tradition, foretold, that in the year 1630 the devil would poison all
Milan. Early one morning in April, and before the pestilence had reached its
height, the passengers were surprised to see that all the doors in the
principal streets of the city were marked with a curious daub, or spot, as if a
sponge, filled with the purulent matter of the plague-sores, had been pressed
against them. The whole population were speedily in movement to remark
the strange appearance, and the greatest alarm spread rapidly. Every means
was taken to discover the perpetrators, but in vain. At last the ancient
prophecy was remembered, and prayers were offered up in all the churches,
that the machinations of the Evil One might be defeated. Many persons
were of opinion that the emissaries of foreign powers were employed to
spread infectious poison over the city; but by far the greater number were
convinced that the powers of hell had conspired against them, and that the
infection was spread by supernatural agencies. In the mean time the plague
increased fearfully. Distrust and alarm took possession of every mind.
Every thing was believed to have been poisoned by the Devil; the waters of
the wells, the standing corn in the fields, and the fruit upon the trees. It was
believed that all objects of touch were poisoned; the walls of the houses, the
pavements of the streets, and the very handles of the doors. The populace
were raised to a pitch of ungovernable fury. A strict watch was kept for the
Devil’s emissaries, and any man who wanted to be rid of an enemy, had
only to say that he had seen him besmearing a door with ointment; his fate
was certain death at the hands of the mob. An old man, upwards of eighty
years of age, a daily frequenter of the church of St. Antonio, was seen, on
rising from his knees, to wipe with the skirt of his cloak the stool on which
he was about to sit down. A cry was raised immediately that he was
besmearing the seat with poison. A mob of women, by whom the church
was crowded, seized hold of the feeble old man, and dragged him out by the
hair of his head, with horrid oaths and imprecations. He was trailed in this
manner through the mire to the house of the municipal judge, that he might
be put to the rack, and forced to discover his accomplices; but he expired on
the way. Many other victims were sacrificed to the popular fury. One Mora,
who appears to have been half a chemist and half a barber, was accused of
being in league with the Devil to poison Milan. His house was surrounded,
and a number of chemical preparations were found. The poor man asserted,
that they were intended as preservatives against infection; but some
physicians, to whom they were submitted, declared they were poison, Mora
was put to the rack, where he for a long time asserted his innocence. He
confessed at last, when his courage was worn down by torture, that he was
in league with the Devil and foreign powers to poison the whole city; that
he had anointed the doors, and infected the fountains of water. He named
several persons as his accomplices, who were apprehended and put to a
similar torture. They were all found guilty, and executed. Mora’s house was
rased to the ground, and a column erected on the spot, with an inscription to
commemorate his guilt.
While the public mind was filled with these marvellous occurrences, the
plague continued to increase. The crowds that were brought together to
witness the executions spread the infection among one another. But the fury
of their passions, and the extent of their credulity, kept pace with the
violence of the plague; every wonderful and preposterous story was
believed. One, in particular, occupied them to the exclusion, for a long time,
of every other. The Devil himself had been seen. He had taken a house in
Milan, in which he prepared his poisonous unguents, and furnished them to
his emissaries for distribution. One man had brooded over such tales till he
became firmly convinced that the wild nights of his own fancy were
realities. He stationed himself in the market-place of Milan, and related the
following story to the crowds that gathered round him. He was standing, he
said, at the door of the cathedral, late in the evening; and when there was
nobody nigh, he saw a dark-coloured chariot, drawn by six milk-white
horses, stop close beside him. The chariot was followed by a numerous train
of domestics in dark liveries, mounted on dark-coloured steeds. In the
chariot there sat a tall stranger of a majestic aspect; his long black hair
floated in the wind—fire flashed from his large black eyes, and a curl of
ineffable scorn dwelt upon his lips. The look of the stranger was so sublime
that he was awed, and trembled with fear when he gazed upon him. His
complexion was much darker than that of any man he had ever seen, and
the atmosphere around him was hot and suffocating. He perceived
immediately that he was a being of another world. The stranger, seeing his
trepidation, asked him blandly, yet majestically, to mount beside him. He
had no power to refuse, and before he was well aware that he had moved,
he found himself in the chariot. Onwards they went, with the rapidity of the
wind, the stranger speaking no word, until they stopped before a door in the
high-street of Milan. There was a crowd of people in the street, but, to his
great surprise, no one seemed to notice the extraordinary equipage and its
numerous train. From this he concluded that they were invisible. The house
at which they stopped appeared to be a shop, but the interior was like a vast
half-ruined palace. He went with his mysterious guide through several large
and dimly-lighted rooms. In one of them, surrounded by huge pillars of
marble, a senate of ghosts was assembled, debating on the progress of the
plague. Other parts of the building were enveloped in the thickest darkness,
illumined at intervals by flashes of lightning, which allowed him to
distinguish a number of gibing and chattering skeletons, running about and
pursuing each other, or playing at leap-frog over one another’s backs. At the
rear of the mansion was a wild, uncultivated plot of ground, in the midst of
which arose a black rock. Down its sides rushed with fearful noise a torrent
of poisonous water, which, insinuating itself through the soil, penetrated to
all the springs of the city, and rendered them unfit for use. After he had been
shewn all this, the stranger led him into another large chamber, filled with
gold and precious stones, all of which he offered him if he would kneel
down and worship him, and consent to smear the doors and houses of Milan
with a pestiferous salve which he held out to him. He now knew him to be
the Devil, and in that moment of temptation, prayed to God to give him
strength to resist. His prayer was heard—he refused the bribe. The stranger
scowled horribly upon him—a loud clap of thunder burst over his head—
the vivid lightning flashed in his eyes, and the next moment he found
himself standing alone at the porch of the cathedral. He repeated this
strange tale day after day, without any variation, and all the populace were
firm believers in its truth. Repeated search was made to discover the
mysterious house, but all in vain. The man pointed out several as
resembling it, which were searched by the police; but the Demon of the
Pestilence was not to be found, nor the hall of ghosts, nor the poisonous
fountain. But the minds of the people were so impressed with the idea, that
scores of witnesses, half crazed by disease, came forward to swear that they
also had seen the diabolical stranger, and had heard his chariot, drawn by
the milk-white steeds, rumbling over the streets at midnight with a sound
louder than thunder.
The number of persons who confessed that they were employed by the
Devil to distribute poison is almost incredible. An epidemic frenzy was
abroad, which seemed to be as contagious as the plague. Imagination was as
disordered as the body, and day after day persons came voluntarily forward
to accuse themselves. They generally had the marks of disease upon them,
and some died in the act of confession.
During the great plague of London, in 1665, the people listened with
similar avidity to the predictions of quacks and fanatics. Defoe says, that at
that time the people were more addicted to prophecies and astronomical
conjurations, dreams, and old wives’ tales than ever they were before or
since. Almanacs, and their predictions, frightened them terribly. Even the
year before the plague broke out, they were greatly alarmed by the comet
which then appeared, and anticipated that famine, pestilence, or fire would
follow. Enthusiasts, while yet the disease had made but little progress, ran
about the streets, predicting that in a few days London would be destroyed.
A still more singular instance of the faith in predictions occurred in
London in the year 1524. The city swarmed at that time with fortune-tellers
and astrologers, who were consulted daily by people of every class in
society on the secrets of futurity. As early as the month of June 1523,
several of them concurred in predicting that, on the 1st day of February
1524, the waters of the Thames would swell to such a height as to overflow
the whole city of London, and wash away ten thousand houses. The
prophecy met implicit belief. It was reiterated with the utmost confidence
month after month, until so much alarm was excited that many families
packed up their goods, and removed into Kent and Essex. As the time drew
nigh, the number of these emigrants increased. In January, droves of
workmen might be seen, followed by their wives and children, trudging on
foot to the villages within fifteen or twenty miles, to await the catastrophe.
People of a higher class were also to be seen in wagons and other vehicles
bound on a similar errand. By the middle of January, at least twenty
thousand persons had quitted the doomed city, leaving nothing but the bare
walls of their homes to be swept away by the impending floods. Many of
the richer sort took up their abode on the heights of Highgate, Hampstead,
and Blackheath; and some erected tents as far away as Waltham Abbey on
the north, and Croydon on the south of the Thames. Bolton, the prior of St.
Bartholomew’s, was so alarmed, that he erected, at a very great expense, a
sort of fortress at Harrow-on-the-Hill, which he stocked with provisions for
two months. On the 24th of January, a week before the awful day which
was to see the destruction of London, he removed thither, with the brethren
and officers of the priory and all his household. A number of boats were
conveyed in wagons to his fortress, furnished abundantly with expert
rowers, in case the flood, reaching so high as Harrow, should force them to
go farther for a resting-place. Many wealthy citizens prayed to share his
retreat; but the prior, with a prudent forethought, admitted only his personal
friends, and those who brought stores of eatables for the blockade.
At last the morn, big with the fate of London, appeared in the east. The
wondering crowds were astir at an early hour to watch the rising of the
waters. The inundation, it was predicted, would be gradual, not sudden; so
that they expected to have plenty of time to escape as soon as they saw the
bosom of old Thames heave beyond the usual mark. But the majority were
too much alarmed to trust to this, and thought themselves safer ten or
twenty miles off. The Thames, unmindful of the foolish crowds upon its
banks, flowed on quietly as of yore. The tide ebbed at its usual hour, flowed
to its usual height, and then ebbed again, just as if twenty astrologers had
not pledged their words to the contrary. Blank were their faces as evening
approached, and as blank grew the faces of the citizens to think that they
had made such fools of themselves. At last night set in, and the obstinate
river would not lift its waters to sweep away even one house out of the ten
thousand. Still, however, the people were afraid to go to sleep. Many
hundreds remained up till dawn of the next day, lest the deluge should come
upon them like a thief in the night.
On the morrow, it was seriously discussed whether it would not be
advisable to duck the false prophets in the river. Luckily for them, they
thought of an expedient which allayed the popular fury. They asserted that,
by an error (a very slight one,) of a little figure, they had fixed the date of
this awful inundation a whole century too early. The stars were right after
all, and they, erring mortals, were wrong. The present generation of
cockneys was safe, and London would be washed away, not in 1524, but in
1624. At this announcement, Bolton the prior dismantled his fortress, and
the weary emigrants came back.
An eye-witness of the great fire of London, in an account preserved
among the Harleian Mss. in the British Museum, and published in the
transactions of the Royal Society of Antiquaries, relates another instance of
the credulity of the Londoners. The writer, who accompanied the Duke of
York day by day through the district included between the Fleet-bridge and
the Thames, states that, in their efforts to check the progress of the flames,
they were much impeded by the superstition of the people. Mother Shipton,
in one of her prophecies, had said that London would be reduced to ashes,
and they refused to make any efforts to prevent it.53 A son of the noted Sir
Kenelm Digby, who was also a pretender to the gifts of prophecy, persuaded
them that no power on earth could prevent the fulfilment of the prediction;
for it was written in the great book of fate that London was to be destroyed.
Hundreds of persons, who might have rendered valuable assistance, and
saved whole parishes from devastation, folded their arms and looked on. As
many more gave themselves up, with the less compunction, to plunder a
city which they could not save.54
The prophecies of Mother Shipton are still believed in many of the rural
districts of England. In cottages and servants’ halls her reputation is great;
and she rules, the most popular of British prophets, among all the
uneducated, or half-educated, portions of the community. She is generally
supposed to have been born at Knaresborough, in the reign of Henry VII.,
and to have sold her soul to the Devil for the power of foretelling future
events. Though during her lifetime she was looked upon as a witch, she yet
escaped the witch’s fate, and died peaceably in her bed at an extreme old
age, near Clifton in Yorkshire. A stone is said to have been erected to her
memory in the churchyard of that place, with the following epitaph:
“Here lies she who never lied,
Whose skill often has been tried:
Her prophecies shall still survive,
And ever keep her name alive.”
“Never a day passed,” says her traditionary biography, “wherein, she
did not relate something remarkable, and that required the most serious
consideration. People flocked to her from far and near, her fame was so
great. They went to her of all sorts, both old and young, rich and poor,
especially young maidens, to be resolved of their doubts relating to things
to come; and all returned wonderfully satisfied in the explanations she gave
to their questions.” Among the rest, went the Abbot of Beverley, to whom
she foretold the suppression of the monasteries by Henry VIII., his marriage
with Anne Boleyn, the fires for heretics in Smithfield, and the execution of
Mary Queen of Scots. She also foretold the accession of James I., adding
that, with him,
“From the cold North
Every evil should come forth.”
On a subsequent visit she uttered another prophecy, which, in the opinion of
her believers, still remains unfulfilled, but may be expected to be realised
during the present century:
“The time shall come when seas of blood
Shall mingle with a greater flood.
Great noise there shall be heard—great shouts and cries,
And seas shall thunder louder than the skies;
Then shall three lions fight with three and bring
Joy to a people, honour to a king.
That fiery year as soon as o’er,
Peace shall then be as before;
Plenty shall every where be found,
And men with swords shall plough the ground.”
But the most famous of all her prophecies is one relating to London.
Thousands of persons still shudder to think of the woes that are to burst
over this unhappy realm, when London and Highgate are joined by one
continuous line of houses. This junction, which, if the rage for building lasts
much longer, in the same proportion as heretofore, bids fair to be soon
accomplished, was predicted by her shortly before her death. Revolutions—
the fall of mighty monarchs, and the shedding of much blood are to
signalise that event. The very angels, afflicted by our woes, are to turn aside
their heads, and weep for hapless Britain.
But great as is the fame of Mother Shipton, she ranks but second in the
list of British prophets. Merlin, the mighty Merlin, stands alone in his high
pre-eminence—the first and greatest. As old Drayton sings, in his Poly-
olbion:
“Of Merlin and his skill what region doth not hear?
The world shall still be full of Merlin every year.
A thousand lingering years his prophecies have run,
And scarcely shall have end till time itself be done.”
Spenser, in his divine poem, has given us a powerful description of this
renowned seer—
“who had in magic more insight
Than ever him before, or after, living wight.
For he by words could call out of the sky
Both sun and moon, and make them him obey;
The land to sea, and sea to mainland dry,
And darksome night he eke could turn to day—
Huge hosts of men he could, alone, dismay.
And hosts of men and meanest things could frame,
Whenso him list his enemies to fray,
That to this day, for terror of his name,
The fiends do quake, when any him to them does name.
And soothe men say that he was not the sonne
Of mortal sire or other living wighte,
But wondrously begotten and begoune
By false illusion of a guileful sprite
On a faire ladye nun.”
In these verses the poet has preserved the popular belief with regard to
Merlin, who is generally supposed to have been a contemporary of
Vortigern. Opinion is divided as to whether he were a real personage, or a
mere impersonation, formed by the poetic fancy of a credulous people. It
seems most probable that such a man did exist, and that, possessing
knowledge as much above the comprehension of his age, as that possessed
by Friar Bacon was beyond the reach of his, he was endowed by the
wondering crowd with the supernatural attributes that Spenser has
enumerated.
Geoffrey of Monmouth translated Merlin’s poetical odes, or prophecies,
into Latin prose; and he was much reverenced not only by Geoffrey, but by
most of the old annalists. In a Life of Merlin, with his Prophecies and
Predictions interpreted and made good by our English Annals, by Thomas
Heywood, published in the reign of Charles I., we find several of these
pretended prophecies. They seem, however, to have been all written by
Heywood himself. They are in terms too plain and positive to allow any one
to doubt for a moment of their having been composed ex post facto.
Speaking of Richard I., he says:
“The Lion’s heart will ’gainst the Saracen rise,
And purchase from him many a glorious prize;
The rose and lily shall at first unite,
But, parting of the prey prove opposite. * * *
But while abroad these great acts shall be done,
All things at home shall to disorder run.
Cooped up and caged then shall the Lion be,
But, after sufferance, ransomed and set free.”
The simple-minded Thomas Heywood gravely goes on to inform us, that all
these things actually came to pass. Upon Richard III. he is equally
luminous. He says:
“A hunch-backed monster, who with teeth is born,
The mockery of art and nature’s scorn;
Who from the womb preposterously is hurled,
And with feet forward thrust into the world,
Shall, from the lower earth on which he stood,
Wade, every step he mounts, knee-deep in blood.
He shall to th’ height of all his hopes aspire,
And, clothed in state, his ugly shape admire;
But, when he thinks himself most safe to stand,
From foreign parts a native whelp shall land.”
Another of these prophecies after the event tells us that Henry VIII.
should take the power from Rome, “and bring it home unto his British
bower;” that he should “root out from the land all the razored skulls;” and
that he should neither spare “man in his rage nor woman in his lust;” and
that, in the time of his next successor but one, “there should come in the
fagot and the stake.” Master Heywood closes Merlin’s prophecies at his
own day, and does not give even a glimpse of what was to befall England
after his decease. Many other prophecies, besides those quoted by him,
were, he says, dispersed abroad, in his day, under the name of Merlin; but
he gives his readers a taste of one only, and that is the following:
“When hempe is ripe and ready to pull,
Then, Englishman, beware thy skull.”
This prophecy, which, one would think, ought to have put him in mind of
the gallows, at that time the not unusual fate of false prophets, he explains
thus: “In this word HEMPE be five letters. Now, by reckoning the five
successive princes from Henry VIII., this prophecy is easily explained: H
signifieth King Henry before-named; E, Edward, his son, the sixth of that
name; M, Mary, who succeeded him; P, Philip of Spain, who, by marrying
Queen Mary, participated with her in the English diadem; and, lastly, E
signifieth Queen Elizabeth, after whose death there was a great feare that
some troubles might have arisen about the crown.” As this did not happen,
Heywood, who was a sly rogue in a small way, gets out of the scrape by
saying, “Yet proved this augury true, though not according to the former
expectation; for, after the peaceful inauguration of King James, there was
great mortality, not in London only, but through the whole kingdom, and
from which the nation was not quite clean in seven years after.”
This is not unlike the subterfuge of Peter of Pontefract, who had
prophesied the death and deposition of King John, and who was hanged by
that monarch for his pains. A very graphic and amusing account of this
pretended prophet is given by Grafton, in his Chronicles of England.55 “In
the meanwhile,” says he, “the priestes within England had provided them a
false and counterfeated prophet, called Peter Wakefielde, a Yorkshire man,
who was an hermite, an idle gadder about, and a pratlyng marchant. Now, to
bring this Peter in credite, and the kyng out of all credite with his people,
diverse vaine persons bruted dayly among the commons of the realme, that
Christe had twice appered unto him in the shape of a childe, betwene the
prieste’s handes, once at Yorke, another tyme at Pomfret; and that he had
breathed upon him thrice, saying, ‘Peace, peace, peace,’ and teachyng
many things, which he anon declared to the bishops, and bid the people
amend their naughtie living. Being rapt also in spirite, they sayde he
behelde the joyes of heaven and sorrowes of hell; for scant were there three
in the realme, sayde he, that lived christianly.
“This counterfeated soothsayer prophesied of King John, that he
should reigne no longer than the Ascension-day next followyng, which
was in the yere of our Lord 1211, and was the thirteenth yere from his
coronation; and this, he said, he had by revelation. Then it was of him
demanded, whether he should be slaine or be deposed, or should
voluntarily give over the crowne? He aunswered, that he could not tell;
but of this he was sure (he sayd), that neither he nor any of his stock or
lineage should reigne after that day.
“The king, hering of this, laughed much at it, and made but a scoff
thereat. ‘Tush!’ saith he, ‘it is but an ideot knave, and such an one as
lacketh his right wittes.’ But when this foolish prophet had so escaped
the daunger of the kinge’s displeasure, and that he made no more of it,
he gate him abroad, and prated thereof at large, as he was a very idle
vagabond, and used to trattle and talke more than ynough; so that they
which loved the king caused him anon after to be apprehended as a
malefactor, and to be throwen in prison, the king not yet knowing
thereof.
“Anone after the fame of this phantasticall prophet went all the
realme over, and his name was knowen every where, as foolishnesse is
much regarded of the people, where wisdome is not in place; specially
because he was then imprisoned for the matter, the rumour was the
larger, their wonderynges were the wantoner, their practises the
foolisher, their busye talkes and other idle doinges the greater.
Continually from thence, as the rude manner of people is, old gossyps
tales went abroad, new tales were invented, fables were added to
fables, and lyes grew upon lyes. So that every daye newe slanders
were laide upon the king, and not one of them true. Rumors arose,
blasphemyes were sprede, the enemyes rejoyced, and treasons by the
priestes were mainteyned; and what lykewise was surmised, or other
subtiltye practised, all was then fathered upon this foolish prophet, as
‘thus saith Peter Wakefield;’ ‘thus hath he prophesied;’ ‘and thus it
shall come to pass;’ yea, many times, when he thought nothing lesse.
And when the Ascension-day was come, which was prophecyed of
before, King John commanded his royal tent to be spread in the open
fielde, passing that day with his noble counseyle and men of honour in
the greatest solemnitie that ever he did before; solacing himself with
musickale instrumentes and songs, most in sight among his trustie
friendes. When that day was paste in all prosperitie and myrth, his
enemyes being confused, turned all into an allegorical understanding
to make the prophecie good, and sayde, ‘He is no longer king, for the
pope reigneth, and not he.’ [King John was labouring under a sentence
of excommunication at the time.]
“Then was the king by his council perswaded that this false
prophet had troubled the realme, perverted the heartes of the people,
and raysed the Commons against him; for his wordes went over the
sea, by the help of his prelates, and came to the French king’s eare, and
gave to him a great encouragement to invade the lande. He had not
else done it so sodeinely. But he was most fowly deceived, as all they
are and shall be that put their trust in such dark drowsye dreames of
hipocrites. The king therefore commended that he should be hanged
up, and his sonne also with him, lest any more false prophets should
arise of that race.”
Heywood, who was a great stickler for the truth of all sorts of
prophecies, gives a much more favourable account of this Peter of Pomfret,
or Pontefract, whose fate he would, in all probability, have shared, if he had
had the misfortune to have flourished in the same age. He says, that Peter,
who was not only a prophet, but a bard, predicted divers of King John’s
disasters, which fell out accordingly. On being taxed for a lying prophet in
having predicted that the king would be deposed before he entered into the
fifteenth year of his reign, he answered him boldly, that all he had said was
justifiable and true; for that, having given up his crown to the pope, and
paying him an annual tribute, the pope reigned, and not he. Heywood
thought this explanation to be perfectly satisfactory, and the prophet’s faith
for ever established.
But to return to Merlin. Of him even to this day it may be said, in the
words which Burns has applied to another notorious personage,
“Great was his power and great his fame;
Far kenned and noted is his name.”
His reputation is by no means confined to the land of his birth, but extends
through most of the nations of Europe. A very curious volume of his Life,
Prophecies, and Miracles, written, it is supposed, by Robert de Bosron, was
printed at Paris in 1498, which states, that the devil himself was his father,
and that he spoke the instant he was born, and assured his mother, a very
virtuous young woman, that she should not die in childbed with him, as her
ill-natured neighbours had predicted. The judge of the district, hearing of so
marvellous an occurrence, summoned both mother and child to appear
before him; and they went accordingly the same day. To put the wisdom of
the young prophet most effectually to the test, the judge asked him if he
knew his own father? To which the infant Merlin replied, in a clear,
sonorous voice, “Yes, my father is the Devil; and I have his power, and
know all things, past, present, and to come.” His worship clapped his hands
in astonishment, and took the prudent resolution of not molesting so awful a
child or its mother either.
Early tradition attributes the building of Stonehenge to the power of
Merlin. It was believed that those mighty stones were whirled through the
air, at his command, from Ireland to Salisbury Plain; and that he arranged
them in the form in which they now stand, to commemorate for ever the
unhappy fate of three hundred British chiefs, who were massacred on that
spot by the Saxons.
At Abergwylly, near Carmarthen, is still shewn the cave of the prophet
and the scene of his incantations. How beautiful is the description of it
given by Spenser in his Faerie Queene! The lines need no apology for their
repetition here, and any sketch of the great prophet of Britain would be
incomplete without them:
“There the wise Merlin, whilom wont (they say,)
To make his wonne low underneath the ground,
In a deep delve far from the view of day,
That of no living wight he mote be found,
Whenso he counselled with his sprites encompassed round.
And if thou ever happen that same way
To travel, go to see that dreadful place;
It is a hideous, hollow cave, they say,
Under a rock that lies, a little space
From the swift Barry, tumbling down apace
Amongst the woody hills of Dynevoure;
But dare thou not, I charge, in any case,
To enter into that same baleful bower,
For fear the cruel fiendes should thee unwares devour!
But, standing high aloft, low lay thine eare,
And there such ghastly noise of iron chaines
And brazen caudrons thou shalt rombling heare,
Which thousand sprites with long-enduring paines
Doe tosse, that it will stun thy feeble braines;
And often times great groans and grievous stownds,
When too huge toile and labour them constraines;
And often times loud strokes and ringing sounds
From under that deep rock most horribly rebounds.
The cause, they say, is this. A little while
Before that Merlin died, he did intend
A brazen wall in compass, to compile
About Cayr Merdin, and did it commend
Unto these sprites to bring to perfect end;
During which work the Lady of the Lake,
Whom long he loved, for him in haste did send,
Who thereby forced his workmen to forsake,
Them bound till his return their labour not to slake.
In the mean time, through that false ladie’s traine,
He was surprised, and buried under biere,
Ne ever to his work returned again;
Natheless these fiendes may not their work forbeare,
So greatly his commandement they fear,
But there doe toile and travaile day and night,
Until that brazen wall they up doe reare.”56
Amongst other English prophets, a belief in whose power has not been
entirely effaced by the light of advancing knowledge, is Robert Nixon, the
Cheshire idiot, a contemporary of Mother Shipton. The popular accounts of
this man say, that he was born of poor parents, not far from Vale Royal, on
the edge of the forest of Delamere. He was brought up to the plough, but
was so ignorant and stupid, that nothing could be made of him. Every body
thought him irretrievably insane, and paid no attention to the strange,
unconnected discourses which he held. Many of his prophecies are believed
to have been lost in this manner. But they were not always destined to be
wasted upon dull and inattentive ears. An incident occurred which brought
him into notice, and established his fame as a prophet of the first calibre. He
was ploughing in a field when he suddenly stopped from his labour, and
with a wild look and strange gesture, exclaimed, “Now, Dick! now, Harry!
O, ill done, Dick! O, well done, Harry! Harry has gained the day!” His
fellow-labourers in the field did not know what to make of this rhapsody;
but the next day cleared up the mystery. News was brought by a messenger,
in hot haste, that at the very instant when Nixon had thus ejaculated,
Richard III. had been slain at the battle of Bosworth, and Henry VII.
proclaimed king of England.
It was not long before the fame of the new prophet reached the ears of
the king, who expressed a wish to see and converse with him. A messenger
was accordingly despatched to bring him to court; but long before he
reached Cheshire, Nixon knew and dreaded the honours that awaited him.
Indeed it was said, that at the very instant the king expressed the wish,
Nixon was, by supernatural means, made acquainted with it, and that he ran
about the town of Over in great distress of mind, calling out, like a
madman, that Henry had sent for him, and that he must go to court, and be
clammed, that is, starved to death. These expressions excited no little
wonder; but, on the third day, the messenger arrived, and carried him to
court, leaving on the minds of the good people of Cheshire an impression
that their prophet was one of the greatest ever born. On his arrival King
Henry appeared to be troubled exceedingly at the loss of a valuable
diamond, and asked Nixon if he could inform him where it was to be found.
Henry had hidden the diamond himself, with a view to test the prophet’s
skill. Great, therefore, was his surprise when Nixon answered him in the
words of the old proverb, “Those who hide can find.” From that time forth
the king implicitly believed that he had the gift of prophecy, and ordered all
his words to be taken down.
During all the time of his residence at court he was in constant fear of
being starved to death, and repeatedly told the king that such would be his
fate, if he were not allowed to depart, and return into his own country.
Henry would not suffer it, but gave strict orders to all his officers and cooks
to give him as much to eat as he wanted. He lived so well, that for some
time he seemed to be thriving like a nobleman’s steward, and growing as fat
as an alderman. One day the king went out hunting, when Nixon ran to the
palace gate, and entreated on his knees that he might not be left behind to
be starved. The king laughed, and calling an officer, told him to take
especial care of the prophet during his absence, and rode away to the forest.
After his departure, the servants of the palace began to jeer at and insult
Nixon, whom they imagined to be much better treated than he deserved.
Nixon complained to the officer, who, to prevent him from being further
molested, locked him up in the king’s own closet, and brought him
regularly his four meals a day. But it so happened that a messenger arrived
from the king to this officer, requiring his immediate presence at
Winchester, on a matter of life and death. So great was his haste to obey the
king’s command, that he mounted on the horse behind the messenger, and
rode off, without bestowing a thought upon poor Nixon. He did not return
till three days afterwards, when, remembering the prophet for the first time,
he went to the king’s closet, and found him lying upon the floor, starved to
death, as he had predicted.
Among the prophecies of his which are believed to have been fulfilled
are the following, which relate to the times of the Pretender:
“A great man shall come into England,
But the son of a king
Shall take from him the victory.”
“Crows shall drink the blood of many nobles,
And the North shall rise against the South.”
“The coek of the North shall be made to flee,
And his feather be plucked for his pride,
That he shall almost curse the day that he was born.”
All these, say his admirers, are as clear as the sun at noon-day. The first
denotes the defeat of Prince Charles Edward, at the battle of Culloden, by
the Duke of Cumberland; the second, the execution of Lords Derwentwater,
Balmerino, and Lovat; and the third, the retreat of the Pretender from the
shores of Britain. Among the prophecies that still remain to be
accomplished are the following:
“Between seven, eight, and nine,
In England wonders shall be seen;
Between nine and thirteen
All sorrow shall be done.”
“Through our own money and our men
Shall a dreadful war begin.
Between the sickle and the suck
All England shall have a pluck.”
“Foreign nations shall invade England with snow on their helmets,
and shall bring plague, famine, and murder in the skirts of their
garments.”
“The town of Nantwich shall be swept away by a flood.”
Of the two first of these no explanation has yet been attempted; but some
event or other will doubtless be twisted into such a shape as will fit them.
The third, relative to the invasion of England by a nation with snow on their
helmets, is supposed by the old women to foretell most clearly a coming
war with Russia. As to the last, there are not a few in the town mentioned
who devoutly believe that such will be its fate. Happily for their peace of
mind, the prophet said nothing of the year that was to witness the awful
calamity; so that they think it as likely to be two centuries hence as now.
The popular biographers of Nixon conclude their account of him by
saying, that “his prophecies are by some persons thought fables; yet by
what has come to pass, it is now thought, and very plainly appears, that
most of them have proved, or will prove, true; for which we, on all
occasions, ought not only to exert our utmost might to repel by force our
enemies, but to refrain from our abandoned and wicked course of life, and
to make our continual prayer to God for protection and safety.” To this,
though a non sequitur, every one will cry, Amen!
Besides the prophets, there have been the almanac-makers Lilly, Poor
Robin, Partridge, and Francis Moore physician, in England and Matthew
Laensbergh, in France and Belgium. But great as were their pretensions,
they were modesty itself in comparison with Merlin, Shipton, and Nixon,
who fixed their minds upon higher things than the weather, and were not so
restrained as to prophesy for only one year at a time. After such prophets
the almanac-makers hardly deserve to be mentioned; not even the renowned
Partridge, whose prognostications set all England agog in 1708, and whose
death while still alive was so pleasantly and satisfactorily proved by Isaac
Bickerstaff. The anti-climax would be too palpable, and they and their
doings must be left uncommemorated.
MOTHER SHIPTON’S HOUSE.57
Fortune-Telling
Table of Contents
And men still grope t’ anticipate
The cabinet designs of Fate;
Apply to wizards to foresee
What shall and what shall never be.
Hudibras, part iii. canto 3.
In accordance with the plan laid down, we proceed to the consideration of
the follies into which men have been led by their eager desire to pierce the
thick darkness of futurity. God himself, for his own wise purposes, has
more than once undrawn the impenetrable veil which shrouds those awful
secrets; and, for purposes just as wise, he has decreed that, except in these
instances, ignorance shall be our lot for ever. It is happy for man that he
does not know what the morrow is to bring forth; but, unaware of this great
blessing, he has, in all ages of the world, presumptuously endeavoured to
trace the events of unborn centuries, and anticipate the march of time. He
has reduced this presumption into a study. He has divided it into sciences
and systems without number, employing his whole life in the vain pursuit.
Upon no subject has it been so easy to deceive the world as upon this. In
every breast the curiosity exists in a greater or less degree, and can only be
conquered by a long course of self-examination, and a firm reliance that the
future would not be hidden from our sight, if it were right that we should be
acquainted with it.
An undue opinion of our own importance in the scale of creation is at
the bottom of all our unwarrantable notions in this respect. How flattering
to the pride of man to think that the stars in their courses watch over him,
and typify, by their movements and aspects, the joys or the sorrows that
await him! He, less in proportion to the universe than the all-but invisible
insects that feed in myriads on a summer’s leaf are to this great globe itself,
fondly imagines that eternal worlds were chiefly created to prognosticate
his fate. How we should pity the arrogance of the worm that crawls at our
feet, if we knew that it also desired to know the secrets of futurity, and
imagined that meteors shot athwart the sky to warn it that a tom-tit was
hovering near to gobble it up; that storms and earthquakes, the revolutions
of empires, or the fall of mighty monarchs, only happened to predict its
birth, its progress, and its decay! Not a whit less presuming has man shewn
himself; not a whit less arrogant are the sciences, so called, of astrology,
augury, necromancy, geomancy, palmistry, and divination of every kind.
Leaving out of view the oracles of pagan antiquity and religious
predictions in general, and confining ourselves solely to the persons who, in
modern times, have made themselves most conspicuous in foretelling the
future, we shall find that the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were the
golden age of these impostors. Many of them have been already mentioned
in their character of alchymists. The union of the two pretensions is not at
all surprising. It was to be expected that those who assumed a power so
preposterous as that of prolonging the life of man for several centuries,
should pretend, at the same time, to foretell the events which were to mark
that preternatural span of existence. The world would as readily believe that
they had discovered all secrets, as that they had only discovered one. The
most celebrated astrologers of Europe, three centuries ago, were alchymists.
Agrippa, Paracelsus, Dr. Dee, and the Rosicrucians, all laid as much stress
upon their knowledge of the days to come, as upon their pretended
possession of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life. In their time,
ideas of the wonderful, the diabolical, and the supernatural, were rifer than
ever they were before. The devil or the stars were universally believed to
meddle constantly in the affairs of men; and both were to be consulted with
proper ceremonies. Those who were of a melancholy and gloomy
temperament betook themselves to necromancy and sorcery; those more
cheerful and aspiring devoted themselves to astrology. The latter science
was encouraged by all the monarchs and governments of that age. In
England, from the time of Elizabeth to that of William and Mary, judicial
astrology was in high repute. During that period flourished Drs. Dee, Lamb,
and Forman; with Lilly, Booker, Gadbury, Evans, and scores of nameless
impostors in every considerable town and village in the country, who made
it their business to cast nativities, aid in the recovery of stolen goods,
prognosticate happy or unhappy marriages, predict whether journeys would
be prosperous, and note lucky moments for the commencement of any
enterprise, from the setting up of a cobbler’s shop to the marching of an
army. Men who, to use the words of Butler, did
“Deal in Destiny’s dark counsel,
And sage opinion of the moon sell;
To whom all people far and near
On deep importance did repair,
When brass and pewter pots did stray,
And linen slunk out of the way.”
HENRY ANDREWS, THE ORIGINAL “FRANCIS MOORE.”
In Lilly’s Memoirs of his Life and Times, there are many notices of the
inferior quacks who then abounded, and upon whom he pretended to look
down with supreme contempt; not because they were astrologers, but
because they debased that noble art by taking fees for the recovery of stolen
property. From Butler’s Hudibras, and its curious notes, we may learn what
immense numbers of these fellows lived upon the credulity of mankind in
that age of witchcraft and diablerie. Even in our day, how great is the
reputation enjoyed by the almanac-makers, who assume the name of
Francis Moore! But in the time of Charles I. and the Commonwealth the
most learned, the most noble, and the most conspicuous characters did not
hesitate to consult astrologers in the most open manner. Lilly, whom Butler
has immortalised under the name of Sydrophel, relates, that he proposed to
write a work called An Introduction to Astrology, in which he would satisfy
the whole kingdom of the lawfulness of that art. Many of the soldiers were
for it, he says, and many of the Independent party, and abundance of worthy
men in the House of Commons, his assured friends, and able to take his part
against the Presbyterians, who would have silenced his predictions if they
could. He afterwards carried his plan into execution, and when his book
was published, went with another astrologer named Booker to the
headquarters of the parliamentary army at Windsor, where they were
welcomed and feasted in the garden where General Fairfax lodged. They
were afterwards introduced to the general, who received them very kindly,
and made allusion to some of their predictions. He hoped their art was
lawful and agreeable to God’s word; but he did not understand it himself.
He did not doubt, however, that the two astrologers feared God, and
therefore he had a good opinion of them. Lilly assured him that the art of
astrology was quite consonant to the Scriptures; and confidently predicted
from his knowledge of the stars, that the parliamentary army would
overthrow all its enemies. In Oliver’s Protectorate, this quack informs us
that he wrote freely enough. He became an Independent, and all the soldiery
were his friends. When he went to Scotland, he saw a soldier standing in
front of the army with a book of prophecies in his hand, exclaiming to the
several companies as they passed by him, “Lo! hear what Lilly saith: you
are in this month promised victory! Fight it out, brave boys! and then read
that month’s prediction!”
After the great fire of London, which Lilly said he had foretold, he was
sent for by the committee of the House of Commons appointed to inquire
into the causes of the calamity. In his Monarchy or no Monarchy, published
in 1651, he had inserted an hieroglyphical plate representing on one side
persons in winding-sheets digging graves; and on the other a large city in
flames. After the great fire, some sapient member of the legislature
bethought him of Lilly’s book, and having mentioned it in the house, it was
agreed that the astrologer should be summoned. Lilly attended accordingly,
when Sir Robert Brook told him the reason of his summons, and called
upon him to declare what he knew. This was a rare opportunity for the
vainglorious Lilly to vaunt his abilities; and he began a long speech in
praise of himself and his pretended science. He said that, after the execution
of Charles I., he was extremely desirous to know what might from that time
forth happen to the parliament and to the nation in general. He therefore
consulted the stars, and satisfied himself. The result of his judgment he put
into emblems and hieroglyphics, without any commentary, so that the true
meaning might be concealed from the vulgar, and made manifest only to the
wise; imitating in this the example of many wise philosophers who had
done the like.
“Did you foresee the year of the fire?” said a member. “No,” quoth
Lilly, “nor was I desirous. Of that I made no scrutiny.” After some further
parley, the house found they could make nothing of the astrologer, and
dismissed him with great civility.
One specimen of the explanation of a prophecy given by Lilly, and
related by him with much complacency, will be sufficient to shew the sort
of trash by which he imposed upon the million. “In the year 1588,” says he,
“there was a prophecy printed in Greek characters, exactly deciphering the
long troubles of the English nation from 1641 to 1660.” And it ended thus:
“And after him shall come a dreadful dead man, and with him a royal G, of
the best blood in the world; and he shall have the crown, and shall set
England on the right way, and put out all heresies.” The following is the
explanation of this oracular absurdity:
“Monkery being extinguished above eighty or ninety years, and the
Lord General’s name being Monk, is the dead man. The royal G or C
[it is gamma in the Greek, intending C in the Latin, being the third
letter in the alphabet] is Charles II., who for his extraction may be
said to be of the best blood of the world.”
In France and Germany astrologers met even more encouragement than
they received in England. In very early ages Charlemagne and his
successors fulminated their wrath against them in common with sorcerers.
Louis XI., that most superstitious of men, entertained great numbers of
them at his court; and Catherine de Medicis, that most superstitious of
women, hardly ever undertook any affair of importance without consulting
them. She chiefly favoured her own countrymen; and during the time she
governed France, the land was overrun by Italian conjurors, necromancers,
and fortune-tellers of every kind. But the chief astrologer of that day,
beyond all doubt, was the celebrated Nostradamus, physician to her
husband, King Henry II. He was born in 1503 at the town of St. Remi, in
Provence, where his father was a notary. He did not acquire much fame till
he was past his fiftieth year, when his famous Centuries, a collection of
verses, written in obscure and almost unintelligible language, began to
excite attention. They were so much spoken of in 1556, that Henry II.
resolved to attach so skilful a man to his service, and appointed him his
physician. In a biographical notice of him, prefixed to the edition of his
Vraies Centuries, published at Amsterdam in 1668, we are informed that he
often discoursed with his royal master on the secrets of futurity, and
received many great presents as his reward, besides his usual allowance for
medical attendance. After the death of Henry he retired to his native place,
where Charles IX. paid him a visit in 1564; and was so impressed with
veneration for his wondrous knowledge of the things that were to be, not in
France only, but in the whole world for hundreds of years to come, that he
made him a counsellor of state and his own physician, besides treating him
in other matters with a royal liberality. “In fine,” continues his biographer,
“I should be too prolix were I to tell all the honours conferred upon him,
and all the great nobles and learned men that arrived at his house from the
very ends of the earth, to see and converse with him as if he had been an
oracle. Many strangers, in fact, came to France for no other purpose than to
consult him.”
NOSTRADAMUS.—FROM THE FRONTISPIECE TO A COLLECTION OF HIS PROPHECIES,
PUBLISHED AT AMSTERDAM, A.D. 1666.
The prophecies of Nostradamus consist of upwards of a thousand
stanzas, each of four lines, and are to the full as obscure as the oracles of
old. They take so great a latitude, both as to time and space, that they are
almost sure to be fulfilled somewhere or other in the course of a few
centuries. A little ingenuity, like that evinced by Lilly in his explanation
about General Monk and the dreadful dead man, might easily make events
to fit some of them.58
He is to this day extremely popular in France and the Walloon country
of Belgium, where old farmer-wives consult him with great confidence and
assiduity.
Catherine di Medicis was not the only member of her illustrious house
who entertained astrologers. At the beginning of the fifteenth century there
was a man, named Basil, residing in Florence, who was noted over all Italy
for his skill in piercing the darkness of futurity. It is said that he foretold to
Cosmo di Medicis, then a private citizen, that he would attain high dignity,
inasmuch as the ascendant of his nativity was adorned with the same
propitious aspects as those of Augustus Cæsar and the Emperor Charles V.59
Another astrologer foretold the death of Prince Alexander di Medicis; and
so very minute and particular was he in all the circumstances, that he was
suspected of being chiefly instrumental in fulfilling his own prophecy—a
very common resource with these fellows to keep up their credit. He
foretold confidently that the prince should die by the hand of his own
familiar friend, a person of a slender habit of body, a small face, a swarthy
complexion, and of most remarkable taciturnity. So it afterwards happened,
Alexander having been murdered in his chamber by his cousin Lorenzo,
who corresponded exactly with the above description.60 The author of
Hermippus Redivivus, in relating this story, inclines to the belief that the
astrologer was guiltless of any participation in the crime, but was employed
by some friend of Prince Alexander to warn him of his danger.
A much more remarkable story is told of an astrologer who lived in
Romagna in the fifteenth century, and whose name was Antiochus
Tibertus.61 At that time nearly all the petty sovereigns of Italy retained such
men in their service; and Tibertus, having studied the mathematics with
great success at Paris, and delivered many predictions, some of which, for
guesses, were not deficient in shrewdness, was taken into the household of
Pandolfo di Malatesta, the sovereign of Rimini. His reputation was so great,
that his study was continually thronged either with visitors who were
persons of distinction, or with clients who came to him for advice; and in a
short time he acquired a considerable fortune. Notwithstanding all these
advantages, he passed his life miserably, and ended it on the scaffold. The
following story afterwards got into circulation, and has been often
triumphantly cited by succeeding astrologers as an irrefragable proof of the
truth of their science. It was said that, long before he died, he uttered three
remarkable prophecies—one relating to himself, another to his friend, and
the third to his patron, Pandolfo di Malatesta. The first delivered was that
relating to his friend Guido di Bogni, one of the greatest captains of the
time. Guido was exceedingly desirous to know his fortune, and so
importuned Tibertus, that the latter consulted the stars and the lines on his
palm to satisfy him. He afterwards told him with a sorrowful face, that,
according to all the rules of astrology and palmistry, he should be falsely
suspected by his best friend, and should lose his life in consequence. Guido
then asked the astrologer if he could foretell his own fate; upon which
Tibertus again consulted the stars, and found that it was decreed from all
eternity that he should end his days on the scaffold. Malatesta, when he
heard these predictions, so unlikely, to all present appearance, to prove true,
desired his astrologer to predict his fate also, and to hide nothing from him,
however unfavourable it might be. Tibertus complied, and told his patron, at
that time one of the most flourishing and powerful princes of Italy, that he
should suffer great want, and die at last like a beggar in the common
hospital of Bologna. And so it happened in all three cases. Guido di Bogni
was accused by his own father-in-law, the Count di Bentivoglio, of a
treasonable design to deliver up the city of Rimini to the papal forces, and
was assassinated afterwards, by order of the tyrant Malatesta, as he sat at
the supper-table, to which he had been invited in all apparent friendship.
The astrologer was at the same time thrown into prison, as being concerned
in the treason of his friend. He attempted to escape, and had succeeded in
letting himself down from his dungeon-window into a moat, when he was
discovered by the sentinels. This being reported to Malatesta, he gave
orders for his execution on the following morning.
Malatesta had, at this time, no remembrance of the prophecy; and his
own fate gave him no uneasiness; but events were silently working its
fulfilment. A conspiracy had been formed, though Guido di Bogni was
innocent of it, to deliver up Rimini to the pope; and all the necessary
measures having been taken, the city was seized by the Count de
Valentinois. In the confusion, Malatesta had barely time to escape from his
palace in disguise. He was pursued from place to place by his enemies,
abandoned by all his former friends, and, finally, by his own children. He at
last fell ill of a languishing disease, at Bologna; and, nobody caring to
afford him shelter, he was carried to the hospital, where he died. The only
thing that detracts from the interest of this remarkable story is the fact, that
the prophecy was made after the event.
For some weeks before the birth of Louis XIV., an astrologer from
Germany, who had been sent for by the Marshal de Bassompierre and other
noblemen of the court, had taken up his residence in the palace, to be ready,
at a moment’s notice, to draw the horoscope of the future sovereign of
France. When the queen was taken in labour, he was ushered into a
contiguous apartment, that he might receive notice of the very instant the
child was born. The result of his observations were the three words, diu,
durè, feliciter; meaning, that the new-born prince should live and reign
long, with much labour, and with great glory. No prediction less favourable
could have been expected from an astrologer, who had his bread to get, and
who was at the same time a courtier. A medal was afterwards struck in
commemoration of the event; upon one side of which was figured the
nativity of the prince, representing him as driving the chariot of Apollo,
with the inscription “Ortus solis Gallici,”—the rising of the Gallic sun.
The best excuse ever made for astrology was that offered by the great
astronomer, Kepler, himself an unwilling practiser of the art.
He had many applications from his friends to cast nativities for them,
and generally gave a positive refusal to such as he was not afraid of
offending by his frankness. In other cases he accommodated himself to the
prevailing delusion. In sending a copy of his Ephemerides to Professor
Gerlach, he wrote, that they were nothing but worthless conjectures; but he
was obliged to devote himself to them, or he would have starved. “Ye
overwise philosophers,” he exclaimed, in his Tertius Interveniens; “ye
censure this daughter of astronomy beyond her deserts! Know ye not that
she must support her mother by her charms? The scanty reward of an
astronomer would not provide him with bread, if men did not entertain
hopes of reading the future in the heavens.”
Necromancy was, next to astrology, the pretended science most resorted to,
by those who wished to pry into the future. The earliest instance upon
record is that of the witch of Endor and the spirit of Samuel. Nearly all the
nations of antiquity believed in the possibility of summoning departed
ghosts to disclose the awful secrets that God made clear to the disembodied.
Many passages in allusion to this subject will at once suggest themselves to
the classical reader; but this art was never carried on openly in any country.
All governments looked upon it as a crime of the deepest dye. While
astrology was encouraged, and its professors courted and rewarded,
necromancers were universally condemned to the stake or the gallows.
Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, Arnold of Villeneuve, and many others,
were accused by the public opinion of many centuries, of meddling in these
unhallowed matters. So deep-rooted has always been the popular delusion
with respect to accusations of this kind, that no crime was ever disproved
with such toil and difficulty. That it met great encouragement, nevertheless,
is evident from the vast numbers of pretenders to it; who, in spite of the
danger, have existed in all ages and countries.
Geomancy, or the art of foretelling the future by means of lines and circles,
and other mathematical figures drawn on the earth, is still extensively
practised in Asiatic countries, but is almost unknown in Europe.
Augury, from the flight or entrails of birds, so favourite a study among the
Romans, is, in like manner, exploded in Europe. Its most assiduous
professors, at the present day, are the abominable Thugs of India.
Divination, of which there are many kinds, boasts a more enduring
reputation. It has held an empire over the minds of men from the earliest
periods of recorded history, and is, in all probability, coeval with time itself.
It was practised alike by the Jews, the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, the
Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans; is equally known to all modern
nations, in every part of the world; and is not unfamiliar to the untutored
tribes that roam in the wilds of Africa and America. Divination, as practised
in civilised Europe at the present day, is chiefly from cards, the tea-cup, and
the lines on the palm of the hand. Gipsies alone make a profession of it; but
there are thousands and tens of thousands of humble families in which the
good-wife, and even the good-man, resort to the grounds at the bottom of
their tea-cups, to know whether the next harvest will be abundant, or their
sow bring forth a numerous litter; and in which the young maidens look to
the same place to know when they are to be married, and whether the man
of their choice is to be dark or fair, rich or poor, kind or cruel. Divination by
cards, so great a favourite among the moderns, is, of course, a modern
science; as cards do not yet boast an antiquity of much more than four
hundred years. Divination by the palm, so confidently believed in by half
the village lasses in Europe, is of older date, and seems to have been known
to the Egyptians in the time of the patriarchs; as well as divination by the
cup, which, as we are informed in Genesis, was practised by Joseph.
Divination by the rod was also practised by the Egyptians. In comparatively
recent times, it was pretended that by this means hidden treasures could be
discovered. It now appears to be altogether exploded in Europe. Onomancy,
or the foretelling a man’s fate by the letters of his name, and the various
transpositions of which they are capable, is a more modern sort of
divination; but it reckons comparatively few believers.
The following list of the various species of divination formerly in use, is
given by Gaule in his Magastromancer, and quoted in Hone’s Year-Book, p.
1517.
Stereomancy, or divining by the elements.
Aeromancy, or divining by the air.
Pyromancy, by fire,
Hydromancy, by water.
Geomancy, by earth.
Theomancy, pretending to divine by the revelation of the Spirit, and by
the Scriptures, or word of God.
Demonomancy, by the aid of devils and evil spirits.
Idolomancy, by idols, images, and figures.
Psychomancy, by the soul, affections, or dispositions of men.
Anthropomancy, by the entrails of human beings.
Theriomancy, by beasts.
Ornithomancy, by birds.
Ichthyomancy, by fishes.
Botanomancy, by herbs.
Lithomancy, by stones.
Kleromancy, by lots.
Oneiromancy, by dreams.
Onomancy, by names.
Arithmancy, by numbers.
Logarithmancy, by logarithms.
Sternomancy, by the marks from the breast to the belly.
Gastromancy, by the sound of, or marks upon the belly.
Omphalomancy, by the navel.
Chiromancy, by the hands.
Podomancy, by the feet.
Onchyomancy, by the nails.
Cephaleonomancy, by asses’ heads.
Tephromancy, by ashes.
Kapnomancy, by smoke.
Knissomancy, by the burning of incense.
Ceromancy, by the melting of wax.
Lecanomancy, by basins of water.
Katoptromancy, by looking-glasses.
Chartomancy, by writing in papers, and by Valentines.
Macharomancy, by knives and swords.
Crystallomancy, by crystals.
Dactylomancy, by rings.
Koskinomancy, by sieves.
Axinomancy, by saws.
Chalcomancy, by vessels of brass, or other metal.
Spatilomancy, by skins, bones, &c.
Astromancy, by stars.
Sciomancy, by shadows.
Astragalomancy, by dice.
Oinomancy, by the lees of wine.
Sycomancy, by figs.
Tyromancy, by cheese.
Alphitomancy, by meal, flour, or bran.
Krithomancy, by corn or grain.
Alectromancy, by cocks.
Gyromancy, by circles.
Lampadomancy, by candles and lamps.
Oneiro-Criticism, or the art of interpreting dreams, is a relic of the most
remote ages, which has subsisted through all the changes that moral or
physical revolutions have operated in the world. The records of five
thousand years bear abundant testimony to the universal diffusion of the
belief, that the skilful could read the future in dreams. The rules of the art, if
any existed in ancient times, are not known; but in our day, one simple rule
opens the whole secret. Dreams, say all the wiseacres in Christendom, are
to be interpreted by contraries. Thus, if you dream of filth, you will acquire
something valuable; if you dream of the dead, you will hear news of the
living; if you dream of gold and silver, you run a risk of being without
either; and if you dream you have many friends, you will be persecuted by
many enemies. The rule, however, does not hold good in all cases. It is
fortunate to dream of little pigs, but unfortunate to dream of big bullocks. If
you dream you have lost a tooth, you may be sure that you will shortly lose
a friend; and if you dream that your house is on fire, you will receive news
from a far country. If you dream of vermin, it is a sign that there will be
sickness in your family; and if you dream of serpents, you will have friends
who, in the course of time, will prove your bitterest enemies; but, of all
dreams, it is most fortunate if you dream that you are wallowing up to your
neck in mud and mire. Clear water is a sign of grief; and great troubles,
distress, and perplexity are predicted, if you dream that you stand naked in
the public streets, and know not where to find a garment to shield you from
the gaze of the multitude.
In many parts of Great Britain, and the continents of Europe and
America, there are to be found elderly women in the villages and country-
places whose interpretations of dreams are looked upon with as much
reverence as if they were oracles. In districts remote from towns it is not
uncommon to find the members of a family regularly every morning
narrating their dreams at the breakfast-table, and becoming happy or
miserable for the day according to their interpretation. There is not a flower
that blossoms, or fruit that ripens, that, dreamed of, is not ominous of either
good or evil to such people. Every tree of the field or the forest is endowed
with a similar influence over the fate of mortals, if seen in the night-visions.
To dream of the ash, is the sign of a long journey; and of an oak,
prognosticates long life and prosperity. To dream you stript the bark off any
tree, is a sign to a maiden of an approaching loss of a character; to a married
woman, of a family bereavement; and to a man, of an accession of fortune.
To dream of a leafless tree, is a sign of great sorrow; and of a branchless
trunk, a sign of despair and suicide. The elder-tree is more auspicious to the
sleeper; while the fir-tree, better still, betokens all manner of comfort and
prosperity. The lime-tree predicts a voyage across the ocean; while the yew
and the alder are ominous of sickness to the young and of death to the old.62
Among the flowers and fruits charged with messages for the future, the
following is a list of the most important, arranged from approved sources,
in alphabetical order:
Asparagus, gathered and tied up in bundles, is an omen of tears. If you
see it growing in your dreams, it is a sign of good fortune.
Aloes, without a flower, betokens long life; in flower, betokens a
legacy.
Artichokes. This vegetable is a sign that you will receive, in a short
time, a favour from the hands of those from whom you would least
expect it.
Agrimony. This herb denotes that there will be sickness in your house.
Anemone predicts love.
Auriculas, in beds, denote luck; in pots, marriage; while to gather
them, foretells widowhood.
Bilberries predict a pleasant excursion.
Broom-flowers an increase of family.
Cauliflowers predict that all your friends will slight you, or that you
will fall into poverty and find no one to pity you.
Dock-leaves, a present from the country.
Daffodils. Any maiden who dreams of daffodils is warned by her good
angel to avoid going into a wood with her lover, or into any dark or
retired place where she might not be able to make people hear her if
she cried out. Alas for her if she pay no attention to the warning!
“Never again shall she put garland on;
Instead of it she’ll wear sad cypress now,
And bitter elder broken from the bough.”
Figs, if green, betoken embarrassment; if dried, money to the poor, and
mirth to the rich.
Hearts-ease betokens heart’s pain.
Lilies predict joy; water-lilies, danger from the sea.
Lemons betoken a separation.
Pomegranates predict happy wedlock to those who are single, and
reconciliation to those who are married and have disagreed.
Quinces prognosticate pleasant company.
Roses denote happy love, not unmixed with sorrow from other sources.
Sorrel. To dream of this herb is a sign that you will shortly have
occasion to exert all your prudence to overcome some great
calamity.
Sunflowers shew that your pride will be deeply wounded.
Violets predict evil to the single, and joy to the married.
Yellow-flowers of any kind predict jealousy.
Yew-berries predict loss of character to both sexes.
It should be observed that the rules for the interpretation of dreams are
far from being universal. The cheeks of the peasant girl of England glow
with pleasure in the morning after she has dreamed of a rose, while the
paysanne of Normandy dreads disappointment and vexation for the very
same reason. The Switzer who dreams of an oak-tree does not share in the
Englishman’s joy; for he imagines that the vision was a warning to him that,
from some trifling cause, an overwhelming calamity will burst over him.
Thus do the ignorant and the credulous torment themselves; thus do they
spread their nets to catch vexation, and pass their lives between hopes
which are of no value and fears which are a positive evil.
Omens. Among the other means of self-annoyance upon which men have
stumbled, in their vain hope of discovering the future, signs and omens hold
a conspicuous place. There is scarcely an occurrence in nature which,
happening at a certain time, is not looked upon by some persons as a
prognosticator either of good or evil. The latter are in the greatest number,
so much more ingenious are we in tormenting ourselves than in discovering
reasons for enjoyment in the things that surround us. We go out of our
course to make ourselves uncomfortable; the cup of life is not bitter enough
to our palate, and we distil superfluous poison to put into it, or conjure up
hideous things to frighten ourselves at, which would never exist if we did
not make them. “We suffer,” says Addison,63 “as much from trifling
accidents as from real evils. I have known the shooting of a star spoil a
night’s rest, and have seen a man in love grow pale and lose his appetite
upon the plucking of a merrythought. A screech-owl at midnight has
alarmed a family more than a band of robbers; nay, the voice of a cricket
has struck more terror than the roaring of a lion. There is nothing so
inconsiderable which may not appear dreadful to an imagination that is
filled with omens and prognostics. A rusty nail or a crooked pin shoot up
into prodigies.”
The century and a quarter that has passed away since Addison wrote has
seen the fall of many errors. Many fallacies and delusions have been
crushed under the foot of Time since then; but this has been left unscathed,
to frighten the weak-minded and embitter their existence. A belief in omens
is not confined to the humble and uninformed. A general who led an army
with credit has been known to feel alarmed at a winding-sheet in the candle;
and learned men, who had honourably and fairly earned the highest honours
of literature, have been seen to gather their little ones around them, and fear
that one would be snatched away, because,
“When stole upon the time the dead of night,
And heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes,”
a dog in the street was howling at the moon. Persons who would
acknowledge freely that the belief in omens was unworthy of a man of
sense, have yet confessed at the same time that, in spite of their reason, they
have been unable to conquer their fears of death when they heard the
harmless insect called the death-watch ticking in the wall, or saw an oblong
hollow coal fly out of the fire.
Many other evil omens besides those mentioned above alarm the vulgar
and the weak. If a sudden shivering comes over such people, they believe
that, at that instant, an enemy is treading over the spot that will one day be
their grave. If they meet a sow when they first walk abroad in the morning,
it is an omen of evil for that day. To meet an ass, is in like manner unlucky.
It is also very unfortunate to walk under a ladder; to forget to eat goose on
the festival of St. Michael; to tread upon a beetle, or to eat the twin nuts that
are sometimes found in one shell. Woe, in like manner, is predicted to that
wight who inadvertently upsets the salt; each grain that is overthrown will
bring to him a day of sorrow. If thirteen persons sit at table, one of them
will die within the year; and all of them will be unhappy. Of all evil omens
this is the worst. The facetious Dr. Kitchener used to observe that there was
one case in which he believed that it was really unlucky for thirteen persons
to sit down to dinner, and that was when there was only dinner enough for
twelve. Unfortunately for their peace of mind, the great majority of people
do not take this wise view of the matter. In almost every country of Europe
the same superstition prevails, and some carry it so far as to look upon the
number thirteen as in every way ominous of evil; and if they find thirteen
coins in their purse, cast away the odd one like a polluted thing. The
philosophic Beranger, in his exquisite song, Thirteen at Table, has taken a
poetical view of this humiliating superstition, and mingled, as is his wont, a
lesson of genuine wisdom in his lay. Being at dinner, he overthrows the salt,
and, looking round the room, discovers that he is the thirteenth guest. While
he is mourning his unhappy fate, and conjuring up visions of disease and
suffering and the grave, he is suddenly startled by the apparition of Death
herself, not in the shape of a grim foe, with skeleton-ribs and menacing
dart, but of an angel of light, who shews the folly of tormenting ourselves
with the dread of her approach, when she is the friend, rather than the
enemy, of man, and frees us from the fetters which bind us to the dust.
If men could bring themselves to look upon death in this manner, living
well and wisely till her inevitable approach, how vast a store of grief and
vexation would they spare themselves!
Among good omens, one of the most conspicuous is to meet a piebald
horse. To meet two of these animals is still more fortunate; and if on such
an occasion you spit thrice, and form any reasonable wish, it will be
gratified within three days. It is also a sign of good fortune if you
inadvertently put on your stocking wrong side out. If you wilfully wear
your stocking in this fashion, no good will come of it. It is very lucky to
sneeze twice; but if you sneeze a third time, the omen loses its power, and
your good fortune will be nipped in the bud. If a strange dog follow you,
and fawn on you, and wish to attach itself to you, it is a sign of very great
prosperity. Just as fortunate is it if a strange male cat comes to your house
and manifests friendly intentions towards your family. If a she cat, it is an
omen, on the contrary, of very great misfortune. If a swarm of bees alight in
your garden, some very high honour and great joys await you.
Besides these glimpses of the future, you may know something of your
fate by a diligent attention to every itching that you may feel in your body.
Thus, if the eye or the nose itches, it is a sign you will be shortly vexed; if
the foot itches, you will tread upon strange ground; and if the elbow itches,
you will change your bedfellow. Itching of the right hand prognosticates
that you will soon have a sum of money; and, of the left, that you will be
called upon to disburse it.
These are but a few of the omens which are generally credited in
modern Europe. A complete list of them would fatigue from its length, and
sicken from its absurdity. It would be still more unprofitable to attempt to
specify the various delusions of the same kind which are believed among
oriental nations. Every reader will remember the comprehensive formula of
cursing preserved in Tristram Shandy—curse a man after any fashion you
remember or can invent, you will be sure to find it there. The oriental creed
of omens is not less comprehensive. Every movement of the body, every
emotion of the mind, is at certain times an omen. Every form and object in
nature, even the shape of the clouds and the changes of the weather; every
colour, every sound, whether of men or animals, or birds or insects, or
inanimate things, is an omen. Nothing is too trifling or inconsiderable to
inspire a hope which is not worth cherishing, or a fear which is sufficient to
embitter existence.
From the belief in omens springs the superstition that has, from very
early ages, set apart certain days, as more favourable than others, for prying
into the secrets of futurity. The following, copied verbatim from the popular
Dream and Omen Book of Mother Bridget, will shew the belief of the
people of England at the present day. Those who are curious as to the
ancient history of these observances, will find abundant aliment in the
Every-day Book.
“The 1st of January.—If a young maiden drink, on going to bed, a pint
of cold spring water, in which is beat up an amulet, composed of the
yolk of a pullet’s egg, the legs of a spider, and the skin of an eel
pounded, her future destiny will be revealed to her in a dream. This
charm fails of its effect if tried any other day of the year.
“Valentine Day.—Let a single woman go out of her own door very
early in the morning, and if the first person she meets be a woman, she
will not be married that year; if she meet a man she will be married
within three months.
“Lady Day.—The following charm may be tried this day with
certain success: String thirty-one nuts on a string, composed of red
worsted mixed with blue silk, and tie it round your neck on going to
bed, repeating these lines:
“Oh, I wish! oh, I wish to see
Who my true love is to be!
Shortly after midnight, you will see your lover in a dream, and be
informed at the same time of all the principal events of your future life.
“St. Swithin’s Eve.—Select three things you most wish to know;
write them down with a new pen and red ink on a sheet of fine wove
paper, from which you must previously cut off all the corners and burn
them. Fold the paper into a true lover’s knot, and wrap round it three
hairs from your head. Place the paper under your pillow for three
successive nights, and your curiosity to know the future will be
satisfied.
“St. Mark’s Eve.—Repair to the nearest churchyard as the clock
strikes twelve, and take from a grave on the south side of the church
three tufts of grass (the longer and ranker the better), and on going to
bed place them under your pillow, repeating earnestly three several
times,
‘The Eve of St. Mark by prediction is blest,
Set therefore my hopes and my fears all to rest:
Let me know my fate, whether weal or woe;
Whether my rank’s to be high or low;
Whether to live single, or be a bride,
And the destiny my star doth provide.’
Should you have no dream that night, you will be single and miserable
all your life. If you dream of thunder and lightning, your life will be
one of great difficulty and sorrow.
“Candlemas Eve.—On this night (which is the purification of the
Virgin Mary), let three, five, seven, or nine young maidens assemble
together in a square chamber. Hang in each corner a bundle of sweet
herbs, mixed with rue and rosemary. Then mix a cake of flour, olive-
oil, and white sugar; every maiden having an equal share in the making
and the expense of it. Afterwards it must be cut into equal pieces, each
one marking the piece as she cuts it with the initials of her name. It is
then to be baked one hour before the fire, not a word being spoken the
whole time, and the maidens sitting with their arms and knees across.
Each piece of cake is then to be wrapped up in a sheet of paper, on
which each maiden shall write the love part of Solomon’s Songs. If she
put this under her pillow she will dream true. She will see her future
husband and every one of her children, and will know besides whether
her family will be poor or prosperous, a comfort to her or the contrary.
“Midsummer.—Take three roses, smoke them with sulphur, and
exactly at three in the day bury one of the roses under a yew-tree; the
second in a newly-made grave, and put the third under your pillow for
three nights, and at the end of that period burn it in a fire of charcoal.
Your dreams during that time will be prophetic of your future destiny,
and, what is still more curious and valuable, says Mother Bridget, the
man whom you are to wed will enjoy no peace till he comes and visits
you. Besides this, you will perpetually haunt his dreams.
“St. John’s Eve.—Make a new pincushion of the very best black
velvet (no inferior quality will answer the purpose), and on one side
stick your name at full length with the very smallest pins that can be
bought (none other will do). On the other side make a cross with some
very large pins, and surround it with a circle. Put this into your
stocking when you take it off at night, and hang it up at the foot of the
bed. All your future life will pass before you in a dream.
“First New Moon of the year.—On the first new moon in the year
take a pint of clear spring water, and infuse into it the white of an egg
laid by a white hen, a glass of whitewine, three almonds peeled white,
and a tablespoonful of white rose-water. Drink this on going to bed,
not making more nor less than three draughts of it; repeating the
following verses three several times in a clear distinct voice, but not so
loud as to be overheard by any body:
‘If I dream of water pure
Before the coming morn,
’Tis a sign I shall be poor,
And unto wealth not born.
If I dream of tasting beer,
Middling then will be my cheer—
Chequer’d with the good and bad,
Sometimes joyful, sometimes sad;
But should I dream of drinking wine,
Wealth and pleasure will be mine.
The stronger the drink, the better the cheer—
Dreams of my destiny, appear, appear!’
“Twenty-ninth of February.—This day, as it only occurs once in
four years, is peculiarly auspicious to those who desire to have a
glance at futurity, especially to young maidens burning with anxiety to
know the appearance and complexion of their future lords. The charm
to be adopted is the following: Stick twenty-seven of the smallest pins
that are made, three by three, into a tallow candle. Light it up at the
wrong end, and then place it in a candlestick made out of clay, which
must be drawn from a virgin’s grave. Place this on the chimney-place,
in the left-hand corner, exactly as the clock strikes twelve, and go to
bed immediately. When the candle is burnt out, take the pins and put
them into your left shoe; and before nine nights have elapsed your fate
will be revealed to you.”
We have now taken a hasty review of the various modes of seeking to
discover the future, especially as practised in modern times. The main
features of the folly appear essentially the same in all countries. National
character and peculiarities operate some difference of interpretation. The
mountaineer makes the natural phenomena which he most frequently
witnesses prognosticative of the future. The dweller in the plains, in a
similar manner, seeks to know his fate among the signs of the things that
surround him, and tints his superstition with the hues of his own clime. The
same spirit animates them all—the same desire to know that which Infinite
Mercy has concealed. There is but little probability that the curiosity of
mankind in this respect will ever be wholly eradicated. Death and ill fortune
are continual bugbears to the weak-minded, the irreligious, and the
ignorant; and while such exist in the world, divines will preach upon its
impiety and philosophers discourse upon its absurdity in vain. Still it is
evident that these follies have greatly diminished. Soothsayers and prophets
have lost the credit they formerly enjoyed, and skulk in secret now where
they once shewed their faces in the blaze of day. So far there is manifest
improvement.
The Magnetisers
Table of Contents
Some deemed them wondrous wise, and some believed
them mad.
Beattie’s Minstrel.
The wonderful influence of imagination in the cure of diseases is well
known. A motion of the hand, or a glance of the eye, will throw a weak and
credulous patient into a fit; and a pill made of bread, if taken with sufficient
faith, will operate a cure better than all the drugs in the pharmacopœia. The
Prince of Orange, at the siege of Breda, in 1625, cured all his soldiers, who
were dying of the scurvy, by a philanthropic piece of quackery, which he
played upon them with the knowledge of the physicians, when all other
means had failed.64 Many hundreds of instances, of a similar kind, might be
related, especially from the history of witchcraft. The mummeries, strange
gesticulations, and barbarous jargon of witches and sorcerers, which
frightened credulous and nervous women, brought on all those symptoms of
hysteria and other similar diseases, so well understood now, but which were
then supposed to be the work of the Devil, not only by the victims and the
public in general, but by the operators themselves.
In the age when alchymy began to fall into some disrepute, and learning
to lift up its voice against it, a new delusion, based upon this power of
imagination, suddenly arose, and found apostles among all the alchymists.
Numbers of them, forsaking their old pursuits, made themselves
magnetisers. It appeared first in the shape of mineral, and afterwards of
animal, magnetism, under which latter name it survives to this day, and
numbers its dupes by thousands.
The mineral magnetisers claim the first notice, as the worthy
predecessors of the quacks of the present day. The honour claimed for
Paracelsus, of being the first of the Rosicrucians, has been disputed; but his
claim to be considered the first of the magnetisers can scarcely be
challenged. It has been already mentioned of him, in the part of this work
which treats of alchymy, that, like nearly all the distinguished adepts, he
was a physician; and pretended, not only to make gold and confer
immortality, but to cure all diseases. He was the first who, with the latter
view, attributed occult and miraculous powers to the magnet. Animated
apparently by a sincere conviction that the magnet was the philosopher’s
stone, which, if it could not transmute metals, could soothe all human
suffering and arrest the progress of decay, he travelled for many years in
Persia and Arabia, in search of the mountain of adamant, so famed in
oriental fables. When he practised as a physician at Basle, he called one of
his nostrums by the name of azoth—a stone or crystal, which, he said,
contained magnetic properties, and cured epilepsy, hysteria, and spasmodic
affections. He soon found imitators. His fame spread far and near; and thus
were sown the first seeds of that error which has since taken root and
flourished so widely. In spite of the denial of modern practitioners, this
must be considered the origin of magnetism; for we find that, beginning
with Paracelsus, there was a regular succession of mineral magnetisers until
Mesmer appeared, and gave a new feature to the delusion.
Paracelsus boasted of being able to transplant diseases from the human
frame into the earth, by means of the magnet. He said there were six ways
by which this might be effected. One of them will be quite sufficient as a
specimen. “If a person suffer from disease, either local or general, let the
following remedy be tried. Take a magnet, impregnated with mummy,65 and
mixed with rich earth. In this earth sow some seeds that have a congruity or
homogeneity with the disease; then let this earth, well sifted and mixed with
mummy, be laid in an earthen vessel; and let the seeds committed to it be
watered daily with a lotion in which the diseased limb or body has been
washed. Thus will the disease be transplanted from the human body to the
seeds which are in the earth. Having done this, transplant the seeds from the
earthen vessel to the ground, and wait till they begin to sprout into herbs; as
they increase, the disease will diminish; and when they have arrived at their
full growth, it will disappear altogether.”
Kircher the Jesuit, whose quarrel with the alchymists was the means of
exposing many of their impostures, was a firm believer in the efficacy of
the magnet. Having been applied to by a patient afflicted with hernia, he
directed the man to swallow a small magnet reduced to powder, while he
applied at the same time to the external swelling, a poultice made of filings
of iron. He expected that by this means the magnet, when it got to the
corresponding place inside, would draw in the iron, and with it the tumour;
which would thus, he said, be safely and expeditiously reduced.
As this new doctrine of magnetism spread, it was found that wounds
inflicted with any metallic substance could be cured by the magnet. In
process of time, the delusion so increased, that it was deemed sufficient to
magnetise a sword, to cure any hurt which that sword might have inflicted!
This was the origin of the celebrated “weapon-salve,” which excited so
much attention about the middle of the seventeenth century. The following
was the recipe given by Paracelsus for the cure of any wounds inflicted by a
sharp weapon, except such as had penetrated the heart, the brain, or the
arteries. “Take of moss growing on the head of a thief who has been hanged
and left in the air; of real mummy; of human blood, still warm—of each,
one ounce; of human suet, two ounces; of linseed oil, turpentine, and
Armenian bole—of each, two drachms. Mix all well in a mortar, and keep
the salve in an oblong, narrow urn.” With this salve the weapon, after being
dipped in the blood from the wound, was to be carefully anointed, and then
laid by in a cool place. In the mean time, the wound was to be duly washed
with fair clean water, covered with a clean, soft, linen rag, and opened once
a day to cleanse off purulent or other matter. Of the success of this
treatment, says the writer of the able article on Animal Magnetism, in the
twelfth volume of the Foreign Quarterly Review, there cannot be the least
doubt; “for surgeons at this moment follow exactly the same method, except
anointing the weapon!”
The weapon-salve continued to be much spoken of on the Continent,
and many eager claimants appeared for the honour of the invention. Dr.
Fludd, or A. Fluctibus, the Rosicrucian, who has been already mentioned in
a previous part of this volume, was very zealous in introducing it into
England. He tried it with great success in several cases, and no wonder, for
while he kept up the spirits of his patients by boasting of the great efficacy
of the salve, he never neglected those common, but much more important
remedies, of washing, bandaging, &c. which the experience of all ages had
declared sufficient for the purpose. Fludd moreover declared, that the
magnet was a remedy for all diseases, if properly applied; but that man
having, like the earth, a north and a south pole, magnetism could only take
place when his body was in a boreal position! In the midst of his popularity,
an attack was made upon him and his favourite remedy, the salve; which,
however, did little or nothing to diminish the belief in its efficacy. One
“Parson Foster” wrote a pamphlet, entitled Hyplocrisma Spongus; or, a
Spunge to wipe away the Weapon-Salve; in which he declared, that it was as
bad as witchcraft to use or recommend such an unguent; that it was
invented by the Devil, who, at the last day, would seize upon every person
who had given it the slightest encouragement. “In fact,” said Parson Foster,
“the Devil himself gave it to Paracelsus; Paracelsus to the emperor; the
emperor to the courtier; the courtier to Baptista Porta; and Baptista Porta to
Dr. Fludd, a doctor of physic, yet living and practising in the famous city of
London, who now stands tooth and nail for it.” Dr. Fludd, thus assailed,
took up the pen in defence of his unguent, in a reply called The Squeezing
of Parson Foster’s Spunge; wherein the Spunge-bearer’s immodest carriage
and behaviour towards his brethren is detected; the bitter flames of his
slanderous reports are, by the sharp vinegar of truth, corrected and quite
extinguished; and lastly, the virtuous validity of his spunge in wiping away
the-weapon-salve, is crushed out and clean abolished.
Shortly after this dispute a more distinguished believer in the weapon-
salve made his appearance in the person of Sir Kenelm Digby, the son of Sir
Everard Digby, who was executed for his participation in the Gunpowder
Plot. This gentleman, who, in other respects, was an accomplished scholar
and an able man, was imbued with all the extravagant notions of the
alchymists. He believed in the philosopher’s stone, and wished to engage
Descartes to devote his energies to the discovery of the elixir of life, or
some other means by which the existence of man might be prolonged to an
indefinite period. He gave his wife, the beautiful Venetia Anastasia Stanley,
a dish of capons fed upon vipers, according to the plan supposed to have
been laid down by Arnold of Villeneuve, in the hope that she might thereby
preserve her loveliness for a century. If such a man once took up the idea of
the weapon-salve, it was to be expected that he would make the most of it.
In his hands, however, it was changed from an unguent into a powder, and
was called the powder of sympathy. He pretended that he had acquired the
knowledge of it from a Carmelite friar, who had learned it in Persia or
Armenia, from an oriental philosopher of great renown. King James, the
Prince of Wales, the Duke of Buchingham, and many other noble
personages, believed in its efficacy. The following remarkable instance of
his mode of cure was read by Sir Kenelm to a society of learned men at
Montpellier. Mr. James Howell, the well-known author of the Dendrologia,
and of various letters, coming by chance as two of his best friends were
fighting a duel, rushed between them and endeavoured to part them. He
seized the sword of one of the combatants by the hilt, while, at the same
time, he grasped the other by the blade. Being transported with fury one
against the other, they struggled to rid themselves of the hindrance caused
by their friend; and in so doing, the one whose sword was held by the blade
by Mr. Howell, drew it away roughly, and nearly cut his hand off, severing
the nerves and muscles, and penetrating to the bone. The other, almost at
the same instant, disengaged his sword, and aimed a blow at the head of his
antagonist, which Mr. Howell observing, raised his wounded hand with the
rapidity of thought to prevent the blow. The sword fell on the back of his
already wounded hand, and cut it severely. “It seemed,” said Sir Kenelm
Digby, “as if some unlucky star raged over them, that they should have both
shed the blood of that dear friend for whose life they would have given their
own, if they had been in their proper mind at the time.” Seeing Mr.
Howell’s face all besmeared with blood from his wounded hand, they both
threw down their swords and embraced him, and bound up his hand with a
garter, to close the veins which were cut and bled profusely. They then
conveyed him home, and sent for a surgeon. King James, who was much
attached to Mr. Howell, afterwards sent his own surgeon to attend him. We
must continue the narrative in the words of Sir Kenelm Digby: “It was my
chance,” says he, “to be lodged hard by him; and four or five days after, as I
was making myself ready, he came to my house, and prayed me to view his
wounds. ‘For I understand,’ said he, ‘that you have extraordinary remedies
on such occasions; and my surgeons apprehend some fear that it may grow
to a gangrene, and so the hand must be cut off.’ In effect, his countenance
discovered that he was in much pain, which, he said, was insupportable in
regard of the extreme inflammation. I told him I would willingly serve him;
but if, haply, he knew the manner how I could cure him, without touching
or seeing him, it might be that he would not expose himself to my manner
of curing; because he would think it, peradventure, either ineffectual or
superstitious. He replied, ‘The many wonderful things which people have
related unto me of your way of medicinement makes me nothing doubt at
all of its efficacy; and all that I have to say unto you is comprehended in the
Spanish proverb, Hagase el milagro y hagalo Mahoma—Let the miracle be
done, though Mahomet do it.’
“I asked him then for any thing that had the blood upon it: so he
presently sent for his garter, wherewith his hand was first bound; and
as I called for a basin of water, as if I would wash my hands, I took a
handful of powder of vitriol, which I had in my study, and presently
dissolved it. As soon as the bloody garter was brought me, I put it in
the basin, observing, in the interim, what Mr. Howell did, who stood
talking with a gentleman in a corner of my chamber, not regarding at
all what I was doing. He started suddenly, as if he had found some
strange alteration in himself. I asked him what he ailed? ‘I know not
what ails me, but I find that I feel no more pain. Methinks that a
pleasing kind of freshness, as it were a wet cold napkin, did spread
over my hand, which hath taken away the inflammation that tormented
me before.’ I replied, ‘Since, then, you feel already so much good of
my medicament, I advise you to cast away all your plasters; only keep
the wound clean, and in a moderate temper betwixt heat and cold.’
This was presently reported to the Duke of Buckingham, and, a little
after, to the king, who were both very curious to know the
circumstances of the business; which was, that after dinner I took the
garter out of the water, and put it to dry before a great fire. It was
scarce dry before Mr. Howell’s servant came running, and saying that
his master felt as much burning as ever he had done, if not more; for
the heat was such as if his hand were betwixt coals of fire. I answered
that, although that had happened at present, yet he should find ease in a
short time; for I knew the reason of this new accident, and would
provide accordingly; for his master should be free from that
inflammation, it might be before he could possibly return to him. But,
in case he found no ease, I wished him to come presently back again; if
not, he might forbear coming. Thereupon he went, and, at the instant I
did put the garter again into the water; thereupon he found his master
without any pain at all. To be brief, there was no cense of pain
afterwards; but within five or six days the wounds were sicatrised and
entirely healed.”
Such is the marvellous story of Sir Kenelm Digby. Other practitioners
of that age were not behind him in their pretensions. It was not always
thought necessary to use either the powder of sympathy, or the weapon-
salve, to effect a cure. It was sufficient to magnetise the sword with the
hand (the first faint dawn of the animal theory), to relieve any pain the same
weapon had caused. They asserted, that if they stroked the sword upwards
with their fingers, the wounded person would feel immediate relief; but if
they stroked it downwards, he would feel intolerable pain.66
Another very singular notion of the power and capabilities of
magnetism was entertained at the same time. It was believed that a
sympathetic alphabet could be made on the flesh, by means of which
persons could correspond with each other, and communicate all their ideas
with the rapidity of volition, although thousands of miles apart. From the
arms of two persons a piece of flesh was cut, and mutually transplanted,
while still warm and bleeding. The piece so severed grew to the new arm on
which it was placed; but still retained so close a sympathy with its native
limb, that its old possessor was always sensible of any injury done to it.
Upon these transplanted pieces were tatooed the letters of the alphabet; so
that, when a communication was to be made, either of the persons, though
the wide Atlantic rolled between them, had only to prick his arm with a
magnetic needle, and straightway his friend received intimation that the
telegraph was at work. Whatever letter he pricked on his own arm pained
the same letter on the arm of his correspondent.
Contemporary with Sir Kenelm Digby was the no less famous Mr.
Valentine Greatraks, who, without mentioning magnetism, or laying claim
to any theory, practised upon himself and others a deception much more
akin to the animal magnetism of the present day than the mineral
magnetism it was then so much the fashion to study. He was the son of an
Irish gentleman, of good education and property, in the county of Cork. He
fell, at an early age, into a sort of melancholy derangement. After some time
he had an impulse, or strange persuasion in his mind, which continued to
present itself, whether he were sleeping or waking, that God had given him
the power of curing the king’s evil. He mentioned this persuasion to his
wife, who very candidly told him that he was a fool. He was not quite sure
of this, notwithstanding the high authority from which it came, and
determined to make trial of the power that was in him. A few days
afterwards, he went to one William Maher, of Saltersbridge, in the parish of
Lismore, who was grievously afflicted with the king’s evil in his eyes,
cheek, and throat. Upon this man, who was of abundant faith, he laid his
hands, stroked him, and prayed fervently. He had the satisfaction to see him
heal considerably in the course of a few days; and finally, with the aid of
other remedies, to be quite cured. This success encouraged him in the belief
that he had a divine mission. Day after day he had further impulses from on
high that he was called upon to cure the ague also. In the course of time he
extended his powers to the curing of epilepsy, ulcers, aches, and lameness.
All the county of Cork was in a commotion to see this extraordinary
physician, who certainly operated some very great benefit in cases where
the disease was heightened by hypochondria and depression of spirits.
According to his own account,67 such great multitudes resorted to him from
divers places, that he had no time to follow his own business, or enjoy the
company of his family and friends. He was obliged to set aside three days in
the week, from six in the morning till six at night, during which time only
he laid hands upon all that came. Still the crowds which thronged around
him were so great, that the neighbouring towns were not able to
accommodate them. He thereupon left his house in the country, and went to
Youghal, where the resort of sick people, not only from all parts of Ireland,
but from England, continued so great, that the magistrates were afraid they
would infect the place by their diseases. Several of these poor credulous
people no sooner saw him than they fell into fits, and he restored them by
waving his hand in their faces, and praying over them. Nay, he affirmed that
the touch of his glove had driven pains away, and, on one occasion, cast out
from a woman several devils, or evil spirits, who tormented her day and
night. “Every one of these devils,” says Greatraks, “was like to choke her
when it came up into her throat.” It is evident from this that the woman’s
complaint was nothing but hysteria.
The clergy of the diocese of Lismore, who seem to have had much
clearer notions of Greatraks’ pretensions than their parishioners, set their
faces against the new prophet and worker of miracles. He was cited to
appear in the Dean’s Court, and prohibited from laying on his hands for the
future: but he cared nothing for the Church. He imagined that he derived his
powers direct from heaven, and continued to throw people into fits, and
bring them to their senses again, as usual, almost exactly after the fashion of
modern magnetisers. His reputation became, at last, so great, that Lord
Conway sent to him from London, begging that he would come over
immediately to cure a grievous headache which his lady had suffered for
several years, and which the principal physicians of England had been
unable to relieve.
Greatraks accepted the invitation, and tried his manipulations and
prayers upon Lady Conway. He failed, however, in affording any relief. The
poor lady’s headache was excited by causes too serious to allow her any
help, even from faith and a lively imagination. He lived for some months in
Lord Conway’s house, at Ragley, in Warwickshire, operating cures similar
to those he had performed in Ireland. He afterwards removed to London,
and took a house in Lincoln’s-Inn Fields, which soon became the daily
resort of all the nervous and credulous women of the metropolis. A very
amusing account of Greatraks at this time (1665) is given in the second
volume of the Miscellanies of St. Evremond, under the title of the Irish
prophet. It is the most graphic sketch ever made of this early magnetiser.
Whether his pretensions were more or less absurd than those of some of his
successors, who have lately made their appearance among us, would be
hard to say.
“When M. de Comminges,” says St. Evremond, “was ambassador from
his most Christian majesty to the king of Great Britain, there came to
London an Irish prophet, who passed himself off as a great worker of
miracles. Some persons of quality having begged M. de Comminges to
invite him to his house, that they might be witnesses of some of his
miracles, the ambassador promised to satisfy them, as much to gratify his
own curiosity as from courtesy to his friends; and gave notice to Greatraks
that he would be glad to see him.
“A rumour of the prophet’s coming soon spread all over the town, and
the hotel of M. de Comminges was crowded by sick persons, who
came full of confidence in their speedy cure. The Irishman made them
wait a considerable time for him, but came at last, in the midst of their
impatience, with a grave and simple countenance, that showed no
signs of his being a cheat. Monsieur de Comminges prepared to
question him strictly, hoping to discourse with him on the matters that
he had read of in Van Helmont and Bodinus; but he was not able to do
so, much to his regret, for the crowd became so great, and cripples and
others pressed around so impatiently to be the first cured, that the
servants were obliged to use threats, and even force, before they could
establish order among them, or place them in proper ranks.
“The prophet affirmed that all diseases were caused by evil spirits.
Every infirmity was with him a case of diabolical possession. The first
that was presented to him was a man suffering from gout and
rheumatism, and so severely that the physicians had been unable to
cure him. ‘Ah,’ said the miracle-worker, ‘I have seen a good deal of
this sort of spirits when I was in Ireland. They are watery spirits, who
bring on cold shivering, and excite an overflow of aqueous humours in
our poor bodies.’ Then addressing the man, he said, ‘Evil spirit, who
hast quitted thy dwelling in the waters to come and afflict this
miserable body, I command thee to quit thy new abode, and to return
to thine ancient habitation!’ This said, the sick man was ordered to
withdraw, and another was brought forward in his place. This new
comer said he was tormented by the melancholy vapours. In fact, he
looked like a hypochondriac; one of those persons, diseased in
imagination, and who but too often become so in reality. ‘Aerial
spirit,’ said the Irishman, ‘return, I command thee, into the air;—
exercise thy natural vocation of raising tempests, and do not excite any
more wind in this sad unlucky body!’ This man was immediately
turned away to make room for a third patient, who, in the Irishman’s
opinion, was only tormented by a little bit of a sprite, who could not
withstand his command for an instant. He pretended that he recognised
this sprite by some marks which were invisible to the company, to
whom he turned with a smile, and said, ‘This sort of spirit does not
often do much harm, and is always very diverting.’ To hear him talk,
one would have imagined that he knew all about spirits,—their names,
their rank, their numbers, their employment, and all the functions they
were destined to; and he boasted of being much better acquainted with
the intrigues of demons than he was with the affairs of men. You can
hardly imagine what a reputation he gained in a short time. Catholics
and Protestants visited him from every part, all believing that power
from heaven was in his hands.”
After relating a rather equivocal adventure of a husband and wife, who
implored Greatraks to cast out the devil of dissension which had crept in
between them, St. Evremond thus sums up the effect he produced on the
popular mind: “So great was the confidence in him, that the blind fancied
they saw the light which they did not see—the deaf imagined that they
heard—the lame that they walked straight, and the paralytic that they had
recovered the use of their limbs. An idea of health made the sick forget for a
while their maladies; and imagination, which was not less active in those
merely drawn by curiosity than in the sick, gave a false view to the one
class, from the desire of seeing, as it operated a false cure on the other from
the strong desire of being healed. Such was the power of the Irishman over
the mind, and such was the influence of the mind upon the body. Nothing
was spoken of in London but his prodigies; and these prodigies were
supported by such great authorities, that the bewildered multitude believed
them almost without examination, while more enlightened people did not
dare to reject them from their own knowledge. The public opinion, timid
and enslaved, respected this imperious and, apparently, well-authenticated
error. Those who saw through the delusion kept their opinion to themselves,
knowing how useless it was to declare their disbelief to a people filled with
prejudice and admiration.”
About the same time that Valentine Greatraks was thus magnetising the
people of London, an Italian enthusiast, named Francisco Bagnone, was
performing the same tricks in Italy, and with as great success. He had only
to touch weak women with his hands, or sometimes (for the sake of
working more effectively upon their fanaticism) with a relic, to make them
fall into fits, and manifest all the symptoms of magnetism.
Besides these, several learned men, in different parts of Europe, directed
their attention to the study of the magnet, believing that it might be
rendered efficacious in many diseases. Van Helmont, in particular,
published a work on the effects of magnetism on the human frame; and
Balthazar Gracian, a Spaniard, rendered himself famous for the boldness of
his views on the subject. “The magnet,” said the latter, “attracts iron; iron is
found every where; every thing, therefore, is under the influence of
magnetism. It is only a modification of the general principle, which
establishes harmony or foments divisions among men. It is the same agent
that gives rise to sympathy, antipathy, and the passions.”68
Baptista Porta, who, in the whimsical genealogy of the weapon-salve,
given by Parson Foster, in his attack upon Dr. à Fluctibus, is mentioned as
one of its fathers, had also great faith in the efficacy of the magnet, and
operated upon the imagination of his patients in a manner which was then
considered so extraordinary that he was accused of being a magician, and
prohibited from practising by the court of Rome. Among others who
distinguished themselves by their faith in magnetism, Sebastian Wirdig and
William Maxwell claim especial notice. Wirdig was professor of medicine
at the university of Rostock in Mecklenburg, and wrote a treatise called The
New Medicine of the Spirits, which he presented to the Royal Society of
London. An edition of this work was printed in 1673, in which the author
maintained that a magnetic influence took place, not only between the
celestial and terrestrial bodies, but between all living things. The whole
world, he said, was under the influence of magnetism; life was preserved by
magnetism; death was the consequence of magnetism!
Maxwell, the other enthusiast, was an admiring disciple of Paracelsus,
and boasted that he had irradiated the obscurity in which too many of the
wonder-working recipes of that great philosopher were enveloped. His
works were printed at Frankfort in 1679. It would seem, from the following
passage, that he was aware of the great influence of imagination, as well in
the production as in the cure of diseases. “If you wish to work prodigies,”
says he, “abstract from the materiality of beings—increase the sum of
spirituality in bodies—rouse the spirit from its slumbers. Unless you do one
or other of these things—unless you can bind the idea, you can never
perform any thing good or great.” Here, in fact, lies the whole secret of
magnetism, and all delusions of a similar kind: increase the spirituality—
rouse the spirit from its slumbers, or, in other words, work upon the
imagination—induce belief and blind confidence, and you may do any
thing. This passage, which is quoted with approbation by M. Dupotet69 in a
work, as strongly corroborative of the theory now advanced by the animal
magnetists, is just the reverse. If they believe they can work all their
wonders by the means so dimly shadowed forth by Maxwell, what becomes
of the universal fluid pervading all nature, and which they pretend to pour
into weak and diseased bodies from the tips of their fingers?
Early in the eighteenth century the attention of Europe was directed to a
very remarkable instance of fanaticism, which has been claimed by the
animal magnetists as a proof of their science. The Convulsionaries of St.
Medard, as they were called, assembled in great numbers round the tomb of
their favourite saint, the Jansenist priest Paris, and taught one another how
to fall into convulsions. They believed that St. Paris would cure all their
infirmities; and the number of hysterical women and weak-minded persons
of all descriptions that flocked to the tomb from far and near was so great as
daily to block up all the avenues leading to it. Working themselves up to a
pitch of excitement, they went off one after the other into fits, while some
of them, still in apparent possession of all their faculties, voluntarily
exposed themselves to sufferings which on ordinary occasions would have
been sufficient to deprive them of life. The scenes that occurred were a
scandal to civilisation and to religion—a strange mixture of obscenity,
absurdity, and superstition. While some were praying on bended knees at
the shrine of St. Paris, others were shrieking and making the most hideous
noises. The women especially exerted themselves. On one side of the
chapel there might be seen a score of them, all in convulsions; while at
another as many more, excited to a sort of frenzy, yielded themselves up to
gross indecencies. Some of them took an insane delight in being beaten and
trampled upon. One in particular, according to Montégre, whose account we
quote,70 was so enraptured with this ill-usage, that nothing but the hardest
blows would satisfy her. While a fellow of Herculean strength was beating
her with all his might with a heavy bar of iron, she kept continually urging
him to renewed exertion. The harder he struck the better she liked it,
exclaiming all the while, “Well done, brother, well done! Oh, how pleasant
it is! what good you are doing me! Courage, my brother, courage; strike
harder, strike harder still!” Another of these fanatics had, if possible, a still
greater love for a beating. Carré de Montgeron, who relates the
circumstance, was unable to satisfy her with sixty blows of a large sledge-
hammer. He afterwards used the same weapon with the same degree of
strength, for the sake of experiment, and succeeded in battering a hole in a
stone wall at the twenty-fifth stroke. Another woman, named Sonnet, laid
herself down on a red-hot brazier without flinching, and acquired for herself
the nickname of the Salamander; while others, desirous of a more
illustrious martyrdom, attempted to crucify themselves. M. Deleuze, in his
critical history of Animal Magnetism, attempts to prove that this fanatical
frenzy was produced by magnetism, and that these mad enthusiasts
magnetised each other without being aware of it. As well might he insist
that the fanaticism which tempts the Hindoo bigot to keep his arms
stretched in a horizontal position till the sinews wither, or his fingers closed
upon his palms till the nails grow out of the backs of his hands, is also an
effect of magnetism!
For a period of sixty or seventy years magnetism was almost wholly
confined to Germany. Men of sense and learning devoted their attention to
the properties of the loadstone; and one Father Hell, a Jesuit, and professor
of astronomy at the University of Vienna, rendered himself famous by his
magnetic cures. About the year 1771 or 1772 he invented steel-plates of a
peculiar form, which he applied to the naked body as a cure for several
diseases. In the year 1774 he communicated his system to Anthony Mesmer.
The latter improved upon the ideas of Father Hell, constructed a new theory
of his own, and became the founder of Animal Magnetism.
It has been the fashion among the enemies of the new delusion to decry
Mesmer as an unprincipled adventurer, while his disciples have extolled
him to the skies as a regenerator of the human race. In nearly the same
words as the Rosicrucians applied to their founders, he has been called the
discoverer of the secret which brings man into more intimate connexion
with his Creator, the deliverer of the soul from the debasing trammels of the
flesh, the man who enables us to set time at defiance, and conquer the
obstructions of space. A careful sifting of his pretensions, and examination
of the evidence brought forward to sustain them, will soon shew which
opinion is the more correct. That the writer of these pages considers him in
the light of a man who, deluding himself, was the means of deluding others,
may be inferred from his finding a place in these volumes, and figuring
among the Flamels, the Agrippas, the Borris, the Böhmens, and the
Cagliostros.
He was born in May 1734, at Mersburg, in Swabia, and studied
medicine at the University of Vienna. He took his degrees in 1766, and
chose the influence of the planets on the human body as the subject of his
inaugural dissertation. Having treated the matter quite in the style of the old
astrological physicians, he was exposed to some ridicule both then and
afterwards. Even at this early period some faint ideas of his great theory
were germinating in his mind. He maintained in his dissertation “that the
sun, moon, and fixed stars mutually affect each other in their orbits; that
they cause and direct in our earth a flux and reflux not only in the sea, but
in the atmosphere, and affect in a similar manner all organised bodies
through the medium of a subtile and mobile fluid, which pervades the
universe, and associates all things together in mutual intercourse and
harmony.” This influence, he said, was particularly exercised on the
nervous system, and produced two states, which he called intension and
remission, which seemed to him to account for the different periodical
revolutions observable in several maladies. When in after-life he met with
Father Hell, he was confirmed by that person’s observations in the truth of
many of his own ideas. Having caused Hell to make him some magnetic
plates, he determined to try experiments with them himself for his further
satisfaction.
He tried accordingly, and was astonished at his success. The faith of
their wearers operated wonders with the metallic plates. Mesmer made due
reports to Father Hell of all he had done, and the latter published them as
the results of his own happy invention, and speaking of Mesmer as a
physician whom he had employed to work under him. Mesmer took offence
at being thus treated, considering himself a far greater personage than
Father Hell. He claimed the invention as his own, accused Hell of a breach
of confidence, and stigmatised him as a mean person, anxious to turn the
discoveries of others to his own account. Hell replied, and a very pretty
quarrel was the result, which afforded small talk for months to the literati of
Vienna. Hell ultimately gained the victory. Mesmer, nothing daunted,
continued to promulgate his views till he stumbled at last upon the animal
theory.
One of his patients was a young lady, named Œsterline, who suffered
under a convulsive malady. Her attacks were periodical, and attended by a
rush of blood to the head, followed by delirium and syncope. These
symptoms he soon succeeded in reducing under his system of planetary
influence, and imagined he could foretell the periods of accession and
remission. Having thus accounted satisfactorily to himself for the origin of
the disease, the idea struck him that he could operate a certain cure if he
could ascertain beyond doubt, what he had long believed, that there existed
between the bodies which compose our globe an action equally reciprocal
and similar to that of the heavenly bodies, by means of which he could
imitate artificially the periodical revolutions of the flux and reflux before
mentioned. He soon convinced himself that this action did exist. When
trying the metallic plates of Father Hell, he thought their efficacy depended
on their form; but he found afterwards that he could produce the same
effects without using them at all, merely by passing his hands downwards
towards the feet of the patient, even when at a considerable distance.
This completed the theory of Mesmer. He wrote an account of his
discovery to all the learned societies of Europe, soliciting their
investigation. The Academy of Sciences at Berlin was the only one that
answered him, and their answer was any thing but favourable to his system
or flattering to himself. Still he was not discouraged. He maintained to all
who would listen to him that the magnetic matter, or fluid, pervaded all the
universe—that every human body contained it, and could communicate the
superabundance of it to another by an exertion of the will. Writing to a
friend from Vienna, he said, “I have observed that the magnetic is almost
the same thing as the electric fluid, and that it may be propagated in the
same manner, by means of intermediate bodies. Steel is not the only
substance adapted to this purpose. I have rendered paper, bread, wool, silk,
stones, leather, glass, wood, men, and dogs—in short, every thing I touched,
magnetic to such a degree, that these substances produced the same effects
as the loadstone on diseased persons. I have charged jars with magnetic
matter in the same way as is done with electricity.”
Mesmer did not long find his residence at Vienna as agreeable as he
wished. His pretensions were looked upon with contempt or indifference,
and the case of Mademoiselle Œsterline brought him less fame than
notoriety. He determined to change his sphere of action, and travelled into
Swabia and Switzerland. In the latter country he met with the celebrated
Father Gassner, who, like Valentine Greatraks, amused himself by casting
out devils, and healing the sick by merely laying hands upon them. At his
approach, delicate girls fell into convulsions, and hypochondriacs fancied
themselves cured. His house was daily besieged by the lame, the blind, and
the hysteric. Mesmer at once acknowledged the efficacy of his cures, and
declared that they were the obvious result of his own newly-discovered
power of magnetism. A few of the father’s patients were forthwith subjected
to the manipulations of Mesmer, and the same symptoms were induced. He
then tried his hand upon some paupers in the hospitals of Berne and Zurich,
and succeeded, according to his own account, but no other person’s, in
curing an opththalmia and a gutta serena. With memorials of these
achievements he returned to Vienna, in the hope of silencing his enemies, or
at least forcing them to respect his newly-acquired reputation, and to
examine his system more attentively.
His second appearance in that capital was not more auspicious than the
first. He undertook to cure a Mademoiselle Paradis, who was quite blind,
and subject to convulsions. He magnetised her several times, and then
declared that she was cured; at least, if she was not, it was her fault and not
his. An eminent oculist of that day, named Barth, went to visit her, and
declared that she was as blind as ever; while her family said she was as
much subject to convulsions as before. Mesmer persisted that she was
cured. Like the French philosopher, he would not allow facts to interfere
with his theory.71 He declared that there was a conspiracy against him; and
that Mademoiselle Paradis, at the instigation of her family, feigned
blindness in order to injure his reputation!
The consequences of this pretended cure taught Mesmer that Vienna
was not the sphere for him. Paris, the idle, the debauched, the pleasure-
hunting, the novelty-loving, was the scene for a philosopher like him, and
thither he repaired accordingly. He arrived at Paris in 1778, and began
modestly by making himself and his theory known to the principal
physicians. At first, his encouragement was but slight; he found people
more inclined to laugh at than to patronise him. But he was a man who had
great confidence in himself, and of a perseverance which no difficulties
could overcome. He hired a sumptuous apartment, which he opened to all
comers who chose to make trial of the new power of nature. M. D’Eslon, a
physician of great reputation, became a convert; and from that time, animal
magnetism, or, as some called it, mesmerism, became the fashion in Paris.
The women were quite enthusiastic about it, and their admiring tattle
wafted its fame through every grade of society. Mesmer was the rage; and
high and low, rich and poor, credulous and unbelieving, all hastened to
convince themselves of the power of this mighty magician, who made such
magnificent promises. Mesmer, who knew as well as any man living the
influence of the imagination, determined that, on that score, nothing should
be wanting to heighten the effect of the magnetic charm. In all Paris, there
was not a house so charmingly furnished as Monsieur Mesmer’s. Richly-
stained glass shed a dim religious light on his spacious saloons, which were
almost covered with mirrors. Orange-blossoms scented all the air of his
corridors; incense of the most expensive kinds burned in antique vases on
his chimney-pieces; æolian harps sighed melodious music from distant
chambers; while sometimes a sweet female voice, from above or below,
stole softly upon the mysterious silence that was kept in the house, and
insisted upon from all visitors. “Was ever any thing so delightful!” cried all
the Mrs. Wittitterleys of Paris, as they thronged to his house in search of
pleasant excitement; “So wonderful!” said the pseudo-philosophers, who
would believe anything if it were the fashion; “So amusing!” said the worn-
out debauchés, who had drained the cup of sensuality to its dregs, and who
longed to see lovely women in convulsions, with the hope that they might
gain some new emotions from the sight.
The following was the mode of operation: In the centre of the saloon
was placed an oval vessel, about four feet in its longest diameter, and one
foot deep. In this were laid a number of wine-bottles, filled with magnetised
water, well corked-up, and disposed in radii, with their necks outwards.
Water was then poured into the vessel so as just to cover the bottles, and
filings of iron were thrown in occasionally to heighten the magnetic effect.
The vessel was then covered with an iron cover, pierced through with many
holes, and was called the baquet. From each hole issued a long movable rod
of iron, which the patients were to apply to such parts of their bodies as
were afflicted. Around this baquet the patients were directed to sit, holding
each other by the hand, and pressing their knees together as closely as
possible, to facilitate the passage of the magnetic fluid from one to the
other.
Then came in the assistant magnetisers, generally strong, handsome
young men, to pour into the patient from their finger-tips fresh streams of
the wondrous fluid. They embraced the patient between the knees, rubbed
them gently down the spine and the course of the nerves, using gentle
pressure upon the breasts of the ladies, and staring them out of countenance
to magnetise them by the eye! All this time the most rigorous silence was
maintained, with the exception of a few wild notes on the harmonica or the
piano-forte, or the melodious voice of a hidden opera-singer swelling softly
at long intervals. Gradually the cheeks of the ladies began to glow, their
imaginations to become inflamed; and off they went, one after the other, in
convulsive fits. Some of them sobbed and tore their hair, others laughed till
the tears ran from their eyes, while others shrieked and screamed and yelled
till they became insensible altogether.
This was the crisis of the delirium. In the midst of it, the chief actor
made his appearance, waving his wand, like Prospero, to work new
wonders. Dressed in a long robe of lilac-coloured silk richly embroidered
with gold flowers, bearing in his hand a white magnetic rod, and with a
look of dignity which would have sat well on an eastern caliph, he marched
with solemn strides into the room. He awed the still sensible by his eye, and
the violence of their symptoms diminished. He stroked the insensible with
his hands upon the eye-brows and down the spine; traced figures upon their
breast and abdomen with his long white wand, and they were restored to
consciousness. They became calm, acknowledged his power, and said they
felt streams of cold or burning vapour passing through their frames,
according as he waved his wand or his fingers before them.
“It is impossible,” says M. Dupotet, “to conceive the sensation which
Mesmer’s experiments created in Paris. No theological controversy, in the
earlier ages of the Catholic Church, was ever conducted with greater
bitterness.” His adversaries denied the discovery; some calling him a quack,
others a fool, and others again, like the Abbé Fiard, a man who had sold
himself to the Devil! His friends were as extravagant in their praise, as his
foes were in their censure. Paris was inundated with pamphlets upon the
subject, as many defending as attacking the doctrine. At court, the queen
expressed herself in favour of it, and nothing else was to be heard of in
society.
By the advice of M. D’Eslon, Mesmer challenged an examination of his
doctrine by the Faculty of Medicine. He proposed to select twenty-four
patients, twelve of whom he would treat magnetically, leaving the other
twelve to be treated by the faculty according to the old and approved
methods. He also stipulated that, to prevent disputes, the government should
nominate certain persons who were not physicians, to be present at the
experiments; and that the object of the inquiry should be, not how these
effects were produced, but whether they were really efficacious in the cure
of any disease. The faculty objected to limit the inquiry in this manner, and
the proposition fell to the ground.
Mesmer now wrote to Marie Antoinette, with the view of securing her
influence in obtaining for him the protection of government. He wished to
have a château and its lands given to him, with a handsome yearly income,
that he might be enabled to continue his experiments at leisure, untroubled
by the persecution of his enemies. He hinted the duty of governments to
support men of science, and expressed his fear, that if he met no more
encouragement, he should be compelled to carry his great discovery to
some other land more willing to appreciate him. “In the eyes of your
majesty,” said he, “four or five hundred thousand francs, applied to a good
purpose, are of no account. The welfare and happiness of your people are
every thing. My discovery ought to be received and rewarded with a
munificence worthy of the monarch to whom I shall attach myself.” The
government at last offered him a pension of twenty thousand francs, and the
cross of the order of St. Michael, if he had made any discovery in medicine,
and would communicate it to physicians nominated by the king. The latter
part of the proposition was not agreeable to Mesmer. He feared the
unfavourable report of the king’s physicians; and, breaking off the
negotiation, spoke of his disregard of money, and his wish to have his
discovery at once recognised by the government. He then retired to Spa, in
a fit of disgust, upon pretence of drinking the waters for the benefit of his
health.
After he had left Paris, the Faculty of Medicine called upon M. D’Eslon,
for the third and last time, to renounce the doctrine of animal magnetism, or
be expelled from their body. M. D’Eslon, so far from doing this, declared
that he had discovered new secrets, and solicited further examination. A
royal commission of the Faculty of Medicine was, in consequence,
appointed on the 12th of March 1784, seconded by another commission of
the Académie des Sciences, to investigate the phenomena and report upon
them. The first commission was composed of the principal physicians of
Paris; while, among the eminent men comprised in the latter, were
Benjamin Franklin, Lavoisier, and Bailly the historian of astronomy.
Mesmer was formally invited to appear before this body, but absented
himself from day to day, upon one pretence or another. M. D’Eslon was
more honest, because he thoroughly believed in the phenomena, which it is
to be questioned if Mesmer ever did, and regularly attended the sittings and
performed experiments.
Bailly has thus described the scenes of which he was a witness in the
course of this investigation. “The sick persons, arranged in great numbers
and in several rows around the baquet, receive the magnetism, by all these
means: by the iron rods which convey it to them from the baquet—by the
cords wound round their bodies—by the connexion of the thumb, which
conveys to them the magnetism of their neighbours—and by the sounds of a
piano-forte, or of an agreeable voice, diffusing the magnetism in the air.
The patients were also directly magnetised by means of the finger and wand
of the magnetiser moved slowly before their faces, above or behind their
heads, and on the diseased parts, always observing the direction of the
holes. The magnetiser acts by fixing his eyes on them. But above all, they
are magnetised by the application of his hands and the pressure of his
fingers on the hypochondres and on the regions of the abdomen; an
application often continued for a long time—sometimes for several hours.
“Meanwhile the patients in their different conditions present a very
varied picture. Some are calm, tranquil, and experience no effect.
Others cough, spit, feel slight pains, local or general heat, and have
sweatings. Others again are agitated and tormented with convulsions.
These convulsions are remarkable in regard to the number affected
with them, to their duration and force. As soon as one begins to be
convulsed, several others are affected. The commissioners have
observed some of these convulsions last more than three hours. They
are accompanied with expectorations of a muddy viscous water,
brought away by violent efforts. Sometimes streaks of blood have been
observed in this fluid. These convulsions are characterised by the
precipitous, involuntary motion of all the limbs, and of the whole
body; by the contraction of the throat—by the leaping motions of the
hypochondria and the epigastrium—by the dimness and wandering of
the eyes—by piercing shrieks, tears, sobbing, and immoderate
laughter. They are preceded or followed by a state of langour or
reverie, a kind of depression, and sometimes drowsiness. The smallest
sudden noise occasions a shuddering; and it was remarked, that the
change of measure in the airs played on the piano-forte had a great
influence on the patients. A quicker motion, a livelier melody, agitated
them more, and renewed the vivacity of their convulsions.
“Nothing is more astonishing than the spectacle of these
convulsions. One who has not seen them can form no idea of them.
The spectator is as much astonished at the profound repose of one
portion of the patients as at the agitation of the rest—at the various
accidents which are repeated, and at the sympathies which are
exhibited. Some of the patients may be seen devoting their attention
exclusively to one another, rushing towards each other with open arms,
smiling, soothing, and manifesting every symptom of attachment and
affection. All are under the power of the magnetiser; it matters not in
what state of drowsiness they may be, the sound of his voice—a look,
a motion of his hand—brings them out of it. Among the patients in
convulsions there are always observed a great many women, and very
few men.”72
These experiments lasted for about five months. They had hardly
commenced, before Mesmer, alarmed at the loss both of fame and profit,
determined to return to Paris. Some patients of rank and fortune,
enthusiastic believers in his doctrine, had followed him to Spa. One of them
named Bergasse, proposed to open a subscription for him, of one hundred
shares, at one hundred louis each, on condition that he would disclose his
secret to the subscribers, who were to be permitted to make whatever use
they pleased of it. Mesmer readily embraced the proposal; and such was the
infatuation, that the subscription was not only filled in a few days, but
exceeded by no less a sum than one hundred and forty thousand francs.
With this fortune he returned to Paris, and recommenced his
experiments, while the royal commission continued theirs. His admiring
pupils, who had paid him so handsomely for his instructions, spread his
fame over the country, and established in all the principal towns of France,
“Societies of Harmony,” for trying experiments and curing all diseases by
means of magnetism. Some of these societies were a scandal to morality,
being joined by profligate men of depraved appetites, who took a disgusting
delight in witnessing young girls in convulsions. Many of the pretended
magnetisers were asserted at the time to be notorious libertines, who took
that opportunity of gratifying their passions.
At last the commissioners published their report, which was drawn up
by the illustrious and unfortunate Bailly. For clearness of reasoning and
strict impartiality it has never been surpassed. After detailing the various
experiments made, and their results, they came to the conclusion that the
only proof advanced in support of animal magnetism was the effects it
produced on the human body—that those effects could be produced without
passes or other magnetic manipulations—that all these manipulations and
passes and ceremonies never produce any effect at all if employed without
the patient’s knowledge; and that therefore imagination did, and animal
magnetism did not, account for the phenomena.
This report was the ruin of Mesmer’s reputation in France. He quitted
Paris shortly after, with the three hundred and forty thousand francs which
had been subscribed by his admirers, and retired to his own country, where
he died in 1815, at the advanced age of eighty-one. But the seeds he had
sown fructified of themselves, nourished and brought to maturity by the
kindly warmth of popular credulity. Imitators sprang up in France,
Germany, and England, more extravagant than their master, and claiming
powers for the new science which its founder had never dreamt of. Among
others, Cagliostro made good use of the delusion in extending his claims to
be considered a master of the occult sciences. But he made no discoveries
worthy to be compared to those of the Marquis de Puysegur and the
Chevalier Barbarin, honest men, who began by deceiving themselves before
they deceived others.
The Marquis de Puysegur, the owner of a considerable estate at
Busancy, was one of those who had entered into the subscription for
Mesmer. After that individual had quitted France, he retired to Busancy,
with his brother, to try animal magnetism upon his tenants, and cure the
country people of all manner of diseases. He was a man of great simplicity
and much benevolence, and not only magnetised but fed the sick that
flocked around him. In all the neighbourhood, and indeed within a
circumference of twenty miles, he was looked upon as endowed with a
power almost divine. His great discovery, as he called it, was made by
chance. One day he had magnetised his gardener; and observing him to fall
into a deep sleep, it occurred to him that he would address a question to
him, as he would have done to a natural somnambulist. He did so, and the
man replied with much clearness and precision. M. de Puysegur was
agreeably surprised: he continued his experiments, and found that, in this
state of magnetic somnambulism, the soul of the sleeper was enlarged, and
brought into more intimate communion with all nature, and more especially
with him, M. de Puysegur. He found that all further manipulations were
unnecessary; that, without speaking or making any sign, he could convey
his will to the patient; that he could, in fact, converse with him, soul to soul,
without the employment of any physical operation whatever!
Simultaneously with this marvellous discovery he made another, which
reflects equal credit upon his understanding. Like Valentine Greatraks, he
found it hard work to magnetise all that came—that he had not even time to
take the repose and relaxation which were necessary for his health. In this
emergency he hit upon a clever expedient. He had heard Mesmer say that he
could magnetise bits of wood: why should he not be able to magnetise a
whole tree? It was no sooner thought than done. There was a large elm on
the village green at Busancy, under which the peasant girls used to dance on
festive occasions, and the old men to sit, drinking their vin du pays, on the
fine summer evenings. M. de Puysegur proceeded to this tree and
magnetised it, by first touching it with his hands, and then retiring a few
steps from it; all the while directing streams of the magnetic fluid from the
branches toward the trunk, and from the trunk toward the root. This done,
he caused circular seats to be erected round it, and cords suspended from it
in all directions. When the patients had seated themselves, they twisted the
cords round the diseased parts of their bodies, and held one another firmly
by their thumbs to form a direct channel of communication for the passage
of the fluid.
M. de Puysegur had now two “hobbies”—the man with the enlarged
soul and the magnetic elm. The infatuation of himself and his patients
cannot be better expressed than in his own words. Writing to his brother, on
the 17th of May 1784, he says, “If you do not come, my dear friend, you
will not see my extraordinary man, for his health is now almost quite
restored. I continue to make use of the happy power for which I am
indebted to M. Mesmer. Every day I bless his name; for I am very useful,
and produce many salutary effects on all the sick poor in the
neighbourhood. They flock around my tree; there were more than one
hundred and thirty of them this morning. It is the best baquet possible; not a
leaf of it but communicates health! all feel, more or less, the good effects of
it. You will be delighted to see the charming picture of humanity which this
presents. I have only one regret—it is, that I cannot touch all who come.
But my magnetised man—my intelligence—sets me at ease. He teaches me
what conduct I should adopt. According to him, it is not at all necessary that
I should touch every one; a look, a gesture, even a wish, is sufficient. And it
is one of the most ignorant peasants of the country that teaches me this!
When he is in a crisis, I know of nothing more profound, more prudent,
more clearsighted (clairvoyant) than he is.”
In another letter, describing his first experiment with the magnetic tree,
he says, “Yesterday evening I brought my first patient to it. As soon as I had
put the cord round him he gazed at the tree; and, with an air of astonishment
which I cannot describe, exclaimed, ‘What is it that I see there?’ His head
then sunk down, and he fell into a perfect fit of somnambulism. At the end
of an hour, I took him home to his house again, when I restored him to his
senses. Several men and women came to tell him what he had been doing.
He maintained it was not true; that, weak as he was, and scarcely able to
walk, it would have been scarcely possible for him to have gone down stairs
and walked to the tree. To-day I have repeated the experiment on him, and
with the same success. I own to you that my head turns round with pleasure
to think of the good I do. Madame de Puysegur, the friends she has with her,
my servants, and, in fact, all who are near me, feel an amazement, mingled
with admiration, which cannot be described; but they do not experience the
half of my sensations. Without my tree, which gives me rest, and which will
give me still more, I should be in a state of agitation, inconsistent, I believe,
with my health. I exist too much, if I may be allowed to use the
expression.”
In another letter, he descants still more poetically upon his gardener
with the enlarged soul. He says, “It is from this simple man, this tall and
stout rustic, twenty-three years of age, enfeebled by disease, or rather by
sorrow, and therefore the more predisposed to be affected by any great
natural agent,—it is from this man, I repeat, that I derive instruction and
knowledge. When in the magnetic state, he is no longer a peasant who can
hardly utter a single sentence; he is a being, to describe whom I cannot find
a name. I need not speak; I have only to think before him, when he instantly
understands and answers me. Should any body come into the room, he sees
him, if I desire it (but not else), and addresses him, and says what I wish to
say; not indeed exactly as I dictate to him, but as truth requires. When he
wants to add more than I deem it prudent strangers should hear, I stop the
flow of his ideas, and of his conversation in the middle of a word, and give
it quite a different turn!”
Among other persons attracted to Busancy by the report of these
extraordinary occurrences was M. Cloquet, the Receiver of Finance. His
appetite for the marvellous being somewhat insatiable, he readily believed
all that was told him by M. de Puysegur. He also has left a record of what
he saw, and what he credited, which throws a still clearer light upon the
progress of the delusion.73 He says that the patients he saw in the magnetic
state had an appearance of deep sleep, during which all the physical
faculties were suspended, to the advantage of the intellectual faculties. The
eyes of the patients were closed, the sense of hearing was abolished; and
they awoke only at the voice of their magnetiser. “If any one touched a
patient during a crisis, or even the chair on which he was seated,” says M.
Cloquet, “it would cause him much pain and suffering, and throw him into
convulsions. During the crisis, they possess an extraordinary and
supernatural power, by which, on touching a patient presented to them, they
can feel what part of his body is diseased, even by merely passing their
hand over the clothes.” Another singularity was, that these sleepers who
could thus discover diseases, see into the interior of other men’s stomachs,
and point out remedies, remembered absolutely nothing after the magnetiser
thought proper to disenchant them. The time that elapsed between their
entering the crisis and their coming out of it was obliterated. Not only had
the magnetiser the power of making himself heard by the somnambulists,
but he could make them follow him by merely pointing his finger at them
from a distance, though they had their eyes the whole time completely
closed.
Such was animal magnetism under the auspices of the Marquis de
Puysegur. While he was exhibiting these phenomena around his elm-tree, a
magnetiser of another class appeared in Lyons, in the person of the
Chevalier de Barbarin. This gentleman thought the effort of the will,
without any of the paraphernalia of wands or baquets, was sufficient to
throw patients into the magnetic sleep. He tried it and succeeded. By sitting
at the bedside of his patients, and praying that they might be magnetised,
they went off into a state very similar to that of the persons who fell under
the notice of M. de Puysegur. In the course of time a very considerable
number of magnetisers, acknowledging Barbarin for their model, and called
after him Barbarinists, appeared in different parts, and were believed to
have effected some remarkable cures. In Sweden and Germany this sect of
fanatics increased rapidly, and were called spiritualists, to distinguish them
from the followers of M. de Puysegur, who were called experimentalists.
They maintained that all the effects of animal magnetism, which Mesmer
believed to be producible by a magnetic fluid dispersed through nature,
were produced by the mere effort of one human soul acting upon another;
that when a connexion had once been established between a magnetiser and
his patient, the former could communicate his influence to the latter from
any distance, even hundreds of miles, by the will. One of them thus
described the blessed state of a magnetic patient: “In such a man animal
instinct ascends to the highest degree admissible in this world. The
clairvoyant is then a pure animal, without any admixture of matter. His
observations are those of a spirit. He is similar to God: his eye penetrates all
the secrets of nature. When his attention is fixed on any of the objects of
this world—on his disease, his death, his well-beloved, his friends, his
relations, his enemies—in spirit he sees them acting; he penetrates into the
causes and the consequences of their actions; he becomes a physician, a
prophet, a divine!”74
Let us now see what progress these mysteries made in England. In the
year 1788 Dr. Mainauduc, who had been a pupil, first of Mesmer, and
afterwards of D’Eslon, arrived in Bristol, and gave public lectures upon
magnetism. His success was quite extraordinary. People of rank and fortune
hastened from London to Bristol to be magnetised, or to place themselves
under his tuition. Dr. George Winter, in his History of Animal Magnetism,
gives the following list of them: “They amounted to one hundred and
twenty-seven, among whom there were one duke, one duchess, one
marchioness, two countesses, one earl, one baron, three baronesses, one
bishop, five right honourable gentlemen and ladies, two baronets, seven
members of parliament, one clergyman, two physicians, seven surgeons,
besides ninety-two gentlemen and ladies of respectability.” He afterwards
established himself in London, where he performed with equal success.
He began by publishing proposals to the ladies for the formation of a
Hygeian Society. In this paper he vaunted highly the curative effects of
animal magnetism, and took great credit to himself for being the first person
to introduce it into England, and thus concluded: “As this method of cure is
not confined to sex or college education, and the fair sex being in general
the most sympathising part of the creation, and most immediately
concerned in the health and care of its offspring, I think myself bound in
gratitude to you, ladies, for the partiality you have shewn me in midwifery,
to contribute, as far as lies in my power, to render you additionally useful
and valuable to the community. With this view I propose forming my
Hygeian Society, to be incorporated with that of Paris. As soon as twenty
ladies have given in their names, the day shall be appointed for the first
meeting at my house, when they are to pay fifteen guineas, which will
include the whole expense.”
Hannah More, in a letter addressed to Horace Walpole in September
1788, speaks of the “demoniacal mummeries” of Dr. Mainauduc, and says
he was in a fair way of gaining a hundred thousand pounds by them, as
Mesmer had done by his exhibitions in Paris.
So much curiosity was excited by the subject, that, about the same time,
a man named Holloway gave a course of lectures on animal magnetism in
London, at the rate of five guineas for each pupil, and realised a
considerable fortune. Loutherbourg the painter and his wife followed the
same profitable trade; and such was the infatuation of the people to be
witnesses of their strange manipulations, that at times upwards of three
thousand persons crowded around their house at Hammersmith, unable to
gain admission. The tickets sold at prices varying from one to three guineas.
Loutherbourg performed his cures by the touch, after the manner of
Valentine Greatraks, and finally pretended to a divine mission. An account
of his miracles, as they were called, was published in 1789, entitled A List
of New Cures performed by Mr. and Mrs. de Loutherbourg, of
Hammersmith Terrace, without Medicine; by a Lover of the Lamb of God.
Dedicated to his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury.
This “Lover of the Lamb of God” was a half-crazy old woman, named
Mary Pratt, who conceived for Mr. and Mrs. de Loutherbourg a veneration
which almost prompted her to worship them. She chose for the motto of her
pamphlet a verse in the thirteenth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles:
“Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish! for I will work a work in
your days which ye shall not believe, though a man declare it unto you.”
Attempting to give a religious character to the cures of the painter, she
thought a woman was the proper person to make them known, since the
apostle had declared that a man should not be able to conquer the
incredulity of the people. She stated, that from Christmas 1788 to July
1789, De Loutherbourg and his wife had cured two thousand people,
“having been made proper recipients to receive divine manuductions; which
heavenly and divine influx, coming from the radix God, his Divine Majesty
had most graciously bestowed upon them to diffuse healing to all, be they
deaf, dumb, blind, lame, or halt.”
In her dedication to the Archbishop of Canterbury she implored him to
compose a new form of prayer, to be used in all churches and chapels, that
nothing might impede this inestimable gift from having its due course. She
further entreated all the magistrates and men of authority in the land to wait
on Mr. and Mrs. de Loutherbourg, to consult with them on the immediate
erection of a large hospital, with a pool of Bethesda attached to it. All the
magnetisers were scandalised at the preposterous jabber of this old woman,
and De Loutherbourg appears to have left London to avoid her,—
continuing, however, in conjunction with his wife, the fantastic tricks which
had turned the brain of this poor fanatic, and deluded many others who
pretended to more sense than she had.
From this period until 1798 magnetism excited little or no attention in
England. An attempt to revive the belief in it was made in that year, but it
was in the shape of mineral rather than of animal magnetism. One Benjamin
Douglas Perkins, an American, practising as a surgeon in Leicester Square,
invented and took out a patent for the celebrated “Metallic Tractors.” He
pretended that these tractors, which were two small pieces of metal strongly
magnetised, something resembling the steel plates which were first brought
into notice by Father Hell, would cure gout, rheumatism, palsy, and, in fact,
almost every disease the human frame was subject to, if applied externally
to the afflicted part, and moved about gently, touching the surface only. The
most wonderful stories soon obtained general circulation, and the press
groaned with pamphlets, all vaunting the curative effects of the tractors,
which were sold at five guineas the pair. Perkins gained money rapidly.
Gouty subjects forgot their pains in the presence of this new remedy; the
rheumatism fled at its approach; and toothache, which is often cured by the
mere sight of a dentist, vanished before Perkins and his marvellous steel-
plates. The benevolent Society of Friends, of whose body he was a member,
warmly patronised the invention. Desirous that the poor, who could not
afford to pay Mr. Perkins five guineas, or even five shillings for his tractors,
should also share in the benefits of that sublime discovery, they subscribed
a large sum, and built an hospital, called the “Perkinean Institution,” in
which all comers might be magnetised free of cost. In the course of a few
months they were in very general use, and their lucky inventor in
possession of five thousand pounds.
Dr. Haygarth, an eminent physician at Bath, recollecting the influence
of imagination in the cure of disease, hit upon an expedient to try the real
value of the tractors. Perkins’s cures were too well established to be
doubted; and Dr. Haygarth, without gain-saying them, quietly, but in the
face of numerous witnesses, exposed the delusion under which people
laboured with respect to the curative medium. He suggested to Dr. Falconer
that they should make wooden tractors, paint them to resemble the steel
ones, and see if the very same effects would not be produced. Five patients
were chosen from the hospital in Bath, upon whom to operate. Four of them
suffered severely from chronic rheumatism in the ankle, knee, wrist, and
hip; and the fifth had been afflicted for several months with the gout. On the
day appointed for the experiments Dr. Haygarth and his friends assembled
at the hospital, and with much solemnity brought forth the fictitious
tractors. Four out of the five patients said their pains were immediately
relieved; and three of them said they were not only relieved but very much
benefited. One felt his knee warmer, and said he could walk across the
room. He tried and succeeded, although on the previous day he had not
been able to stir. The gouty man felt his pains diminish rapidly, and was
quite easy for nine hours, until he went to bed, when the twitching began
again. On the following day the real tractors were applied to all the patients,
when they described their symptoms in nearly the same terms.
To make still more sure, the experiment was tried in the Bristol
infirmary, a few weeks afterwards, on a man who had a rheumatic affection
in the shoulder, so severe as to incapacitate him from lifting his hand from
his knee. The fictitious tractors were brought and applied to the afflicted
part, one of the physicians, to add solemnity to the scene, drawing a stop-
watch from his pocket to calculate the time exactly, while another, with a
pen in his hand, sat down to write the change of symptoms from minute to
minute as they occurred. In less than four minutes the man felt so much
relieved, that he lifted his hand several inches without any pain in the
shoulder!
An account of these matters was published by Dr. Haygarth, in a small
volume entitled, Of the Imagination, as a Cause and Cure of Disorders,
exemplified by fictitious Tractors. The exposure was a coup de grace to the
system of Mr. Perkins. His friends and patrons, still unwilling to confess
that they had been deceived, tried the tractors upon sheep, cows, and horses,
alleging that the animals received benefit from the metallic plates, but none
at all from the wooden ones. But they found nobody to believe them; the
Perkinean institution fell into neglect; and Perkins made his exit from
England, carrying with him about ten thousand pounds, to soothe his
declining years in the good city of Pennsylvania.
Thus was magnetism laughed out of England for a time. In France the
revolution left men no leisure for studying it. The Sociétés de l’Harmonie of
Strasbourg, and other great towns lingered for a while, till sterner matters
occupying men’s attention, they were one after the other abandoned, both
by pupils and professors. The system, thus driven from the first two nations
of Europe, took refuge among the dreamy philosophers of Germany. There
the wonders of the magnetic sleep grew more and more wonderful every
day; the patients acquired the gift of prophecy; their vision extended over
all the surface of the globe; they could hear and see with their toes and
fingers, and read unknown languages, and understand them too, by merely
having the book placed on their stomachs. Ignorant peasants, when once
entranced by the grand mesmeric fluid, could spout philosophy diviner than
Plato ever wrote, descant upon the mysteries of the mind with more
eloquence and truth than the profoundest metaphysicians the world ever
saw, and solve knotty points of divinity with as much ease as waking men
could undo their shoe-buckles!
During the first twelve years of the present century little was heard of
animal magnetism in any country of Europe. Even the Germans forgot their
airy fancies, recalled to the knowledge of this every-day world by the roar
of Napoleon’s cannon and the fall or the establishment of kingdoms. During
this period a cloud of obscurity hung over the science, which was not
dispersed until M. Deleuze published, in 1813, his Histoire Critique du
Magnétisme Animal. This work gave a new impulse to the half-forgotten
fancy. Newspapers, pamphlets, and books again waged war upon each other
on the question of its truth or falsehood; and many eminent men in the
profession of medicine recommenced inquiry with an earnest design to
discover the truth.
The assertions made in the celebrated treatise of Deleuze are thus
summed up:75 “There is a fluid continually escaping from the human body,”
and “forming an atmosphere around us,” which, as “it has no determined
current,” produces no sensible effects on surrounding individuals. It is,
however, “capable of being directed by the will;” and, when so directed, “is
sent forth in currents,” with a force corresponding to the energy we possess.
Its motion is “similar to that of the rays from burning bodies;” “it possesses
different qualities in different individuals.” It is capable of a high degree of
concentration, “and exists also in trees.” The will of the magnetiser, “guided
by a motion of the hand, several times repeated in the same direction,” can
fill a tree with this fluid. Most persons, when this fluid is poured into them
from the body and by the will of the magnetiser, “feel a sensation of heat or
cold” when he passes his hand before them, without even touching them.
Some persons, when sufficiently charged with this fluid, fall into a state of
somnambulism, or magnetic ecstasy; and when in this state, “they see the
fluid encircling the magnetiser like a halo of light, and issuing in luminous
streams from his mouth and nostrils, his head and hands, possessing a very
agreeable smell, and communicating a particular taste to food and water.”
One would think that these “notions” were quite enough to be insisted
upon by any physician who wished to be considered sane; but they form
only a small portion of the wondrous things related by M. Deleuze. He
further said, “When magnetism produces somnambulism, the person who is
in this state acquires a prodigious extension of all his faculties. Several of
his external organs, especially those of sight and hearing, become inactive;
but the sensations which depend upon them take place internally. Seeing
and hearing are carried on by the magnetic fluid, which transmits the
impressions immediately, and without the intervention of any nerves or
organs directly to the brain. Thus the somnambulist, though his eyes and
ears are closed, not only sees and hears, but sees and hears much better than
he does when awake. In all things he feels the will of the magnetiser,
although that will be not expressed. He sees into the interior of his own
body, and the most secret organisation of the bodies of all those who may
be put en rapport, or in magnetic connexion, with him. Most commonly, he
only sees those parts which are diseased and disordered, and intuitively
prescribes a remedy for them. He has prophetic visions and sensations,
which are generally true, but sometimes erroneous. He expresses himself
with astonishing eloquence and facility. He is not free from vanity. He
becomes a more perfect being of his own accord for a certain time, if
guided wisely by the magnetiser, but wanders if he is ill-directed.”
According to M. Deleuze, any person could become a magnetiser and
produce these effects, by conforming to the following conditions, and acting
upon the following rules:
“Forget for a while all your knowledge of physics and metaphysics.
“Remove from your mind all objections that may occur.
“Imagine that it is in your power to take the malady in hand, and
throw it on one side.
“Never reason for six weeks after you have commenced the study.
“Have an active desire to do good; a firm belief in the power of
magnetism, and an entire confidence in employing it. In short, repel all
doubts; desire success, and act with simplicity and attention.”
That is to say, “be very credulous; be very persevering; reject all past
experience, and do not listen to reason,” and you are a magnetiser after M.
Deleuze’s own heart.
Having brought yourself into this edifying state, “remove from the
patient all persons who might be troublesome to you; keep with you only
the necessary witnesses—a single person if need be; desire them not to
occupy themselves in any way with the processes you employ and the
effects which result from them, but to join with you in the desire of doing
good to your patient. Arrange yourself so as neither to be too hot nor too
cold, and in such a manner that nothing may obstruct the freedom of your
motions; and take precautions to prevent interruption during the sitting.
Make your patient then sit as commodiously as possible, and place yourself
opposite to him, on a seat a little more elevated, in such a manner that his
knees may be betwixt yours, and your feet at the side of his. First, request
him to resign himself; to think of nothing; not to perplex himself by
examining the effects which may be produced; to banish all fear; to
surrender himself to hope, and not to be disturbed or discouraged if the
action of magnetism should cause in him momentary pains. After having
collected yourself, take his thumbs between your fingers in such a way that
the internal part of your thumbs may be in contact with the internal part of
his, and then fix your eyes upon him! You must remain from two to five
minutes in this situation, or until you feel an equal heat between your
thumbs and his. This done, you will withdraw your hands, removing them
to the right and left; and at the same time turning them till their internal
surface be outwards, and you will raise them to the height of the head. You
will now place them upon the two shoulders, and let them remain there
about a minute; afterwards drawing them gently along the arms to the
extremities of the fingers, touching very slightly as you go. You will renew
this pass five or six times, always turning your hands, and removing them a
little from the body before you lift them. You will then place them above
the head; and after holding them there for an instant, lower them, passing
them before the face, at the distance of one or two inches, down to the pit of
the stomach. There you will stop them two minutes also, putting your
thumbs upon the pit of the stomach and the rest of your fingers below the
ribs. You will then descend slowly along the body to the knees, or rather, if
you can do so without deranging yourself, to the extremity of the feet. You
will repeat the same processes several times during the remainder of the
sitting. You will also occasionally approach your patient, so as to place your
hands behind his shoulders, in order to descend slowly along the spine of
the back and the thighs, down to the knees or the feet. After the first passes,
you may dispense with putting your hands upon the head, and may make
the subsequent passes upon the arms, beginning at the shoulders, and upon
the body, beginning at the stomach.”
Such was the process of magnetising recommended by Deleuze. That
delicate, fanciful, and nervous women, when subjected to it, should have
worked themselves into convulsions will be readily believed by the
sturdiest opponent of animal magnetism. To sit in a constrained posture—be
stared out of countenance by a fellow who enclosed her knees between his,
while he made passesupon different parts of her body, was quite enough to
throw any weak woman into a fit, especially if she were predisposed to
hysteria, and believed in the efficacy of the treatment. It is just as evident
that those of stronger minds and healthier bodies should be sent to sleep by
the process. That these effects have been produced by these means, there
are thousands of instances to shew. But are they testimony in favour of
animal magnetism?—do they prove the existence of the magnetic fluid? It
needs neither magnetism, nor ghost from the grave, to tell us that silence,
monotony, and long recumbency in one position, must produce sleep; or
that excitement, imitation, and a strong imagination acting upon a weak
body, will bring on convulsions.
M. Deleuze’s book produced quite a sensation in France; the study was
resumed with redoubled vigour. In the following year, a journal was
established devoted exclusively to the science, under the title of Annales du
Magnétisme Animal; and shortly afterwards appeared the Bibliothèque du
Magnétisme Animal, and many others. About the same time, the Abbé Faria,
“the man of wonders,” began to magnetise; and the belief being that he had
more of the mesmeric fluid about him, and a stronger will, than most men,
he was very successful in his treatment. His experiments afford a
convincing proof that imagination can operate all, and the supposed fluid
none, of the results so confidently claimed as evidence of the new science.
He placed his patients in an arm-chair; told them to shut their eyes; and
then, in a loud commanding voice, pronounced the single word, “Sleep!”
He used no manipulations whatever—had no baquet, or conductor of the
fluid; but he nevertheless succeeded in causing sleep in hundreds of
patients. He boasted of having in his time produced five thousand
somnambulists by this method. It was often necessary to repeat the
command three or four times; and if the patient still remained awake, the
abbé got out of the difficulty by dismissing him from the chair, and
declaring that he was incapable of being acted on. And it should be
especially remarked that the magnetisers do not lay claim to universal
efficacy for their fluid; the strong and the healthy cannot be magnetised; the
incredulous cannot be magnetised; those who reason upon it cannot be
magnetised; those who firmly believe in it can be magnetised; the weak in
body can be magnetised, and the weak in mind can be magnetised. And lest,
from some cause or other, individuals of the latter classes should resist the
magnetic charm, the apostles of the science declare that there are times
when even they cannot be acted upon; the presence of one scorner or
unbeliever may weaken the potency of the fluid and destroy its efficacy. In
M. Deleuze’s instructions to a magnetiser, he expressly says, “Never
magnetise before inquisitive persons!”76
Here we conclude the subject, as it would serve no good purpose to
extend to greater length the history of Animal Magnetism; especially at a
time when many phenomena, the reality of which it is impossible to
dispute, are daily occurring to startle and perplex the most learned,
impartial, and truth-loving of mankind. Enough, however, has been stated to
shew, that if there be some truth in magnetism, there has been much error,
misconception, 
and 
exaggeration. 
Taking 
its 
history 
from 
the
commencement, it can hardly be said to have been without its uses. To
quote the words of Bailly, in 1784, “Magnetism has not been altogether
unavailing to the philosophy which condemns it: it is an additional fact to
record among the errors of the human mind, and a great experiment on the
strength of the imagination.” Over that vast inquiry of the influence of mind
over matter,—an inquiry which the embodied intellect of mankind will
never be able to fathom completely,—it will at least have thrown a feeble
and imperfect light. It will have afforded an additional proof of the strength
of the unconquerable will, and the weakness of matter as compared with it;
another illustration of the words of the inspired Psalmist, that “we are
fearfully and wonderfully made.”
Influence of Politics and Religion on the Hair and
Beard
Table of Contents
Speak with respect and honour
Both of the beard and the beard’s owner.
Hudibras.
The famous declaration of St. Paul, “that long hair was a shame unto a
man,” has been made the pretext for many singular enactments, both of
civil and ecclesiastical governments. The fashion of the hair and the cut of
the beard were state questions in France and England, from the
establishment of Christianity until the fifteenth century.
We find, too, that in much earlier times, men were not permitted to do
as they liked with their own hair. Alexander the Great thought that the
beards of the soldiery afforded convenient handles for the enemy to lay hold
of, preparatory to cutting off their heads; and, with a view of depriving
them of this advantage, he ordered the whole of his army to be closely
shaven. His notions of courtesy towards an enemy were quite different from
those entertained by the North American Indians, and amongst whom it is
held a point of honour to allow one “chivalrous lock” to grow, that the foe,
in taking the scalp, may have something to catch hold of.
At one time, long hair was the symbol of sovereignty in Europe. We
learn from Gregory of Tours, that, among the successors of Clovis, it was
the exclusive privilege of the royal family to have their hair long and
curled. The nobles, equal to kings in power, would not shew any inferiority
in this respect, and wore not only their hair, but their beards of an enormous
length. This fashion lasted, with but slight changes, till the time of Louis the
Debonnaire; but his successors, up to Hugh Capet, wore their hair short, by
way of distinction. Even the serfs had set all regulation at defiance, and
allowed their locks and beards to grow.
At the time of the invasion of England by William the Conqueror, the
Normans wore their hair very short. Harold, in his progress towards
Hastings, sent forward spies to view the strength and number of the enemy.
They reported, amongst other things, on their return, that “the host did
almost seem to be priests, because they had all their face and both their lips
shaven.” The fashion among the English at the time was to wear the hair
long upon the head and the upper lip, but to shave the chin. When the
haughty victors had divided the broad lands of the Saxon thanes and
franklins among them, when tyranny of every kind was employed to make
the English feel that they were indeed a subdued and broken nation, the
latter encouraged the growth of their hair, that they might resemble as little
as possible their cropped and shaven masters.
This fashion was exceedingly displeasing to the clergy, and prevailed to
a considerable extent in France and Germany. Towards the end of the
eleventh century, it was decreed by the pope, and zealously supported by
the ecclesiastical authorities all over Europe, that such persons as wore long
hair should be excommunicated while living, and not be prayed for when
dead. William of Malmesbury relates, that the famous St. Wulstan, Bishop
of Worcester, was peculiarly indignant whenever he saw a man with long
hair. He declaimed against the practice as one highly immoral, criminal, and
beastly. He continually carried a small knife in his pocket, and whenever
any body offending in this respect knelt before him to receive his blessing,
he would whip it out slily, and cut off a handful, and then, throwing it in his
face, tell him to cut off all the rest, or he would go to hell.
But fashion, which at times it is possible to move with a wisp, stands
firm against a lever; and men preferred to run the risk of damnation to
parting with the superfluity of their hair. In the time of Henry I., Anselm,
Archbishop of Canterbury, found it necessary to republish the famous
decree of excommunication and outlawry against the offenders; but, as the
court itself had begun to patronise curls, the fulminations of the Church
were unavailing. Henry I. and his nobles wore their hair in long ringlets
down their backs and shoulders, and became a scandalum magnatum in the
eyes of the godly. One Serlo, the king’s chaplain, was so grieved in spirit at
the impiety of his master, that he preached a sermon from the well-known
text of St. Paul before the assembled court, in which he drew so dreadful a
picture of the torments that awaited them in the other world, that several of
them burst into tears, and wrung their hair, as if they would have pulled it
out by the roots. Henry himself was observed to weep. The priest, seeing
the impression he had made, determined to strike while the iron was hot,
and pulling a pair of scissors from his pocket, cut the king’s hair in presence
of them all. Several of the principal courtiers consented to do the like, and
for a short time long hair appeared to be going out of fashion. But the
courtiers thought, after the first glow of their penitence had been cooled by
reflection, that the clerical Delilah had shorn them of their strength, and in
less than six months they were as great sinners as ever.
Anselm, the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been a monk of Bec, in
Normandy, and who had signalised himself at Rouen by his fierce
opposition to long hair, was still anxious to work a reformation in this
matter. But his pertinacity was far from pleasing to the king, who had
finally made up his mind to wear ringlets. There were other disputes, of a
more serious nature, between them; so that when the archbishop died, the
king was so glad to be rid of him, that he allowed the see to remain vacant
for five years. Still the cause had other advocates, and every pulpit in the
land resounded with anathemas against that disobedient and long-haired
generation. But all was of no avail. Stowe, in writing of this period, asserts,
on the authority of some more ancient chronicler, “that men, forgetting their
birth, transformed themselves, by the length of their haires, into the
semblance of woman kind;” and that when their hair decayed from age, or
other causes, “they knit about their heads certain rolls and braidings of false
hair.” At last accident turned the tide of fashion. A knight of the court, who
was exceedingly proud of his beauteous locks, dreamed one night that, as
he lay in bed, the devil sprang upon him, and endeavoured to choke him
with his own hair. He started in affright, and actually found that he had a
great quantity of hair in his mouth. Sorely stricken in conscience, and
looking upon the dream as a warning from heaven, he set about the work of
reformation, and cut off his luxuriant tresses the same night. The story was
soon bruited abroad; of course it was made the most of by the clergy, and
the knight, being a man of influence and consideration, and the
acknowledged leader of the fashion, his example, aided by priestly
exhortations, was very generally imitated. Men appeared almost as decent
as St. Wulstan himself could have wished, the dream of a dandy having
proved more efficacious than the entreaties of a saint. But, as Stowe informs
us, “scarcely was one year past, when all that thought themselves courtiers
fell into the former vice, and contended with women in their long haires.”
Henry, the king, appears to have been quite uninfluenced by the dreams of
others, for even his own would not induce him a second time to undergo a
cropping from priestly shears. It is said, that he was much troubled at this
time by disagreeable visions. Having offended the Church in this and other
respects, he could get no sound, refreshing sleep, and used to imagine that
he saw all the bishops, abbots, and monks of every degree, standing around
his bed-side, and threatening to belabour him with their pastoral staves;
which sight, we are told, so frightened him, that he often started naked out
of his bed, and attacked the phantoms sword in hand. Grimbalde, his
physician, who, like most of his fraternity at that day, was an ecclesiastic,
never hinted that his dreams were the result of a bad digestion, but told him
to shave his head, be reconciled to the Church, and reform himself with
alms and prayer. But he would not take this good advice, and it was not
until he had been nearly drowned a year afterwards, in a violent storm at
sea, that he repented of his evil ways, cut his hair short, and paid proper
deference to the wishes of the clergy.
In France, the thunders of the Vatican with regard to long curly hair
were hardly more respected than in England. Louis VII., however, was
more obedient than his brother-king, and cropped himself as closely as a
monk, to the great sorrow of all the gallants of his court. His queen, the gay,
haughty, and pleasure-seeking Eleanor of Guienne, never admired him in
this trim, and continually reproached him with imitating, not only the head-
dress, but the asceticism of the monks. From this cause a coldness arose
between them. The lady proving at last unfaithful to her shaven and
indifferent lord, they were divorced, and the kings of France lost the rich
provinces of Guienne and Poitou, which were her dowry. She soon after
bestowed her hand and her possessions upon Henry Duke of Normandy,
afterwards Henry II. of England, and thus gave the English sovereigns that
strong footing in France which was for so many centuries the cause of such
long and bloody wars between the nations. When the Crusades had drawn
all the smart young fellows into Palestine, the clergy did not find it so
difficult to convince the staid burghers who remained in Europe, of the
enormity of long hair. During the absence of Richard Cœur de Lion, his
English subjects not only cut their hair close, but shaved their faces.
William Fitz-osbert, or Long-beard, the great demagogue of that day,
reintroduced among the people who claimed to be of Saxon origin the
fashion of long hair. He did this with the view of making them as unlike as
possible to the citizens and the Normans. He wore his own beard hanging
down to his waist, from whence the name by which he is best known to
posterity.
The Church never shewed itself so great an enemy to the beard as to
long hair on the head. It generally allowed fashion to take its own course,
both with regard to the chin and the upper lip. This fashion varied
continually; for we find that, in little more than a century after the time of
Richard I., when beards were short, that they had again become so long as
to be mentioned in the famous epigram made by the Scots who visited
London in 1327, when David, son of Robert Bruce, was married to Joan,
the sister of King Edward. This epigram, which was stuck on the church-
door of St. Peter Stangate, ran as follows:
“Long beards heartlesse,
Painted hoods witlesse,
Gray coats gracelesse,
Make England thriftlesse.”
When the Emperor Charles V. ascended the throne of Spain he had no
beard. It was not to be expected that the obsequious parasites who always
surround a monarch, could presume to look more virile than their master.
Immediately all the courtiers appeared beardless, with the exception of such
few grave old men as had outgrown the influence of fashion, and who had
determined to die bearded as they had lived. Sober people in general saw
this revolution with sorrow and alarm, and thought that every manly virtue
would be banished with the beard. It became at the time a common saying,
—
“Desde que no hay barba, no hay mas alma.”
We have no longer souls since we have lost our beards.
In France also the beard fell into disrepute after the death of Henry IV.,
from the mere reason that his successor was too young to have one. Some
of the more immediate friends of the great Béarnais, and his minister Sully
among the rest, refused to part with their beards, notwithstanding the jeers
of the new generation.
Who does not remember the division of England into the two great
parties of Roundheads and Cavaliers? In those days every species of vice
and iniquity was thought by the Puritans to lurk in the long curly tresses of
the monarchists, while the latter imagined that their opponents were as
destitute of wit, of wisdom, and of virtue, as they were of hair. A man’s
locks were the symbol of his creed, both in politics and religion. The more
abundant the hair, the more scant the faith; and the balder the head, the
more sincere the piety.
PETER THE GREAT.
But among all the instances of the interference of governments with
men’s hair, the most extraordinary, not only for its daring, but for its
success, is that of Peter the Great, in 1705. By this time fashion had
condemned the beard in every other country in Europe, and with a voice
more potent than popes or emperors, had banished it from civilised society.
But this only made the Russians cling more fondly to their ancient
ornament, as a mark to distinguish them from foreigners, whom they hated.
Peter, however, resolved that they should be shaven. If he had been a man
deeply read in history, he might have hesitated before he attempted so
despotic an attack upon the time-hallowed customs and prejudices of his
countrymen; but he was not. He did not know or consider the danger of the
innovation; he only listened to the promptings of his own indomitable will,
and his fiat went forth, that not only the army, but all ranks of citizens, from
the nobles to the serfs, should shave their beards. A certain time was given,
that people might get over the first throes of their repugnance, after which
every man who chose to retain his beard was to pay a tax of one hundred
roubles. The priests and the serfs were put on a lower footing, and allowed
to retain theirs upon payment of a copeck every time they passed the gate of
a city. Great discontent existed in consequence, but the dreadful fate of the
Strelitzes was too recent to be forgotten, and thousands who had the will
had not the courage to revolt. As is well remarked by a writer in the
Encyclopædia Britannica, they thought it wiser to cut off their beards than
to run the risk of incensing a man who would make no scruple in cutting off
their heads. Wiser, too, than the popes and bishops of a former age, he did
not threaten them with eternal damnation, but made them pay in hard cash
the penalty of their disobedience. For many years, a very considerable
revenue was collected from this source. The collectors gave in receipt for its
payment a small copper coin, struck expressly for the purpose, and called
the “borodováia,” or “the bearded.” On one side it bore the figure of a nose,
mouth, and moustaches, with a long bushy beard, surmounted by the words,
“Deuyee Vyeatee,” “money received;” the whole encircled by a wreath, and
stamped with the black eagle of Russia. On the reverse, it bore the date of
the year. Every man who chose to wear a beard was obliged to produce this
receipt on his entry into a town. Those who were refractory, and refused to
pay the tax, were thrown into prison.
Since that day, the rulers of modern Europe have endeavoured to
persuade, rather than to force, in all matters pertaining to fashion. The
Vatican troubles itself no more about beards or ringlets, and men may
become hairy as bears, if such is their fancy, without fear of
excommunication or deprivation of their political rights. Folly has taken a
new start, and cultivates the moustache.
Even upon this point governments will not let men alone. Religion as
yet has not meddled with it; but perhaps it will; and politics already
influence it considerably. Before the revolution of 1830, neither the French
nor Belgian citizens were remarkable for their moustaches; but, after that
event, there was hardly a shopkeeper either in Paris or Brussels whose
upper lip did not suddenly become hairy with real or mock moustaches.
During a temporary triumph gained by the Dutch soldiers over the citizens
of Louvain, in October 1830, it became a standing joke against the patriots,
that they shaved their faces clean immediately; and the wits of the Dutch
army asserted that they had gathered moustaches enough from the denuded
lips of the Belgians to stuff mattresses for all the sick and wounded in their
hospital.
The last folly of this kind is still more recent. In the German
newspapers, of August 1838, appeared an ordonnance, signed by the king of
Bavaria, forbidding civilians, on any pretence whatever, to wear
moustaches, and commanding the police and other authorities to arrest, and
cause to be shaved, the offending parties. “Strange to say,” adds Le Droit,
the journal from which this account is taken, “moustaches disappeared
immediately, like leaves from the trees in autumn; every body made haste to
obey the royal order, and not one person was arrested.”
The king of Bavaria, a rhymester of some celebrity, has taken a good
many poetical licences in his time. His licence in this matter appears neither
poetical nor reasonable. It is to be hoped that he will not take it into his
royal head to make his subjects shave theirs; nothing but that is wanting to
complete their degradation.
BAYEUX TAPESTRY.77
Footnotes
1. Miss Elizabeth Villiers, afterwards Countess of Orkney.
2. The wits of the day called it a sand-bank, which would wreck the vessel of the state.
3. This anecdote, which is related in the correspondence of Madame de Bavière, Duchess of Orleans
and mother of the Regent, is discredited by Lord John Russell in his History of the principal
States of Europe from the Peace of Utrecht; for what reason he does not inform us. There is no
doubt that Law proposed his scheme to Desmarets, and that Louis refused to hear of it. The
reason given for the refusal is quite consistent with the character of that bigoted and tyrannical
monarch.
4. From maltôte, an oppressive tax.
5. This anecdote is related by M. de la Hode, in his Life of Philippe of Orleans. It would have
looked more authentic if he had given the names of the dishonest contractor and the still more
dishonest minister. But M. de la Hode’s book is liable to the same objection as most of the
French memoirs of that and of subsequent periods. It is sufficient with most of them that an
anecdote be ben trovato; the vero is but matter of secondary consideration.
6. The French pronounced his name in this manner to avoid the ungallic sound, aw. After the failure
of his scheme, the wags said the nation was lasse de lui, and proposed that he should in future
be known by the name of Monsieur Helas!
7. The curious reader may find an anecdote of the eagerness of the French ladies to retain Law in
their company, which will make him blush or smile according as he happens to be very modest
or the reverse. It is related in the Letters of Madame Charlotte Elizabeth de Bavière, Duchess of
Orleans, vol. ii. p. 274.
8. The following squib was circulated on the occasion:
“Foin de ton zèle séraphique,
Malheureux Abbé de Tencin,
Depuis que Law est Catholique,
Tout le royaume est Capucin!”
Thus somewhat weakly and paraphrastically rendered by Justandsond, in his translation of
the Memoirs of Louis XV.: “Tencin, a curse on thy seraphic zeal,
Which by persuasion hath contrived the means
To make the Scotchman at our altars kneel,
Since which we all are poor as Capucines!”
9. From a print in a Dutch collection of satirical prints relating to the Mississippi Mania, entitled
“Het groote Tafereel der Dwaasheid;” or, The great picture of Folly. The print of Atlas is styled,
“L’Atlas actieux de Papier.” Law is calling in Hercules to aid him in supporting the globe.
Quoted in Wright’s England under the House of Hanover.
10. The Duke de la Force gained considerable sums, not only by jobbing in the stocks, but in
dealing in porcelain, spices, &c. It was debated for a length of time in the parliament of Paris
whether he had not, in his quality of spice-merchant, forfeited his rank in the peerage. It was
decided in the negative. A caricature of him was made, dressed as a street-porter, carrying a
large bale of spices on his back, with the inscription, “Admirez La Force.”
11. “Lucifer’s New Row-Barge” exhibits Law in a barge, with a host of emblematic figures
representing the Mississippi follies.—From a Print in Mr. Hawkins’ Collection.
12. Duclos, Memoires Secrets de la Régence.
13. The Duchess of Orleans gives a different version of this story; but whichever be the true one, the
manifestation of such feeling in a legislative assembly was not very creditable. She says that the
president was so transported with joy, that he was seized with a rhyming fit, and, returning into
the hall, exclaimed to the members: “Messieurs! Messieurs! bonne nouvelle!
Le carrosse de Lass est reduit en cannelle!”
14. Law in a car drawn by cocks; from Het groote Tofereel der Dwaasheid.
15. Neck or nothing, or downfall of the Mississippi Company.—From a Print in Mr. Hawkins’
Collection.
16. A South-Sea Ballad; or, Merry Remarks upon Exchange-Alley Bubbles. To a new Tune called
“The Grand Elixir; or, the Philosopher’s Stone discovered.”
17. Coxe’s Walpole, Correspondence between Mr. Secretary Craggs and Earl Stanhope.
18. Stock-jobbing Card, or the humours of Change Alley. Copied from a print called Bubblers’
Medley, published by Carrington Bowles.
19. Tree, surrounded by water; people climbing up the tree. One of a series of bubble cards, copied
from the Bubblers’ Medley, published by Carrington Bowles.
20. Gay (the poet), in that disastrous year, had a present from young Craggs of some South-Sea
stock, and once supposed himself to be master of twenty thousand pounds. His friends
persuaded him to sell his share, but he dreamed of dignity and splendour, and could not hear to
obstruct his own fortune. He was then importuned to sell as much as would purchase a hundred
a year for life, “which,” says Fenton, “will make you sure of a clean shirt and a shoulder of
mutton every day.” This counsel was rejected; the profit and principal were lost, and Gay sunk
under the calamity so low that his life became in danger.—Johnson’s Lives of the Poets 21.
Smollett.
22. Caricature, copied from Bubblers’ Medley, published by Carrington Bowles.
23. Britannia stript by a South-Sea Director. From Het groote Tafereel der Dwaasheid.
24. “‘God cannot love,’ says Blunt, with tearless eyes,
‘The wretch he starves, and piously denies.’ …
Much-injur’d Blunt! why bears he Britain’s hate?
A wizard told him in these words our fate:
‘At length corruption, like a gen’ral flood,
So long by watchful ministers withstood,
Shall deluge all; and av’rice, creeping on,
Spread like a low-born mist, and blot the sun;
Statesman and patriot ply alike the stocks,
Peeress and butler share alike the box,
And judges job, and bishops bite the Town,
And mighty dukes pack cards for half-a-crown:
See Britain sunk in Lucre’s forbid charms,
And France reveng’d of Ann’s and Edward’s arms!’
’Twas no court-badge, great Scriv’ner! fir’d thy brain,
Nor lordly luxury, nor city gain:
No, ’twas thy righteous end, asham’d to see
Senates degen’rate, patriots disagree,
And nobly wishing party-rage to cease,
To buy both sides, and give thy country peace.”
Pope’s Epistle to Allen Lord Bathurst.
25. The Brabant Screen. This caricature represents the Duchess of Kendal behind the “Brabant
Screen,” supplying Mr. Knight with money to facilitate his escape; and is copied from a rare
print of the time, in the collection of E. Hawkins, Esq. F.S.A.
26. Emblematic print of the South-Sea Scheme. By W. Hogarth.
27. The South-Sea project remained until 1845 the greatest example in British history of the
infatuation of the people for commercial gambling. The first edition of these volumes was
published some time before the outbreak of the Great Railway Mania of that and the following
year.
28. Biographie Universelle.
29. His sum “of perfection,” or instructions to students to aid them in the laborious search for the
stone and elixir, has been translated into most of the languages of Europe. An English
translation, by a great enthusiast in alchymy, one Richard Russell, was published in London in
1686. The preface is dated eight years previously from the house of the alchymist, “at the Star,
in Newmarket, in Wapping, near the Dock.” His design in undertaking the translation was, as he
informs us, to expose the false pretences of the many ignorant pretenders to the science who
abounded in his day.
30. Article, Geber, Biographie Universelle.
31. Naudé, Apologie des Grands Hommes accusés de Magie, chap. xviii.
32. Lenglet, Histoire de la Philosophie Hermétique. See also Godwin’s Lives of the Necromancers.
33. Naudé, Apologie des Grands Hommes accusés de Magie, chap. xvii.
34. Vidimus omnia ista dum ad Angliam transiimus, propter intercessionem domini Regis Edoardi
illustrissimi.
35. Converti una vice in aurum ad L millia pondo argenti vivi, plumbi, et stanni.—Lullii
Testamentum.
36. These verses are but a coarser expression of the slanderous line of Pope, that “every woman is at
heart a rake.”
37. Fuller’s Worthies of England.
38. Biographie Universelle.
39. For full details of this extraordinary trial, see Lobineau’s Nouvelle Histoire de Bretagne, and
D’Argentré’s work on the same subject. The character and life of Gilles de Rays are believed to
have suggested the famous Blue Beard of the nursery tale.
40. See the article “Paracelsus,” by the learned Renaudin, in the Biographie Universelle.
41. The “crystal” alluded to appears to have been a black stone, or piece of polished coal. The
following account of it is given, in the supplement to Granger’s Biographical History. “The
black stone into which Dee used to call his spirits was in the collection of the Earls of
Peterborough, from whence it came to Lady Elizabeth Germaine. It was next the property of the
late Duke of Argyle, and is now Mr. Walpole’s. It appears upon examination to be nothing more
than a polished piece of cannel coal; but this is what Butler means when he says, ‘Kelly did all
his feats upon
The devil’s looking-glass—a stone.’”
42. Lilly the astrologer, in his Life, written by himself, frequently tells of prophecies delivered by
the angels in a manner similar to the angels of Dr. Dee. He says, “The prophecies were not given
vocally by the angels, but by inspection of the crystal in types and figures, or by apparition the
circular way; where, at some distance, the angels appear, representing by forms, shapes, and
creatures, what is demanded. It is very rare, yea even in our days,” quoth that wiseacre, “for any
operator or master to hear the angels speak articulately: when they do speak, it is like, the Irish,
much in the throat!”
43. Albert Laski, son of Jaroslav, was Palatine of Siradz, and afterwards of Sendomir, and chiefly
contributed to the election of Henry of Valois, the Third of France, to the throne of Poland, and
was one of the delegates who went to France in order to announce to the new monarch his
elevation to the sovereignty of Poland. After the deposition of Henry, Albert Laski voted for
Maximilian of Austria. In 1583 he visited England, when Queen Elizabeth received him with
great distinction. The honours which were shewn him during his visit to Oxford, by the especial
command of the Queen, were equal to those rendered to sovereign princes. His extraordinary
prodigality rendered his enormous wealth insufficient to defray his expenses, and he therefore
became a zealous adept in alchymy, and took from England to Poland with him two known
alchymists.—Count Valerian Krasinski’s Historical Sketch of the Reformation in Poland.
44. The following legend of the tomb of Rosencreutz, written by Eustace Budgell, appears in No.
379 of the Spectator:—“A certain person, having occasion to dig somewhat deep in the ground
where this philosopher lay interred, met with a small door, having a wall on each side of it. His
curiosity, and the hope of finding some hidden treasure, soon prompted him to force open the
door. He was immediately surprised by a sudden blaze of light, and discovered a very fair vault.
At the upper end of it was a statue of a man in armour, sitting by a table, and leaning on his left
arm. He held a truncheon in his right hand, and had a lamp burning before him. The man had no
sooner set one foot within the vault, than the statue, erecting itself from its leaning posture,
stood bolt upright; and, upon the fellow’s advancing another step, lifted up the truncheon in his
right hand. The man still ventured a third step; when the statue, with a furious blow, broke the
lamp into a thousand pieces, and left his guest in sudden darkness. Upon the report of this
adventure, the country people came with lights to the sepulchre, and discovered that the statue,
which was made of brass, was nothing more than a piece of clock-work; that the floor of the
vault was all loose, and underlaid with several springs, which, upon any man’s entering,
naturally produced that which had happened.
“Rosicreucius, say his disciples, made use of this method to shew the world that he had re-
invented the ever-burning lamps of the ancients, though he was resolved no one should reap any
advantage from the discovery.”
45. No. 574. Friday, July 30th, 1714.
46. “Vitulus Aureus quem Mundus adorat et orat, in quo tractatur de naturæ miraculo transmutandi
metalla.” Hagæ, 1667.
47. Voyages de Monconis, tome ii. p. 379.
48. See the Abbé Fiard, and Anecdotes of the Reign of Louis XVI. p. 400.
49. Biographie des Contemporains, article “Cagliostro.” See also Histoire de la Magie en France,
par M. Jules Garinet, p. 284.
50. The enemies of the unfortunate Queen of France, when the progress of the Revolution
embittered their animosity against her, maintained that she was really a party in this transaction;
that she, and not Mademoiselle D’Oliva, met the cardinal and rewarded him with the flower;
and that the story above related was merely concocted between her La Motte, and others to
cheat the jeweller of his 1,600,000 francs.
51. See Gibbon and Voltaire for further notice of this subject.
52. Charlemagne: Poëme épique par Lucien Buonaparte.
53. This prophecy seems to have been that set forth at length in the popular Life of Mother Shipton:
“When fate to England shall restore
A king to reign as heretofore,
Great death in London shall be though,
And many houses be laid low.”
54. The London Saturday Journal of March 12th, 1842, contains the following:—“An absurd report
is gaining ground among the weak-minded, that London will be destroyed by an earthquake on
the 17th of March, or St. Patrick’s day. This rumour is founded on the following ancient
prophecies: one professing to be pronounced in the year 1203; the other, by Dr. Dee the
astrologer, in 1598:
“In eighteen hundred and forty-two
Four things the sun shall view;
London’s rich and famous town
Hungry earth shall swallow down.
Storm and rain in France shall be,
Till every river runs a sea.
Spain shall be rent in twain,
And famine waste the land again.
So say I, the Monk of Dree,
In the twelve hundredth year and three.”
Harleian Collection (British Museum), 800 b, fol. 319.
“The Lord have mercy on you all—
Prepare yourselves for dreadful fall
Of house and land and human soul—
The measure of your sins is full.
In the year one, eight, and forty-two,
Of the year that is so new;
In the third month of that sixteen,
It may be a day or two between—
Perhaps you’ll soon be stiff and cold.
Dear Christian, be not stout and bold—
The mighty, kingly-proud will see
This comes to pass as my name’s Dee.”
1598. Ms. in the British Museum.
The alarm of the population of London did not on this occasion extend beyond the wide circle
of the uneducated classes, but among them it equalled that recorded in the text. It was soon
afterwards stated that no such prophecy is to be found in the Harleian Ms.
55. Chronicles of England, by Richard Grafton; London, 1568, p. 106.
56. Faerie Queene, b. 3, c. 3, s. 6-13.
57. Although other places claim the honour(!) of Mother Shipton’s birth, her residence is asserted,
by oral tradition, to have been for many years a cottage at Winslow-cum-Shipton, in
Buckinghamshire, of which the above is a representation. We give the contents of one of the
popular books containing her prophecies: The Strange and Wonderful History and Prophecies of
Mother Shipton, plainly setting forth her Birth, Life, Death, and Burial. 12mo. Newcastle. Chap.
1.—Of her birth and parentage. 2. How Mother Shipton’s mother proved with child; how she
fitted the justice, and what happened at her delivery. 3. By what name Mother Shipton was
christened, and how her mother went into a monastery. 4. Several other pranks play’d by Mother
Shipton in revenge of such as abused her. 5. How Ursula married a young man named Tobias
Shipton, and how strangely she discovered a thief. 6. Her prophecy against Cardinal Wolsey. 7.
Some other prophecies of Mother Shipton relating to those times. 8. Her prophecies in verse to
the Abbot of Beverly. 9. Mother Shipton’s life, death, and burial.
58. Let us try. In his second century, prediction 66, he says:
“From great dangers the captive is escaped.
A little time, great fortune changed.
In the palace the people are caught.
By good augury the city is besieged.”
“What is this,” a believer might exclaim, “but the escape of Napoleon from Elba—his
changed fortune, and the occupation of Paris by the allied armies?”
Let us try again. In his third century, prediction 98, he says:
“Two royal brothers will make fierce war on each other;
So mortal shall be the strife between them,
That each one shall occupy a fort against the other;
For their reign and life shall be the quarrel.”
Some Lillius Redivivus would find no difficulty in this prediction. To use a vulgar phrase, it
is as clear as a pikestaff. Had not the astrologer in view Don Miguel and Don Pedro when he
penned this stanza, so much less obscure and oracular than the rest?
59. Hermippus Redivivus, p. 142.
60. Jovii Elog. p. 320.
61. Les Anecdotes de Florence, ou l’Histoire secrète de la Maison di Medicis, p. 318.
62. It is quite astonishing to see the great demand there is, both in England and France, for dream-
books, and other trash of the same kind. Two books in England enjoy an extraordinary
popularity, and have run through upwards of fifty editions in as many years in London alone,
besides being reprinted in Manchester, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Dublin. One is Mother
Bridget’s Dream-book and Oracle of Fate; the other is the Norwood Gipsy. It is stated, on the
authority of one who is curious in these matters, that there is a demand for these works, which
are sold at sums varying from a penny to sixpence, chiefly to servant-girls and imperfectly-
educated people, all over the country, of upwards of eleven thousand annually; and that at no
period during the last thirty years has the average number sold been less than this. The total
number during this period would thus amount to 330,000.
63. Spectator, No. 7, March 8, 1710-11.
64. See Van der Mye’s account of the siege of Breda. The garrison, being afflicted with scurvy, the
Prince of Orange sent the physicians two or three small phials, containing a decoction of
camomile, wormwood, and camphor, telling them to pretend that it was a medicine of the
greatest value and extremest rarity, which had been procured with very much danger and
difficulty from the East; and so strong, that two or three drops would impart a healing virtue to a
gallon of water. The soldiers had faith in their commander; they took the medicine with cheerful
faces, and grew well rapidly. They afterwards thronged about the prince in groups of twenty and
thirty at a time, praising his skill, and loading him with protestations of gratitude.
65. Mummies were of several kinds, and were all of great use in magnetic medicines. Paracelsus
enumerates six kinds of mummies; the first four only differing in the composition used by
different people for preserving their dead, are the Egyptian, Arabian, Pisasphaltos, and Libyan.
The fifth mummy of peculiar power was made from criminals that had been hanged; “for from
such there is a gentle siccation, that expungeth the watery humour, without destroying the oil
and spirituall, which is cherished by the heavenly luminaries, and strengthened continually by
the affluence and impulses of the celestial spirits; whence it may be properly called by the name
of constellated or celestial mummie.” The sixth kind of mummy was made of corpuscles, or
spiritual effluences, radiated from the living body; though we cannot get very clear ideas on this
head, or respecting the manner in which they were caught.—Medicina Diatastica; or,
Sympathetical Mummie, abstracted from the Works of Paracelsus, and translated out of the
Latin, by Fernando Parkhurst, Gent. London, 1653, pp. 2, 7. Quoted by the Foreign Quarterly
Review, vol. xii. p. 415.
66. Reginald Scott, quoted by Sir Walter Scott, in the notes to the Lay of the last Minstrel, c. iii. v.
xxiii.
67. Greatraks’ Account of himself, in a letter to the Honourable Robert Boyle.
68. Introduction to the Study of Animal Magnetism, by Baron Dupotet de Sennevoy, p. 315.
69. Introduction to the Study of Animal Magnetism, p. 318.
70. Dictionaire des Sciences Médicales—Article Convulsionnaires, par Montégre.
71. An enthusiastic philosopher, of whose name we are not informed, had constructed a very
satisfactory theory on some subject or other, and was not a little proud of it. “But the facts, my
dear fellow,” said his friend, “the facts do not agree with your theory.”—“Don’t they?” replied
the philosopher, shrugging his shoulders, “then, tant pis pour les faits;”—so much the worse for
the facts!
72. Rapport des Commissaires, rédigé par M. Bailly. Paris, 1784.
73. Introduction to the Study of Animal Magnetism, by Baron Dupotet, p. 73.
74. See Foreign Review and Continental Miscellany, vol. v. p. 113.
75. See the very clear, and dispassionate article upon the subject in the fifth volume (1830) of The
Foreign Review, p. 96 et seq.
76. Histoire Critique du Magnétisme Animal, p. 60.
77. The above engraving, shewing two soldiers of William the Conqueror’s army, is taken from the
celebrated Bayeux Tapestry.—See ante, p. 297.
POPE URBAN PREACHING THE CRUSADES
Volume 2
Table of Contents
VIEW IN THE THE HARZ MOUNTAINS.
N’en déplaise à ces fous nommés sages de Grèce,
En ce monde il n’est point de parfaite sagesse;
Tous les hommes sont fous, et malgré tous leurs soîns
Ne diffèrent entre eux que du plus ou du moins.
BOILEAU.
The Crusades
Table of Contents
They heard, and up they sprang upon the wing
Innumerable. As when the potent rod
Of Amram’s son, in Egypt’s evil day,
Waved round the coast, up call’d a pitchy cloud
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind
That o’er the realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like night, and darken’d all the realm of Nile,
So numberless were they. * * * *
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand banners rise into the air,
With orient colours waving. With them rose
A forest huge of spears; and thronging helms
Appear’d, and serried shields, in thick array,
Of depth immeasurable.
Paradise Lost.
Every age has its peculiar folly; some scheme, project, or phantasy into
which it plunges, spurred on either by the love of gain, the necessity of
excitement, or the mere force of imitation. Failing in these, it has some
madness, to which it is goaded by political or religious causes, or both
combined. Every one of these causes influenced the Crusades, and
conspired to render them the most extraordinary instance upon record of the
extent to which popular enthusiasm can be carried. History in her solemn
page informs us, that the Crusaders were but ignorant and savage men, that
their motives were those of bigotry unmitigated, and that their pathway was
one of blood and tears. Romance, on the other hand, dilates upon their piety
and heroism, and portrays, in her most glowing and impassioned hues, their
virtue and magnanimity, the imperishable honour they acquired for
themselves, and the great services they rendered to Christianity. In the
following pages we shall ransack the stores of both, to discover the true
spirit that animated the motley multitude who took up arms in the service of
the cross, leaving history to vouch for facts, but not disdaining the aid of
contemporary poetry and romance, to throw light upon feelings, motives,
and opinions.
In order to understand thoroughly the state of public feeling in Europe
at the time when Peter the Hermit preached the holy war, it will be
necessary to go back for many years anterior to that event. We must make
acquaintance with the pilgrims of the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries, and
learn the tales they told of the dangers they had passed and the wonders
they had seen. Pilgrimages to the Holy Land seem at first to have been
undertaken by converted Jews, and by Christian devotees of lively
imagination, pining with a natural curiosity to visit the scenes which of all
others were most interesting in their eyes. The pious and the impious alike
flocked to Jerusalem,—the one class to feast their sight on the scenes
hallowed by the life and sufferings of their Lord, and the other, because it
soon became a generally received opinion, that such a pilgrimage was
sufficient to rub off the long score of sins, however atrocious. Another and
very numerous class of pilgrims were the idle and roving, who visited
Palestine then as the moderns visit Italy or Switzerland now, because it was
the fashion, and because they might please their vanity by retailing, on their
return, the adventures they had met with. But the really pious formed the
great majority. Every year their numbers increased, until at last they became
so numerous as to be called the “armies of the Lord.” Full of enthusiasm,
they set the dangers and difficulties of the way at defiance, and lingered
with holy rapture on every scene described by the Evangelists. To them it
was bliss indeed to drink the clear waters of the Jordan, or be baptised in
the same stream where John had baptised the Saviour. They wandered with
awe and pleasure in the purlieus of the Temple, on the solemn Mount of
Olives, or the awful Calvary, where a God had bled for sinful men. To these
pilgrims every object was precious. Relics were eagerly sought after;
flagons of water from Jordan, or panniers of mould from the hill of the
Crucifixion, were brought home, and sold at extravagant prices to churches
and monasteries. More apocryphal relics, such as the wood of the true cross,
the tears of the Virgin Mary, the hems of her garments, the toe-nails and
hair of the Apostles—even the tents that Paul had helped to manufacture—
were exhibited for sale by the knavish in Palestine, and brought back to
Europe “with wondrous cost and care.” A grove of a hundred oaks would
not have furnished all the wood sold in little morsels as remnants of the true
cross; and the tears of Mary, if collected together, would have filled a
cistern.
For upwards of two hundred years the pilgrims met with no impediment
in Palestine. The enlightened Haroun Al Reschid, and his more immediate
successors, encouraged the stream which brought so much wealth into
Syria, and treated the wayfarers with the utmost courtesy. The race of
Fatemite caliphs,—who, although in other respects as tolerant, were more
distressed for money, or more unscrupulous in obtaining it, than their
predecessors of the house of Abbas,—imposed a tax of a bezant for each
pilgrim that entered Jerusalem. This was a serious hardship upon the poorer
sort, who had begged their weary way across Europe, and arrived at the
bourne of all their hopes without a coin. A great outcry was immediately
raised, but still the tax was rigorously levied. The pilgrims unable to pay
were compelled to remain at the gate of the holy city until some rich
devotee arriving with his train, paid the tax and let them in. Robert of
Normandy, father of William the Conqueror, who, in common with many
other nobles of the highest rank, undertook the pilgrimage, found on his
arrival scores of pilgrims at the gate, anxiously expecting his coming to pay
the tax for them. Upon no occasion was such a boon refused.
The sums drawn from this source were a mine of wealth to the Moslem
governors of Palestine, imposed as the tax had been at a time when
pilgrimages had become more numerous than ever. A strange idea had taken
possession of the popular mind at the close of the tenth and commencement
of the eleventh century. It was universally believed that the end of the world
was at hand; that the thousand years of the Apocalypse were near
completion, and that Jesus Christ would descend upon Jerusalem to judge
mankind. All Christendom was in commotion. A panic terror seized upon
the weak, the credulous, and the guilty, who in those days formed more than
nineteen-twentieths of the population. Forsaking their homes, kindred, and
occupation, they crowded to Jerusalem to await the coming of the Lord,
lightened, as they imagined, of a load of sin by their weary pilgrimage. To
increase the panic, the stars were observed to fall from heaven, earthquakes
to shake the land, and violent hurricanes to blow down the forests. All
these, and more especially the meteoric phenomena, were looked upon as
the forerunners of the approaching judgments. Not a meteor shot athwart
the horizon that did not fill a district with alarm, and send away to
Jerusalem a score of pilgrims, with staff in hand and wallet on their back,
praying as they went for the remission of their sins. Men, women, and even
children, trudged in droves to the holy city, in expectation of the day when
the heavens would open, and the Son of God descend in his glory. This
extraordinary delusion, while it augmented the numbers, increased also the
hardships of the pilgrims. Beggars became so numerous on all the highways
between the west of Europe and Constantinople, that the monks, the great
almsgivers upon these occasions, would have brought starvation within
sight of their own doors, if they had not economised their resources, and left
the devotees to shift for themselves as they could. Hundreds of them were
glad to subsist upon the berries that ripened by the road, who, before this
great flux, might have shared the bread and flesh of the monasteries.
But this was not the greatest of their difficulties. On their arrival in
Jerusalem they found that a sterner race had obtained possession of the
Holy Land. The caliphs of Bagdad had been succeeded by the harsh Turks
of the race of Seljook, who looked upon the pilgrims with contempt and
aversion. The Turks of the eleventh century were more ferocious and less
scrupulous than the Saracens of the tenth. They were annoyed at the
immense number of pilgrims who overran the country, and still more so
because they shewed no intention of quitting it. The hourly expectation of
the last judgment kept them waiting; and the Turks, apprehensive of being
at last driven from the soil by the swarms that were still arriving, heaped up
difficulties in their way. Persecution of every kind awaited them. They were
plundered, and beaten with stripes, and kept in suspense for months at the
gates of Jerusalem, unable to pay the golden bezant that was to procure
them admission.
When the first epidemic terror of the day of judgment began to subside,
a few pilgrims ventured to return to Europe, their hearts big with
indignation at the insults they had suffered. Every where as they passed
they related to a sympathising auditory the wrongs of Christendom. Strange
to say, even these recitals increased the mania for pilgrimage. The greater
the dangers of the way, the fairer chance that sins of deep dye would be
atoned for. Difficulty and suffering only heightened the merit, and fresh
hordes issued from every town and village, to win favour in the sight of
heaven by a visit to the holy sepulchre. Thus did things continue during the
whole of the eleventh century.
The train that was to explode so fearfully was now laid, and there
wanted but the hand to apply the torch. At last the man appeared upon the
scene. Like all who have ever achieved so great an end, Peter the Hermit
was exactly suited to the age; neither behind it nor in advance of it; but
acute enough to penetrate its mystery ere it was discovered by any other.
Enthusiastic, chivalrous, bigoted, and, if not insane, not far removed from
insanity, he was the very prototype of the time. True enthusiasm is always
persevering and always eloquent, and these two qualities were united in no
common degree in the person of this extraordinary preacher. He was a
monk of Amiens, and ere he assumed the hood had served as a soldier. He is
represented as having been ill favoured and low in stature, but with an eye
of surpassing brightness and intelligence. Having been seized with the
mania of the age, he visited Jerusalem, and remained there till his blood
boiled to see the cruel persecution heaped upon the devotees. On his return
home he shook the world by the eloquent story of their wrongs.
Before entering into any further details of the marvellous results of his
preaching, it will be advisable to cast a glance at the state of the mind of
Europe, that we may understand all the better the causes of his success.
First of all, there was the priesthood, which, exercising as it did the most
conspicuous influence upon the fortunes of society, claims the largest share
of attention. Religion was the ruling idea of that day, and the only civiliser
capable of taming such wolves as then constituted the flock of the faithful.
The clergy were all in all; and though they kept the popular mind in the
most slavish subjection with regard to religious matters, they furnished it
with the means of defence against all other oppression except their own. In
the ecclesiastical ranks were concentrated all the true piety, all the learning,
all the wisdom of the time; and, as a natural consequence, a great portion of
power, which their very wisdom perpetually incited them to extend. The
people knew nothing of kings and nobles, except in the way of injuries
inflicted. The first ruled for, or more properly speaking against, the barons,
and the barons only existed to brave the power of the kings, or to trample
with their iron heels upon the neck of prostrate democracy. The latter had
no friend but the clergy, and these, though they necessarily instilled the
superstition from which they themselves were not exempt, yet taught the
cheering doctrine that all men were equal in the sight of heaven. Thus,
while Feudalism told them they had no rights in this world, Religion told
them they had every right in the next. With this consolation they were for
the time content, for political ideas had as yet taken no root. When the
clergy, for other reasons, recommended the Crusade, the people joined in it
with enthusiasm. The subject of Palestine filled all minds; the pilgrims’
tales of two centuries warmed every imagination; and when their friends,
their guides, and their instructors preached a war so much in accordance
with their own prejudices and modes of thinking, the enthusiasm rose into a
frenzy.
But while religion inspired the masses, another agent was at work upon
the nobility. These were fierce and lawless; tainted with every vice,
endowed with no virtue, and redeemed by one good quality alone, that of
courage. The only religion they felt was the religion of fear. That and their
overboiling turbulence alike combined to guide them to the Holy Land.
Most of them had sins enough to answer for. They lived with their hand
against every man, and with no law but their own passions. They set at
defiance the secular power of the clergy; but their hearts quailed at the
awful denunciations of the pulpit with regard to the life to come. War was
the business and the delight of their existence; and when they were
promised remission of all their sins upon the easy condition of following
their favourite bent, it is not to be wondered at that they rushed with
enthusiasm to the onslaught, and became as zealous in the service of the
cross as the great majority of the people, who were swayed by more purely
religious motives. Fanaticism and the love of battle alike impelled them to
the war, while the kings and princes of Europe had still another motive for
encouraging their zeal. Policy opened their eyes to the great advantages
which would accrue to themselves by the absence of so many restless,
intriguing, and bloodthirsty men, whose insolence it required more than the
small power of royalty to restrain within due bounds. Thus every motive
was favourable to the Crusades. Every class of society was alike incited to
join or encourage the war: kings and the clergy by policy, the nobles by
turbulence and the love of dominion, and the people by religious zeal and
the concentrated enthusiasm of two centuries, skilfully directed by their
only instructors.
It was in Palestine itself that Peter the Hermit first conceived the grand
idea of rousing the powers of Christendom to rescue the Christians of the
East from the thraldom of the Mussulmans, and the sepulchre of Jesus from
the rude hands of the infidel. The subject engrossed his whole mind. Even
in the visions of the night he was full of it. One dream made such an
impression upon him, that he devoutly believed the Saviour of the world
himself appeared before him, and promised him aid and protection in his
holy undertaking. If his zeal had ever wavered before, this was sufficient to
fix it for ever.
Peter, after he had performed all the penances and duties of his
pilgrimage, demanded an interview with Simeon, the Patriarch of the Greek
Church at Jerusalem. Though the latter was a heretic in Peter’s eyes, yet he
was still a Christian, and felt as acutely as himself for the persecutions
heaped by the Turks upon the followers of Jesus. The good prelate entered
fully into his views, and, at his suggestion, wrote letters to the Pope, and to
the most influential monarchs of Christendom, detailing the sorrows of the
faithful, and urging them to take up arms in their defence. Peter was not a
laggard in the work. Taking an affectionate farewell of the Patriarch, he
returned in all haste to Italy. Pope Urban II. occupied the apostolic chair. It
was at that time far from being an easy seat. His predecessor Gregory had
bequeathed him a host of disputes with the Emperor Henry IV. of Germany,
and he had converted Philip I. of France into an enemy by his strenuous
opposition to an adulterous connexion formed by that monarch. So many
dangers encompassed him, that the Vatican was no secure abode, and he had
taken refuge in Apulia, under the protection of the renowned Robert
Guiscard. Thither Peter appears to have followed him, though in what spot
their meeting took place is not stated with any precision by ancient
chroniclers or modern historians. Urban received him most kindly; read,
with tears in his eyes, the epistle from the Patriarch Simeon, and listened to
the eloquent story of the Hermit with an attention which shewed how
deeply he sympathised with the woes of the Christian Church. Enthusiasm
is contagious; and the Pope appears to have caught it instantly from one
whose zeal was so unbounded. Giving the Hermit full powers, he sent him
abroad to preach the holy war to all the nations and potentates of
Christendom. The Hermit preached, and countless thousands answered to
his call. France, Germany, and Italy started at his voice, and prepared for
the deliverance of Zion. One of the early historians of the Crusade, who was
himself an eye-witness of the rapture of Europe,1 describes the personal
appearance of the Hermit at this time. He says, that there appeared to be
something of divine in every thing which he said or did. The people so
highly reverenced him, that they plucked hairs from the mane of his mule
that they might keep them as relics. While preaching, he wore in general a
woollen tunic, with a dark-coloured mantle, which fell down to his heels.
His arms and feet were bare; and he ate neither flesh nor bread, supporting
himself chiefly upon fish and wine. “He set out,” says the chronicler, “from
whence I know not; but we saw him passing through the towns and villages,
preaching every where, and the people surrounding him in crowds, loading
him with offerings, and celebrating his sanctity with such great praises, that
I never remember to have seen such honours bestowed upon any one.” Thus
he went on, untired, inflexible, and full of devotion, communicating his
own madness to his hearers, until Europe was stirred from its very depths.
While the Hermit was appealing with such signal success to the people,
the Pope appealed with as much success to those who were to become the
chiefs and leaders of the expedition. His first step was to call a council at
Placentia, in the autumn of the year 1095. Here, in the assembly of the
clergy, the Pope debated the grand scheme, and gave audience to emissaries
who had been sent from Constantinople by the Emperor of the East, to
detail the progress made by the Turks in their design of establishing
themselves in Europe. The clergy were of course unanimous in support of
the Crusade; and the council separated, each individual member of it being
empowered to preach it to his people.
But Italy could not be expected to furnish all the aid required; and the
Pope crossed the Alps to inspire the fierce and powerful nobility and
chivalrous population of Gaul. His boldness in entering the territory, and
placing himself in the power of his foe, King Philip of France, is not the
least surprising feature of his mission. Some have imagined that cool policy
alone actuated him; while others assert that it was mere zeal, as warm and
as blind as that of Peter the Hermit. The latter opinion seems to be the true
one. Society did not calculate the consequences of what it was doing. Every
man seemed to act from impulse only; and the Pope, in throwing himself
into the heart of France, acted as much from impulse as the thousands who
responded to his call. A council was eventually summoned to meet him at
Clermont, in Auvergne, to consider the state of the Church, reform abuses,
and, above all, make preparations for the war. It was in the midst of an
extremely cold winter, and the ground was covered with snow. During
seven days the council sat with closed doors, while immense crowds from
all parts of France flocked into the town, in expectation that the Pope
himself would address the people. All the towns and villages for miles
around were filled with the multitude; even the fields were encumbered
with people, who, unable to procure lodging, pitched their tents under the
trees and by the way-side. All the neighbourhood presented the appearance
of a vast camp.
THE CATHEDRAL OF CLERMONT.
During the seven days’ deliberation, a sentence of excommunication
was passed upon King Philip for adultery with Bertrade de Montfort,
Countess of Anjou, and for disobedience to the supreme authority of the
apostolic see. This bold step impressed the people with reverence for so
stern a Church, which in the discharge of its duty shewed itself no respecter
of persons. Their love and their fear were alike increased, and they were
prepared to listen with more intense devotion to the preaching of so
righteous and inflexible a pastor. The great square before the cathedral
church of Clermont became every instant more densely crowded as the hour
drew nigh when the Pope was to address the populace. Issuing from the
church in his full canonicals, surrounded by his cardinals and bishops in all
the splendour of Romish ecclesiastical costume, the Pope stood before the
populace on a high scaffolding erected for the occasion, and covered with
scarlet cloth. A brilliant array of bishops and cardinals surrounded him; and
among them, humbler in rank, but more important in the world’s eye, the
Hermit Peter, dressed in his simple and austere habiliments. Historians
differ as to whether or not Peter addressed the crowd, but as all agree that
he was present, it seems reasonable to suppose that he spoke. But it was the
oration of the Pope that was most important. As he lifted up his hands to
ensure attention, every voice immediately became still. He began by
detailing the miseries endured by their brethren in the Holy Land; how the
plains of Palestine were desolated by the outrageous heathen, who with the
sword and the firebrand carried wailing into the dwellings and flames into
the possessions of the faithful; how Christian wives and daughters were
defiled by pagan lust; how the altars of the true God were desecrated, and
the relics of the saints trodden under foot. “You,” continued the eloquent
pontiff (and Urban II. was one of the most eloquent men of the day), “you,
who hear me, and who have received the true faith, and been endowed by
God with power, and strength, and greatness of soul,—whose ancestors
have been the prop of Christendom, and whose kings have put a barrier
against the progress of the infidel,—I call upon you to wipe off these
impurities from the face of the earth, and lift your oppressed fellow-
Christians from the depths into which they have been trampled. The
sepulchre of Christ is possessed by the heathen, the sacred places
dishonoured by their vileness. Oh, brave knights and faithful people!
offspring of invincible fathers! ye will not degenerate from your ancient
renown. Ye will not be restrained from embarking in this great cause by the
tender ties of wife or little ones, but will remember the words of the Saviour
of the world himself, ‘Whosoever loves father and mother more than me is
not worthy of me. Whosoever shall abandon for my name’s sake his house,
or his brethren, or his sisters, or his father, or his mother, or his wife, or his
children, or his lands, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal
life.’”
The warmth of the Pontiff communicated itself to the crowd, and the
enthusiasm of the people broke out several times ere he concluded his
address. He went on to portray, not only the spiritual but the temporal
advantages that would accrue to those who took up arms in the service of
the cross. Palestine was, he said, a land flowing with milk and honey, and
precious in the sight of God, as the scene of the grand events which had
saved mankind. That land, he promised, should be divided among them.
Moreover, they should have full pardon for all their offences, either against
God or man. “Go, then,” he added, “in expiation of your sins; and go
assured, that after this world shall have passed away, imperishable glory
shall be yours in the world which is to come.” The enthusiasm was no
longer to be restrained, and loud shouts interrupted the speaker; the people
exclaiming as if with one voice, “Dieu le veult! Dieu le veult!” With great
presence of mind Urban took advantage of the outburst, and as soon as
silence was obtained, continued: “Dear brethren, to-day is shewn forth in
you that which the Lord has said by his Evangelist, ‘When two or three are
gathered together in my name, there will I be in the midst of them to bless
them.’ If the Lord God had not been in your souls, you would not all have
pronounced the same words; or rather God himself pronounced them by
your lips, for it was he that put them in your hearts. Be they, then, your war-
cry in the combat, for those words came forth from God. Let the army of
the Lord, when it rushes upon his enemies, shout but that one cry, ‘Dieu le
veult! Dieu le veult!’ Let whoever is inclined to devote himself to this holy
cause make it a solemn engagement, and bear the cross of the Lord either
on his breast or his brow till he set out; and let him who is ready to begin
his march place the holy emblem on his shoulders, in memory of that
precept of our Saviour, ‘He who does not take up his cross and follow me is
not worthy of me.’”
The news of this council spread to the remotest parts of Europe in an
incredibly short space of time. Long before the fleetest horseman could
have brought the intelligence, it was known by the people in distant
provinces; a fact which was considered as nothing less than supernatural.
But the subject was in every body’s mouth, and the minds of men were
prepared for the result. The enthusiastic merely asserted what they wished,
and the event tallied with their prediction. This was, however, quite enough
in those days for a miracle, and as a miracle every one regarded it.
For several months after the Council of Clermont, France and Germany
presented a singular spectacle. The pious, the fanatic, the needy, the
dissolute, the young and the old, even women and children, and the halt and
lame, enrolled themselves by hundreds. In every village the clergy were
busied in keeping up the excitement, promising eternal rewards to those
who assumed the red cross, and fulminating the most awful denunciations
against all the worldly-minded who refused or even hesitated. Every debtor
who joined the Crusade was freed by the papal edict from the claims of his
creditors; outlaws of every grade were made equal with the honest upon the
same conditions. The property of those who went was placed under the
protection of the Church, and St. Paul and St. Peter themselves were
believed to descend from their high abode, to watch over the chattels of the
absent pilgrims. Signs and portents were seen in the air, to increase the
fervour of the multitude. An aurora-borealis of unusual brilliancy appeared,
and thousands of the Crusaders came out to gaze upon it, prostrating
themselves upon the earth in adoration. It was thought to be a sure
prognostic of the interposition of the Most High; and a representation of his
armies fighting with and overthrowing the infidels. Reports of wonders
were every where rife. A monk had seen two gigantic warriors on
horseback, the one representing a Christian and the other a Turk, fighting in
the sky with flaming swords, the Christian of course overcoming the
Paynim. Myriads of stars were said to have fallen from heaven, each
representing the fall of a Pagan foe. It was believed at the same time that
the Emperor Charlemagne would rise from the grave, and lead on to victory
the embattled armies of the Lord. A singular feature of the popular madness
was the enthusiasm of the women. Every where they encouraged their
lovers and husbands to forsake all things for the holy war. Many of them
burned the sign of the cross upon their breasts and arms, and coloured the
wound with a red dye, as a lasting memorial of their zeal. Others, still more
zealous, impressed the mark by the same means upon the tender limbs of
young children and infants at the breast.
Guibert de Nogent tells of a monk who made a large incision upon his
forehead in the form of a cross, which he coloured with some powerful
ingredient, telling the people that an angel had done it when he was asleep.
This monk appears to have been more of a rogue than a fool, for he
contrived to fare more sumptuously than any of his brother pilgrims, upon
the strength of his sanctity. The Crusaders every where gave him presents of
food and money, and he became quite fat ere he arrived at Jerusalem,
notwithstanding the fatigues of the way. If he had acknowledged in the first
place that he had made the wound himself, he would not have been thought
more holy than his fellows; but the story of the angel was a clincher.
All those who had property of any description rushed to the mart to
change it into hard cash. Lands and houses could be had for a quarter of
their value, while arms and accoutrements of war rose in the same
proportion. Corn, which had been excessively dear in anticipation of a year
of scarcity, suddenly became plentiful; and such was the diminution in the
value of provisions, that seven sheep were sold for five deniers.2 The nobles
mortgaged their estates for mere trifles to Jews and unbelievers, or
conferred charters of immunity upon the towns and communes within their
fiefs, for sums which, a few years previously, they would have rejected with
disdain. The farmer endeavoured to sell his plough, and the artisan his tools,
to purchase a sword for the deliverance of Jerusalem. Women disposed of
their trinkets for the same purpose. During the spring and summer of this
year (1096) the roads teemed with crusaders, all hastening to the towns and
villages appointed as the rendezvous of the district. Some were on
horseback, some in carts, and some came down the rivers in boats and rafts,
bringing their wives and children, all eager to go to Jerusalem. Very few
knew where Jerusalem was. Some thought it fifty thousand miles away, and
others imagined that it was but a month’s journey; while at sight of every
town or castle the children exclaimed, “Is that Jerusalem? Is that the city?”3
Parties of knights and nobles might be seen travelling eastward, and
amusing themselves as they went with the knightly diversion of hawking, to
lighten the fatigues of the way.
Guibert de Nogent, who did not write from hearsay, but from actual
observation, says the enthusiasm was so contagious, that when any one
heard the orders of the Pontiff, he went instantly to solicit his neighbours
and friends to join with him in “the way of God,” for so they called the
proposed expedition. The Counts Palatine were full of the desire to
undertake the journey, and all the inferior knights were animated with the
same zeal. Even the poor caught the flame so ardently, that no one paused
to think of the inadequacy of his means, or to consider whether he ought to
yield up his farm, his vineyard, or his fields. Each one set about selling his
property at as low a price as if he had been held in some horrible captivity,
and sought to pay his ransom without loss of time. Those who had not
determined upon the journey joked and laughed at those who were thus
disposing of their goods at such ruinous prices, prophesying that the
expedition would be miserable and their return worse. But they held this
language only for a day; the next they were suddenly seized with the same
frenzy as the rest. Those who had been loudest in their jeers gave up all
their property for a few crowns, and set out with those they had so laughed
at a few hours before. In most cases the laugh was turned against them; for
when it became known that a man was hesitating, his more zealous
neighbours sent him a present of a knitting-needle or a distaff, to shew their
contempt of him. There was no resisting this; so that the fear of ridicule
contributed its fair contingent to the armies of the Lord.
Another effect of the Crusade was, the religious obedience with which it
inspired the people and the nobility for that singular institution “The Truce
of God.” At the commencement of the eleventh century, the clergy of
France, sympathising for the woes of the people, but unable to diminish
them, by repressing the rapacity and insolence of the feudal chiefs,
endeavoured to promote universal good-will by the promulgation of the
famous “Peace of God.” All who conformed to it bound themselves by oath
not to take revenge for any injury, not to enjoy the fruits of property
usurped from others, nor to use deadly weapons; in reward of which they
would receive remission of all their sins. However benevolent the intention
of this “Peace,” it led to nothing but perjury, and violence reigned as
uncontrolled as before. In the year 1041, another attempt was made to
soften the angry passions of the semi-barbarous chiefs, and the “Truce of
God” was solemnly proclaimed. The trucelasted from the Wednesday
evening to the Monday morning of every week, in which interval it was
strictly forbidden to recur to violence on any pretext, or to seek revenge for
any injury. It was impossible to civilise men by these means. Few even
promised to become peaceable for so unconscionable a period as five days
a-week; or if they did, they made ample amends on the two days left open
to them. The truce was afterwards shortened from the Saturday evening to
the Monday morning; but little or no diminution of violence and bloodshed
was the consequence. At the Council of Clermont, Urban II. again solemnly
proclaimed the truce. So strong was the religious feeling, that every one
hastened to obey. All minor passions disappeared before the grand passion
of crusading. The feudal chief ceased to oppress, the robber to plunder, the
people to complain; but one idea was in all hearts, and there seemed to be
no room for any other.
The encampments of these heterogeneous multitudes offered a singular
aspect. Those vassals who ranged themselves under the banners of their lord
erected tents around his castle; while those who undertook the war on their
own account constructed booths and huts in the neighbourhood of the towns
or villages, preparatory to their joining some popular leader of the
expedition. The meadows of France were covered with tents. As the
belligerents were to have remission of all their sins on their arrival in
Palestine, hundreds of them gave themselves up to the most unbounded
licentiousness. The courtesan, with the red cross upon her shoulders, plied
her shameless trade with sensual pilgrims without scruple on either side; the
lover of good cheer gave loose rein to his appetite, and drunkenness and
debauchery flourished. Their zeal in the service of the Lord was to wipe out
all faults and follies, and they had the same surety of salvation as the rigid
anchorite. This reasoning had charms for the ignorant, and the sounds of
lewd revelry and the voice of prayer rose at the same instant from the camp.
It is now time to speak of the leaders of the expedition. Great multitudes
ranged themselves under the command of Peter the Hermit, whom, as the
originator, they considered the most appropriate leader of the war. Others
joined the banner of a bold adventurer, whom history has dignified with no
other name than that of Gautier sans Avoir, or Walter the Pennyless, but
who is represented as having been of noble family, and well skilled in the
art of war. A third multitude from Germany flocked around the standard of a
monk named Gottschalk, of whom nothing is known except that he was a
fanatic of the deepest dye. All these bands, which together are said to have
amounted to three hundred thousand men, women, and children, were
composed of the vilest rascality of Europe. Without discipline, principle, or
true courage, they rushed through the nations like a pestilence, spreading
terror and death wherever they went. The first multitude that set forth was
led by Walter the Pennyless early in the spring of 1096, within a very few
months after the Council of Clermont. Each man of that irregular host
aspired to be his own master. Like their nominal leader, each was poor to
penury, and trusted for subsistence on his journey to the chances of the
road. Rolling through Germany like a tide, they entered Hungary, where, at
first, they were received with some degree of kindness by the people. The
latter had not yet caught sufficient of the fire of enthusiasm to join the
Crusade themselves, but were willing enough to forward the cause by
aiding those embarked in it. Unfortunately this good understanding did not
last long. The swarm were not contented with food for their necessities, but
craved for luxuries also. They attacked and plundered the dwellings of the
country people, and thought nothing of murder where resistance was
offered. On their arrival before Semlin, the outraged Hungarians collected
in large numbers, and, attacking the rear of the crusading host, slew a great
many of the stragglers, and, taking away their arms and crosses, affixed
them as trophies to the walls of the city. Walter appears to have been in no
mood or condition to make reprisals; for his army, destructive as a plague of
locusts when plunder urged them on, were useless against any regular attack
from a determined enemy. Their rear continued to be thus harassed by the
wrathful Hungarians until they were fairly out of their territory. On his
entrance into Bulgaria, Walter met with no better fate. The cities and towns
refused to let him pass; the villages denied him provisions; and the citizens
and country people uniting, slaughtered his followers by hundreds. The
progress of the army was more like a retreat than an advance; but as it was
impossible to stand still, Walter continued his course till he arrived at
Constantinople with a force which famine and the sword had diminished to
one-third of its original number.
The greater multitude, led by the enthusiastic Hermit, followed close
upon his heels, with a bulky train of baggage, and women and children
sufficient to form a host of themselves. If it were possible to find a rabble
more vile than the army of Walter the Pennyless, it was that led by Peter the
Hermit. Being better provided with means, they were not reduced to the
necessity of pillage in their progress through Hungary; and had they taken
any other route than that which led through Semlin, might perhaps have
traversed the country without molestation. On their arrival before that city,
their fury was raised at seeing the arms and red crosses of their predecessors
hanging as trophies over the gates. Their pent-up ferocity exploded at the
sight. The city was tumultuously attacked, and the besiegers entering, not
by dint of bravery, but of superior numbers, it was given up to all the
horrors which follow when victory, brutality, and licentiousness are linked
together. Every evil passion was allowed to revel with impunity, and
revenge, lust, and avarice,—each had its hundreds of victims in unhappy
Semlin. Any maniac can kindle a conflagration, but it may require many
wise men to put it out. Peter the Hermit had blown the popular fury into a
flame, but to cool it again was beyond his power. His followers rioted
unrestrained, until the fear of retaliation warned them to desist. When the
king of Hungary was informed of the disasters of Semlin, he marched with
a sufficient force to chastise the Hermit, who, at the news, broke up his
camp and retreated towards the Morava, a broad and rapid stream that joins
the Danube a few miles to the eastward of Belgrade. Here a party of
indignant Bulgarians awaited him, and so harassed him, as to make the
passage of the river a task both of difficulty and danger. Great numbers of
his infatuated followers perished in the waters, and many fell under the
swords of the Bulgarians. The ancient chronicles do not mention the amount
of the Hermit’s loss at this passage, but represent it in general terms as very
great.
At Nissa, the Duke of Bulgaria fortified himself, in fear of an assault;
but Peter, having learned a little wisdom from experience, thought it best to
avoid hostilities. He passed three nights in quietness under the walls, and
the duke, not wishing to exasperate unnecessarily so fierce and rapacious a
host, allowed the townspeople to supply them with provisions. Peter took
his departure peaceably on the following morning; but some German
vagabonds, falling behind the main body of the army, set fire to the mills
and house of a Bulgarian, with whom, it appears, they had had some dispute
on the previous evening. The citizens of Nissa, who had throughout
mistrusted the Crusaders, and were prepared for the worst, sallied out
immediately, and took signal vengeance. The spoilers were cut to pieces,
and the townspeople pursuing the Hermit, captured all the women and
children who had lagged in the rear, and a great quantity of baggage. Peter
hereupon turned round and marched back to Nissa, to demand explanation
of the Duke of Bulgaria. The latter fairly stated the provocation given, and
the Hermit could urge nothing in palliation of so gross an outrage. A
negotiation was entered into, which promised to be successful, and the
Bulgarians were about to deliver up the women and children, when a party
of undisciplined Crusaders, acting solely upon their own suggestion,
endeavoured to scale the walls and seize upon the town. Peter in vain
exerted his authority; the confusion became general, and after a short but
desperate battle, the Crusaders threw down their arms, and fled in all
directions. Their vast host was completely routed, the slaughter being so
great among them, as to be counted, not by hundreds, but by thousands.
It is said that the Hermit fled from this fatal field to a forest a few miles
from Nissa, abandoned by every human creature. It would be curious to
know whether, after so dire a reverse,
“His enpierced breast
Sharp sorrow did in thousand pieces rive,”
or whether his fiery zeal still rose superior to calamity, and pictured the
eventual triumph of his cause. He, so lately the leader of a hundred
thousand men, was now a solitary skulker in the forests, liable at every
instant to be discovered by some pursuing Bulgarian, and cut off in mid
career. Chance at last brought him within sight of an eminence, where two
or three of his bravest knights had collected five hundred of the stragglers.
These gladly received the Hermit, and a consultation having taken place, it
was resolved to gather together the scattered remnants of the army. Fires
were lighted on the hill, and scouts sent out in all directions for the
fugitives. Horns were sounded at intervals, to make known that friends were
near, and before nightfall the Hermit saw himself at the head of seven
thousand men. During the succeeding day, he was joined by twenty
thousand more, and with this miserable remnant of his force, he pursued his
route towards Constantinople. The bones of the rest mouldered in the
forests of Bulgaria.
On his arrival at Constantinople, where he found Walter the Pennyless
awaiting him, he was hospitably received by the Emperor Alexius. It might
have been expected that the sad reverses they had undergone would have
taught his followers common prudence; but, unhappily for them, their
turbulence and love of plunder was not to be restrained. Although they were
surrounded by friends, by whom all their wants were liberally supplied,
they could not refrain from rapine. In vain the Hermit exhorted them to
tranquillity; he possessed no more power over them, in subduing their
passions, than the obscurest soldier of the host. They set fire to several
public buildings in Constantinople out of pure mischief, and stripped the
lead from the roofs of the churches, which they afterwards sold for old
metal in the purlieus of the city. From this time may be dated the aversion
which the Emperor Alexius entertained for the Crusaders, and which was
afterwards manifested in all his actions, even when he had to deal with the
chivalrous and more honourable armies which arrived after the Hermit. He
seems to have imagined that the Turks themselves were enemies less
formidable to his power than these outpourings of the refuse of Europe: he
soon found a pretext to hurry them into Asia Minor. Peter crossed the
Bosphorus with Walter, but the excesses of his followers were such, that,
despairing of accomplishing any good end by remaining at their head, he
left them to themselves, and returned to Constantinople, on the pretext of
making arrangements with the government of Alexius for a proper supply of
provisions. The Crusaders, forgetting that they were in the enemy’s country,
and that union, above all things, was desirable, gave themselves up to
dissensions. Violent disputes arose between the Lombards and Normans
commanded by Walter the Pennyless, and the Franks and Germans led out
by Peter. The latter separated themselves from the former, and, choosing for
their leader one Reinaldo, or Reinhold, marched forward, and took
possession of the fortress of Exorogorgon. The Sultan Solimaun was on the
alert, with a superior force. A party of Crusaders, which had been detached
from the fort, and stationed at a little distance as an ambuscade, were
surprised and cut to pieces, and Exorogorgon invested on all sides. The
siege was protracted for eight days, during which the Christians suffered the
most acute agony from the want of water. It is hard to say how long the
hope of succour or the energy of despair would have enabled them to hold
out: their treacherous leader cut the matter short by renouncing the
Christian faith, and delivering up the fort into the hands of the sultan. He
was followed by two or three of his officers; all the rest, refusing to become
Mahometans, were ruthlessly put to the sword. Thus perished the last
wretched remnant of the vast multitude which had traversed Europe with
Peter the Hermit.
Walter the Pennyless and his multitude met as miserable a fate. On the
news of the disasters of Exorogorgon, they demanded to be led instantly
against the Turks. Walter, who only wanted good soldiers to have made a
good general, was cooler of head, and saw all the dangers of such a step.
His force was wholly insufficient to make any decisive movement in a
country where the enemy was so much superior, and where, in case of
defeat, he had no secure position to fall back upon; and he therefore
expressed his opinion against advancing until the arrival of reinforcements.
This prudent counsel found no favour: the army loudly expressed their
dissatisfaction at their chief, and prepared to march forward without him.
Upon this, the brave Walter put himself at their head, and rushed to
destruction. Proceeding towards Nice, the modern Isnik, he was intercepted
by the army of the sultan: a fierce battle ensued, in which the Turks made
fearful havoc; out of twenty-five thousand Christians, twenty-two thousand
were slain, and among them Gautier himself, who fell pierced by seven
mortal wounds. The remaining three thousand retreated upon Civitot, where
they entrenched themselves.
ISNIK.
Disgusted as was Peter the Hermit at the excesses of the multitude, who,
at his call, had forsaken Europe, his heart was moved with grief and pity at
their misfortunes. All his former zeal revived: casting himself at the feet of
the Emperor Alexius, he implored him, with tears in his eyes, to send relief
to the few survivors at Civitot. The emperor consented, and a force was
sent, which arrived just in time to save them from destruction. The Turks
had beleaguered the place, and the Crusaders were reduced to the last
extremity. Negotiations were entered into, and the last three thousand were
conducted in safety to Constantinople. Alexius had suffered too much by
their former excesses to be very desirous of retaining them in his capital: he
therefore caused them all to be disarmed, and, furnishing each with a sum
of money, he sent them back to their own country.
While these events were taking place, fresh hordes were issuing from
the woods and wilds of Germany, all bent for the Holy Land. They were
commanded by a fanatical priest, named Gottschalk, who, like Gautier and
Peter the Hermit, took his way through Hungary. History is extremely
meagre in her details of the conduct and fate of this host, which amounted
to at least one hundred thousand men. Robbery and murder seem to have
journeyed with them, and the poor Hungarians were rendered almost
desperate by their numbers and rapacity. Karloman, the king of the country,
made a bold effort to get rid of them; for the resentment of his people had
arrived at such a height, that nothing short of the total extermination of the
Crusaders would satisfy them. Gottschalk had to pay the penalty, not only
for the ravages of his own bands, but for those of the swarms that had come
before him. He and his army were induced, by some means or other, to lay
down their arms: the savage Hungarians, seeing them thus defenceless, set
upon them, and slaughtered them in great numbers. How many escaped
their arrows we are not informed; but not one of them reached Palestine.
Other swarms, under nameless leaders, issued from Germany and
France, more brutal and more frantic than any that had preceded them.
Their fanaticism surpassed by far the wildest freaks of the followers of the
Hermit. In bands, varying in numbers from one to five thousand, they
traversed the country in all directions, bent upon plunder and massacre.
They wore the symbol of the Crusade upon their shoulders, but inveighed
against the folly of proceeding to the Holy Land to destroy the Turks, while
they left behind them so many Jews, the still more inveterate enemies of
Christ. They swore fierce vengeance against this unhappy race, and
murdered all the Hebrews they could lay their hands on, first subjecting
them to the most horrible mutilation. According to the testimony of Albert
Aquensis, they lived among each other in the most shameless profligacy,
and their vice was only exceeded by their superstition. Whenever they were
in search of Jews, they were preceded by a goose and goat, which they
believed to be holy, and animated with divine power to discover the retreats
of the unbelievers. In Germany alone they slaughtered more than a
thousand Jews, notwithstanding all the efforts of the clergy to save them. So
dreadful was the cruelty of their tormentors, that great numbers of Jews
committed self-destruction to avoid falling into their hands.
Again it fell to the lot of the Hungarians to deliver Europe from these
pests. When there were no more Jews to murder, the bands collected in one
body, and took the old route to the Holy Land, a route stained with the
blood of three hundred thousand who had gone before, and destined also to
receive theirs. The number of these swarms has never been stated; but so
many of them perished in Hungary, that contemporary writers, despairing of
giving any adequate idea of their multitudes, state that the fields were
actually heaped with their corpses, and that for miles in its course the
waters of the Danube were dyed with their blood. It was at Mersburg, on the
Danube, that the greatest slaughter took place,—a slaughter so great as to
amount almost to extermination. The Hungarians for a while disputed the
passage of the river, but the Crusaders forced their way across, and
attacking the city with the blind courage of madness, succeeded in making a
breach in the walls. At this moment of victory an unaccountable fear came
over them. Throwing down their arms, they fled panic-stricken, no one
knew why, and no one knew whither. The Hungarians followed, sword in
hand, and cut them down without remorse, and in such numbers, that the
stream of the Danube is said to have been choked up by their unburied
bodies.
This was the worst paroxysm of the madness of Europe; and this passed,
her chivalry stepped upon the scene. Men of cool heads, mature plans, and
invincible courage stood forward to lead and direct the grand movement of
Europe upon Asia. It is upon these men that romance has lavished her most
admiring epithets, leaving to the condemnation of history the vileness and
brutality of those who went before. Of these leaders the most distinguished
were Godfrey of Bouillon duke of Lorraine, and Raymond count of
Toulouse. Four other chiefs of the royal blood of Europe also assumed the
cross, and led each his army to the Holy Land; Hugh count of Vermandois,
brother of the king of France; Robert duke of Normandy, the elder brother
of William Rufus; Robert count of Flanders, and Bohemund prince of
Tarentum, eldest son of the celebrated Robert Guiscard. These men were all
tinged with the fanaticism of the age, but none of them acted entirely from
religious motives. They were neither utterly reckless like Gautier sans
Avoir, crazy like Peter the Hermit, nor brutal like Gottschalk the Monk, but
possessed each of these qualities in a milder form; their valour being
tempered by caution, their religious zeal by worldly views, and their
ferocity by the spirit of chivalry. They saw whither led the torrent of the
public will; and it being neither their wish nor their interest to stem it, they
allowed themselves to be carried with it, in the hope that it would lead them
at last to a haven of aggrandisement. Around them congregated many minor
chiefs, the flower of the nobility of France and Italy, with some few from
Germany, England, and Spain. It was wisely conjectured that armies so
numerous would find a difficulty in procuring provisions if they all
journeyed by the same road. They therefore resolved to separate; Godfrey
de Bouillon proceeding through Hungary and Bulgaria, the Count of
Toulouse through Lombardy and Dalmatia, and the other leaders through
Apulia to Constantinople, where the several divisions were to reunite. The
forces under these leaders have been variously estimated. The Princess
Anna Comnena talks of them as having been as numerous as the sands on
the sea-shore, or the stars in the firmament. Fulcher of Chartres is more
satisfactory, and exaggerates less magnificently, when he states, that all the
divisions, when they had sat down before Nice in Bithynia, amounted to
one hundred thousand horsemen, and six hundred thousand men on foot,
exclusive of the priests, women, and children. Gibbon is of opinion that this
amount is exaggerated; but thinks the actual numbers did not fall very far
short of the calculation. The Princess Anna afterwards gives the number of
those under Godfrey of Bouillon as eighty thousand foot and horse; and
supposing that each of the other chiefs led an army as numerous, the total
would be near half a million. This must be over rather than under the mark,
as the army of Godfrey of Bouillon was confessedly the largest when it set
out, and suffered less by the way than any other.
GODFREY DE BOUILLON.
The Count of Vermandois was the first who set foot on the Grecian
territory. On his arrival at Durazzo he was received with every mark of
respect and courtesy by the agents of the emperor, and his followers were
abundantly supplied with provisions. Suddenly, however, and without cause
assigned, the count was arrested by order of the Emperor Alexius, and
conveyed a close prisoner to Constantinople. Various motives have been
assigned by different authors as having induced the emperor to this
treacherous and imprudent proceeding. By every writer he has been
condemned for so flagrant a breach of hospitality and justice. The most
probable reason for his conduct appears to be that suggested by Guibert of
Nogent, who states that Alexius, fearful of the designs of the Crusaders
upon his throne, resorted to this extremity in order afterwards to force the
count to take the oath of allegiance to him, as the price of his liberation. The
example of a prince so eminent as the brother of the king of France, would,
he thought, be readily followed by the other chiefs of the Crusade. In the
result he was wofully disappointed, as every man deserves to be who
commits positive evil that doubtful good may ensue. But this line of policy
accorded well enough with the narrowmindedness of the emperor, who, in
the enervating atmosphere of his highly civilised and luxurious court,
dreaded the influx of the hardy and ambitious warriors of the West, and
strove to nibble away by unworthy means the power which he had not
energy enough to confront. If danger to himself had existed from the
residence of the chiefs in his dominions, he might easily have averted it, by
the simple means of placing himself at the head of the European movement,
and directing its energies to their avowed object, the conquest of the Holy
Land. But the emperor, instead of being, as he might have been, the lord
and leader of the Crusades, which he had himself aided in no inconsiderable
degree to suscitate by his embassies to the Pope, became the slave of men
who hated and despised him. No doubt the barbarous excesses of the
followers of Gautier and Peter the Hermit made him look upon the whole
body of them with disgust, but it was the disgust of a little mind, which is
glad of any excuse to palliate or justify its own irresolution and love of
ease.
Godfrey of Bouillon traversed Hungary in the most quiet and orderly
manner. On his arrival at Mersburg he found the country strewed with the
mangled corpses of the Jew-killers, and demanded of the king of Hungary
for what reason his people had set upon them. The latter detailed the
atrocities they had committed, and made it so evident to Godfrey that the
Hungarians had only acted in self-defence, that the high-minded leader
declared himself satisfied, and passed on without giving or receiving
molestation. On his arrival at Philippopoli he was informed for the first time
of the imprisonment of the count of Vermandois. He immediately sent
messengers to the emperor, demanding the count’s release, and threatening,
in case of refusal, to lay waste the country with fire and sword. After
waiting a day at Philippopoli, he marched on to Adrianople, where he was
met by his messengers returning with the emperor’s refusal. Godfrey, the
bravest and most determined of the leaders of the Crusade, was not a man to
swerve from his word, and the country was given up to pillage. Alexius here
committed another blunder. No sooner did he learn from dire experience
that the Crusader was not an utterer of idle threats, than he consented to the
release of the prisoner. As he had been unjust in the first instance, he
became cowardly in the second, and taught his enemies (for so the
Crusaders were forced to consider themselves) a lesson which they took
care to remember to his cost, that they could hope nothing from his sense of
justice, but every thing from his fears. Godfrey remained encamped for
several weeks in the neighbourhood of Constantinople, to the great
annoyance of Alexius, who sought by every means to extort from him the
homage he had extorted from Vermandois. Sometimes he acted as if at open
and declared war with the Crusaders, and sent his troops against them.
Sometimes he refused to supply them with food, and ordered the markets to
be shut against them, while at other times he was all for peace and good-
will, and sent costly presents to Godfrey. The honest, straightforward
Crusader was at last so wearied by his false kindness, and so pestered by his
attacks, that, allowing his indignation to get the better of his judgment, he
gave up the country around Constantinople to be plundered by his soldiers.
For six days the flames of the farm-houses around struck terror into the
heart of Alexius; but, as Godfrey anticipated, they convinced him of his
error. Fearing that Constantinople itself would be the next object of attack,
he sent messengers to demand an interview with Godfrey, offering at the
same time to leave his son as a hostage for his good faith. Godfrey agreed
to meet him; and, whether to put an end to these useless dissensions, or for
some other unexplained reason, he rendered homage to Alexius as his liege
lord. He was thereupon loaded with honours, and, according to a singular
custom of that age, underwent the ceremony of the “adoption of honour” as
son to the emperor. Godfrey and his brother Baudouin de Bouillon
conducted themselves with proper courtesy on this occasion, but were not
able to restrain the insolence of their followers, who did not conceive
themselves bound to keep any terms with a man so insincere as he had
shewn himself. One barbarous chieftain, Count Robert of Paris, carried his
insolence so far as to seat himself upon the throne; an insult which Alexius
merely resented with a sneer, but which did not induce him to look with less
mistrust upon the hordes that were still advancing.
It is impossible, notwithstanding his treachery, to avoid feeling some
compassion for the emperor, whose life at this time was rendered one long
scene of misery by the presumption of the Crusaders, and his not altogether
groundless fears of the evil they might inflict upon him, should any
untoward circumstance force the current of their ambition to the conquest of
his empire. His daughter Anna Comnena feelingly deplores his state of life
at this time, and a learned German4, in a recent work, describes it, on the
authority of the princess, in the following manner:
“To avoid all occasion of offence to the Crusaders, Alexius complied
with all their whims and their (on many occasions) unreasonable
demands, even at the expense of great bodily exertion, at a time when
he was suffering severely under the gout, which eventually brought
him to his grave. No Crusader who desired an interview with him was
refused access; he listened with the utmost patience to the long-winded
harangues which their loquacity or zeal continually wearied him with;
he endured, without expressing any impatience, the unbecoming and
haughty language which they permitted themselves to employ towards
him, and severely reprimanded his officers when they undertook to
defend the dignity of the imperial station from these rude assaults, for
he trembled with apprehension at the slightest disputes, lest they might
become the occasion of greater evil. Though the counts often appeared
before him with trains altogether unsuitable to their dignity and to his
—sometimes with an entire troop, which completely filled the royal
apartment—the emperor held his peace. He listened to them at all
hours; he often seated himself on his throne at day-break to attend to
their wishes and requests, and the evening twilight saw him still in the
same place. Very frequently he could not snatch time to refresh himself
with meat and drink. During many nights he could not obtain any
repose, and was obliged to indulge in an unrefreshing sleep upon his
throne, with his head resting on his hands. Even this slumber was
continually disturbed by the appearance and harangues of some newly-
arrived rude knights. When all the courtiers, wearied out by the efforts
of the day and by night-watching, could no longer keep themselves on
their feet, and sank down exhausted—some upon benches and others
on the floor—Alexius still rallied his strength to listen with seeming
attention to the wearisome chatter of the Latins, that they might have
no occasion or pretext for discontent. In such a state of fear and
anxiety, how could Alexius comport himself with dignity and like an
emperor?”
Alexius, however, had himself to blame, in a great measure, for the
indignities he suffered: owing to his insincerity, the Crusaders mistrusted
him so much, that it became at last a common saying, that the Turks and
Saracens were not such inveterate foes to the Western or Latin Christians as
the Emperor Alexius and the Greeks5. It would be needless in this sketch,
which does not profess to be so much a history of the Crusades, as of the
madness of Europe, from which they sprang, to detail the various acts of
bribery and intimidation, cajolery and hostility, by which Alexius contrived
to make each of the leaders in succession, as they arrived, take the oath of
allegiance to him as their suzerain. One way or another he exacted from
each the barren homage on which he had set his heart, and they were then
allowed to proceed into Asia Minor. One only, Raymond de St. Gilles count
of Toulouse, obstinately refused the homage.
Their residence in Constantinople was productive of no good to the
armies of the cross. Bickerings and contentions on the one hand, and the
influence of a depraved and luxurious court on the other, destroyed the
elasticity of their spirits, and cooled the first ardour of their enthusiasm. At
one time the army of the Count of Toulouse was on the point of disbanding
itself; and, had not their leader energetically removed them across the
Bosphorus, this would have been the result. Once in Asia, their spirits in
some degree revived, and the presence of danger and difficulty nerved them
to the work they had undertaken. The first operation of the war was the
siege of Nice, to gain possession of which all their efforts were directed.
Godfrey of Bouillon and the Count of Vermandois were joined under its
walls by each host in succession as it left Constantinople. Among the
celebrated Crusaders who fought at this siege we find, besides the leaders
already mentioned, the brave and generous Tancred, whose name and fame
have been immortalised in the Gerusalemme Liberata, the valorous Bishop
of Puy, Baldwin, afterwards king of Jerusalem, and Peter the Hermit, now
an almost solitary soldier, shorn of all the power and influence he had
formerly possessed. Kilij Aslaun the sultan of Roum and chief of the
Seljukian Turks, whose deeds, surrounded by the false halo of romance, are
familiar to the readers of Tasso, under the name of Soliman, marched to
defend this city, but was defeated after several obstinate engagements, in
which the Christians shewed a degree of heroism that quite astonished him.
The Turkish chief had expected to find a wild undisciplined multitude, like
that under Peter the Hermit, without leaders capable of enforcing
obedience; instead of which, he found the most experienced leaders of the
age at the head of armies that had just fanaticism enough to be ferocious,
but not enough to render them ungovernable. In these engagements, many
hundreds fell on both sides; and on both sides the most revolting barbarity
was practised: the Crusaders cut off the heads of the fallen Mussulmans,
and sent them in panniers to Constantinople, as trophies of their victory.
After the temporary defeat of Kilij Aslaun, the siege of Nice was carried on
with redoubled vigour. The Turks defended themselves with the greatest
obstinacy, and discharged showers of poisoned arrows upon the Crusaders.
When any unfortunate wretch was killed under the walls, they let down iron
hooks from above, and drew the body up, which, after stripping and
mutilating, they threw back again at the besiegers. The latter were well
supplied with provisions, and for six-and-thirty days the siege continued
without any relaxation of the efforts on either side. Many tales are told of
the almost superhuman heroism of the Christian leaders—how one man put
a thousand to flight; and how the arrows of the faithful never missed their
mark. One anecdote of Godfrey of Bouillon, related by Albert of Aix, is
worth recording, not only as shewing the high opinion entertained of his
valour, but as shewing the contagious credulity of the armies—a credulity
which as often led them to the very verge of defeat, as it incited them to
victory. One Turk, of gigantic stature, took his station day by day on the
battlements of Nice, and, bearing an enormous bow, committed great havoc
among the Christian host. Not a shaft he sped but bore death upon its point;
and although the Crusaders aimed repeatedly at his breast, and he stood in
the most exposed position, their arrows fell harmless at his feet. He seemed
to be invulnerable to attack; and a report was soon spread abroad, that he
was no other than the Arch Fiend himself, and that mortal hand could not
prevail against him. Godfrey of Bouillon, who had no faith in the
supernatural character of the Mussulman, determined, if possible, to put an
end to the dismay which was rapidly paralysing the exertions of his best
soldiers. Taking a huge cross-bow, he stood forward in front of the army, to
try the steadiness of his hand against the much-dreaded archer: the shaft
was aimed directly at his heart, and took fatal effect. The Moslem fell amid
the groans of the besieged, and the shouts of Deus adjuva! Deus adjuva! the
war-cry of the besiegers.
At last the Crusaders imagined that they had overcome all obstacles,
and were preparing to take possession of the city, when, to their great
astonishment, they saw the flag of the Emperor Alexius flying from the
battlements. An emissary of the emperor, named Faticius or Tatin, had
contrived to gain admission, with a body of Greek troops, at a point which
the Crusaders had left unprotected, and had persuaded the Turks to
surrender to him rather than to the crusading forces. The greatest
indignation prevailed in the army when this stratagem was discovered, and
the soldiers were, with the utmost difficulty, prevented from renewing the
attack and besieging the Greek emissary.
The army, however, continued its march, and, by some means or other,
was broken into two divisions; some historians say accidentally,6 while
others affirm by mutual consent, and for the convenience of obtaining
provisions on the way.7 The one division was composed of the forces under
Bohemund, Tancred, and the Duke of Normandy; while the other, which
took a route at some distance on the right, was commanded by Godfrey of
Bouillon and the other chiefs. The Sultan of Roum, who, after his losses at
Nice, had been silently making great efforts to crush the Crusaders at one
blow, collected in a very short time all the multitudinous tribes that owed
him allegiance, and with an army which, according to a moderate
calculation, amounted to two hundred thousand men, chiefly cavalry, he fell
upon the first division of the Christian host in the valley of Dorylæum. It
was early in the morning of the 1st of July 1097, when the Crusaders saw
the first companies of the Turkish horsemen pouring down upon them from
the hills. Bohemund had hardly time to set himself in order, and transport
his sick and helpless to the rear, when the overwhelming force of the
Orientals was upon him. The Christian army, composed principally of men
on foot, gave way on all sides, and the hoofs of the Turkish steeds, and the
poisoned arrows of their bowmen, mowed them down by hundreds. After
having lost the flower of their chivalry, the Christians retreated upon their
baggage, when a dreadful slaughter took place. Neither women nor
children, nor the sick, were spared. Just as they were reduced to the last
extremity, Godfrey of Bouillon and the Count of Toulouse made their
appearance on the field, and turned the tide of battle. After an obstinate
engagement the Turks fled, and their rich camp fell into the hands of the
enemy. The loss of the Crusaders amounted to about four thousand men,
with several chiefs of renown, among whom were Count Robert of Paris
and William the brother of Tancred. The loss of the Turks, which did not
exceed this number, taught them to pursue a different mode of warfare. The
sultan was far from being defeated. With his still gigantic army, he laid
waste all the country on either side of the Crusaders. The latter, who were
unaware of the tactics of the enemy, found plenty of provisions in the
Turkish camp; but so far from economising these resources, they gave
themselves up for several days to the most unbounded extravagance. They
soon paid dearly for their heedlessness. In the ravaged country of Phrygia,
through which they advanced towards Antiochetta, they suffered dreadfully
for want of food for themselves and pasture for their cattle. Above them
was a scorching sun, almost sufficient of itself to dry up the freshness of the
land, a task which the firebrands of the sultan had but too surely effected,
and water was not to be had after the first day of their march. The pilgrims
died at the rate of five hundred a day. The horses of the knights perished on
the road, and the baggage which they had aided to transport was either
placed upon dogs, sheep, and swine, or abandoned altogether. In some of
the calamities that afterwards befell them, the Christians gave themselves
up to the most reckless profligacy; but upon this occasion, the dissensions
which prosperity had engendered were all forgotten. Religion, often
disregarded, arose in the stern presence of misfortune, and cheered them as
they died by the promises of eternal felicity.
At length they reached Antiochetta, where they found water in
abundance, and pastures for their expiring cattle. Plenty once more
surrounded them, and here they pitched their tents. Untaught by the bitter
experience of famine, they again gave themselves up to luxury and waste.
On the 18th of October they sat down before the strong city of Antioch,
the siege of which, and the events to which it gave rise, are among the most
extraordinary incidents of the Crusade. The city, which is situated on an
eminence, and washed by the river Orontes, is naturally a very strong
position, and the Turkish garrison were well supplied with provisions to
endure a long siege. In this respect the Christians were also fortunate, but
unluckily for themselves, unwise. Their force amounted to three hundred
thousand fighting men; and we are informed by Raymond d’Argilles, that
they had so much provision, that they threw away the greater part of every
animal they killed, being so dainty, that they would only eat particular parts
of the beast. So insane was their extravagance, that in less than ten days
famine began to stare them in the face. After making a fruitless attempt to
gain possession of the city by a coup de main, they, starving themselves, sat
down to starve out the enemy. But with want came a cooling of enthusiasm.
The chiefs began to grow weary of the expedition. Baldwin had previously
detached himself from the main body of the army, and, proceeding to
Edessa, had intrigued himself into the supreme power in that little
principality. The other leaders were animated with less zeal than heretofore.
Stephen of Chartres and Hugh of Vermandois began to waver, unable to
endure the privations which their own folly and profusion had brought upon
them. Even Peter the Hermit became sick at heart ere all was over. When
the famine had become so urgent that they were reduced to eat human flesh
in the extremity of their hunger, Bohemund and Robert of Flanders set forth
on an expedition to procure a supply. They were in a slight degree
successful; but the relief they brought was not economised, and in two days
they were as destitute as before. Faticius, the Greek commander and
representative of Alexius, deserted with his division under pretence of
seeking for food, and his example was followed by various bodies of
Crusaders.
Misery was rife among those who remained, and they strove to alleviate
it by a diligent attention to signs and omens. These, with extraordinary
visions seen by the enthusiastic, alternately cheered and depressed them
according as they foretold the triumph or pictured the reverses of the cross.
At one time a violent hurricane arose, levelling great trees with the ground,
and blowing down the tents of the Christian leaders. At another time an
earthquake shook the camp, and was thought to prognosticate some great
impending evil to the cause of Christendom. But a comet which appeared
shortly afterwards raised them from the despondency into which they had
fallen; their lively imaginations making it assume the form of a flaming
cross leading them on to victory. Famine was not the least of the evils they
endured. Unwholesome food, and the impure air from the neighbouring
marshes, engendered pestilential diseases, which carried them off more
rapidly than the arrows of the enemy. A thousand of them died in a day, and
it became at last a matter of extreme difficulty to afford them burial. To add
to their misery, each man grew suspicious of his neighbour; for the camp
was infested by Turkish spies, who conveyed daily to the besieged
intelligence of the movements and distresses of the enemy. With a ferocity,
engendered by despair, Bohemund caused two spies, whom he had detected,
to be roasted alive in presence of the army, and within sight of the
battlements of Antioch. But even this example failed to reduce their
numbers, and the Turks continued to be as well informed as the Christians
themselves of all that was passing in the camp.
The news of the arrival of a reinforcement of soldiers from Europe, with
an abundant stock of provisions, came to cheer them when reduced to the
last extremity. The welcome succour landed at St. Simeon, the port of
Antioch, and about six miles from that city. Thitherwards the famishing
Crusaders proceeded in tumultuous bands, followed by Bohemund and the
Count of Toulouse, with strong detachments of their retainers and vassals,
to escort the supplies in safety to the camp. The garrison of Antioch,
forewarned of this arrival, was on the alert, and a corps of Turkish archers
was despatched to lie in ambuscade among the mountains and intercept
their return. Bohemund, laden with provisions, was encountered in the
rocky passes by the Turkish host. Great numbers of his followers were
slain, and he himself had just time to escape to the camp with the news of
his defeat. Godfrey of Bouillon, the Duke of Normandy, and the other
leaders had heard the rumour of this battle, and were at that instant
preparing for the rescue. The army was immediately in motion, animated
both by zeal and by hunger, and marched so rapidly as to intercept the
victorious Turks before they had time to reach Antioch with their spoil. A
fierce battle ensued, which lasted from noon till the going down of the sun.
The Christians gained and maintained the advantage, each man fighting as
if upon himself alone had depended the fortune of the day. Hundreds of
Turks perished in the Orontes, and more than two thousand were left dead
upon the field of battle. All the provision was recaptured and brought in
safety to the camp, whither the Crusaders returned singing Alleluia!or
shouting Deus adjuva! Deus adjuva!
This relief lasted for some days, and, had it been duly economised,
would have lasted much longer; but the chiefs had no authority, and were
unable to exercise any control over its distribution. Famine again
approached with rapid strides, and Stephen count of Blois, not liking the
prospect, withdrew from the camp with four thousand of his retainers, and
established himself at Alexandretta. The moral influence of this desertion
was highly prejudicial upon those who remained; and Bohemund, the most
impatient and ambitious of the chiefs, foresaw that, unless speedily
checked, it would lead to the utter failure of the expedition. It was necessary
to act decisively; the army murmured at the length of the siege, and the
sultan was collecting his forces to crush them. Against the efforts of the
Crusaders Antioch might have held out for months; but treason within
effected that which courage without might have striven for in vain.
Baghasihan, the Turkish prince or emir of Antioch, had under his
command an Armenian of the name of Phirouz, whom he had entrusted
with the defence of a tower on that part of the city wall which overlooked
the passes of the mountains. Bohemund, by means of a spy who had
embraced the Christian religion, and to whom he had given his own name at
baptism, kept up a daily communication with this captain, and made him
the most magnificent promises of reward, if he would deliver up his post to
the Crusaders. Whether the proposal was first made by Bohemund or by the
Armenian is uncertain, but that a good understanding soon existed between
them is undoubted; and a night was fixed for the execution of the project.
Bohemund communicated the scheme to Godfrey and the Count of
Toulouse, with the stipulation that, if the city were won, he, as the soul of
the enterprise, should enjoy the dignity of Prince of Antioch. The other
leaders hesitated: ambition and jealousy prompted them to refuse their aid
in furthering the views of the intriguer. More mature consideration decided
them to acquiesce, and seven hundred of the bravest knights were chosen
for the expedition, the real object of which, for fear of spies, was kept a
profound secret from the rest of the army. When all was ready, a report was
promulgated that the seven hundred were intended to form an ambuscade
for a division of the sultan’s army, which was stated to be approaching.
Every thing favoured the treacherous project of the Armenian captain,
who, on his solitary watch-tower, received due intimation of the approach
of the Crusaders. The night was dark and stormy; not a star was visible
above, and the wind howled so furiously as to overpower all other sounds:
the rain fell in torrents, and the watchers on the towers adjoining to that of
Phirouz could not hear the tramp of the armed knights for the wind, nor see
them for the obscurity of the night and the dismalness of the weather. When
within shot of the walls, Bohemund sent forward an interpreter to confer
with the Armenian. The latter urged them to make haste, and seize the
favourable interval, as armed men, with lighted torches, patrolled the
battlements every half hour, and at that instant they had just passed. The
chiefs were instantly at the foot of the wall: Phirouz let down a rope;
Bohemund attached it to the end of a ladder of hides, which was then raised
by the Armenian, and held while the knights mounted. A momentary fear
came over the spirits of the adventurers, and every one hesitated. At last
Bohemund,8 encouraged by Phirouz from above, ascended a few steps on
the ladder, and was followed by Godfrey, Count Robert of Flanders, and a
number of other knights. As they advanced, others pressed forward, until
their weight became too great for the ladder, which, breaking, precipitated
about a dozen of them to the ground, where they fell one upon the other,
making a great clatter with their heavy coats of mail. For a moment they
thought that all was lost; but the wind made so loud a howling as it swept in
fierce gusts through the mountain gorges—and the Orontes, swollen by the
rain, rushed so noisily along—that the guards heard nothing. The ladder
was easily repaired, and the knights ascended two at a time, and reached the
platform in safety. When sixty of them had thus ascended, the torch of the
coming patrol was seen to gleam at the angle of the wall. Hiding themselves
behind a buttress, they awaited his coming in breathless silence. As soon as
he arrived at arm’s length, he was suddenly seized, and, before he could
open his lips to raise an alarm, the silence of death closed them up for ever.
They next descended rapidly the spiral staircase of the tower, and opening
the portal, admitted the whole of their companions. Raymond of Toulouse,
who, cognisant of the whole plan, had been left behind with the main body
of the army, heard at this instant the signal horn, which announced that an
entry had been effected, and, leading on his legions, the town was attacked
from within and without.
Imagination cannot conceive a scene more dreadful than that presented
by the devoted city of Antioch on that night of horror. The Crusaders fought
with a blind fury, which fanaticism and suffering alike incited. Men,
women, and children were indiscriminately slaughtered, till the streets ran
with blood. Darkness increased the destruction, for when morning dawned
the Crusaders found themselves with their swords at the breasts of their
fellow-soldiers, whom they had mistaken for foes. The Turkish commander
fled, first to the citadel, and that becoming insecure, to the mountains,
whither he was pursued and slain, and his grey head brought back to
Antioch as a trophy. At daylight the massacre ceased, and the Crusaders
gave themselves up to plunder. They found gold, and jewels, and silks, and
velvets in abundance, but of provisions, which were of more importance to
them, they found but little of any kind. Corn was excessively scarce, and
they discovered to their sorrow that in this respect the besieged had been
but little better off than the besiegers.
SIEGE OF ANTIOCH.
Before they had time to instal themselves in their new position, and take
the necessary measures for procuring a supply, the city was invested by the
Turks. The sultan of Persia had raised an immense army, which he entrusted
to the command of Kerbogha, the emir of Mosul, with instructions to sweep
the Christian locusts from the face of the land. The emir effected a junction
with Kilij Aslaun, and the two armies surrounded the city. Discouragement
took complete possession of the Christian host, and numbers of them
contrived to elude the vigilance of the besiegers, and escape to Count
Stephen of Blois at Alexandretta, to whom they related the most
exaggerated tales of the misery they had endured, and the utter hopelessness
of continuing the war. Stephen forthwith broke up his camp and retreated
towards Constantinople. On his way he was met by the Emperor Alexius, at
the head of a considerable force, hastening to take possession of the
conquests made by the Christians in Asia. As soon as he heard of their
woful plight, he turned back, and proceeded with the Count of Blois to
Constantinople, leaving the remnant of the Crusaders to shift for
themselves.
The news of this defection increased the discouragement at Antioch. All
the useless horses of the army had been slain and eaten, and dogs, cats, and
rats were sold at enormous prices. Even vermin were becoming scarce.
With increasing famine came a pestilence, so that in a short time but sixty
thousand remained of the three hundred thousand that had originally
invested Antioch. But this bitter extremity, while it annihilated the energy of
the host, only served to knit the leaders more firmly together; and
Bohemund, Godfrey, and Tancred swore never to desert the cause as long as
life lasted. The former strove in vain to reanimate the courage of his
followers. They were weary and sick at heart, and his menaces and
promises were alike thrown away. Some of them had shut themselves up in
the houses, and refused to come forth. Bohemund, to drive them to their
duty, set fire to the whole quarter, and many of them perished in the flames,
while the rest of the army looked on with the utmost indifference.
Bohemund, animated himself by a worldly spirit, did not know the true
character of the Crusaders, nor understand the religious madness which had
brought them in such shoals from Europe. A priest, more clear-sighted,
devised a scheme which restored all their confidence, and inspired them
with a courage so wonderful as to make the poor sixty thousand emaciated,
sick, and starving zealots put to flight the well-fed and six times as
numerous legions of the Sultan of Persia.
This priest, a native of Provence, was named Peter Barthelemy, and
whether he were a knave or an enthusiast, or both; a principal, or a tool in
the hands of others, will ever remain a matter of doubt. Certain it is,
however, that he was the means of raising the siege of Antioch, and causing
the eventual triumph of the armies of the cross. When the strength of the
Crusaders was completely broken by their sufferings, and hope had fled
from every bosom, Peter came to Count Raymond of Toulouse, and
demanded an interview on matters of serious moment. He was immediately
admitted. He said that, some weeks previously, at the time the Christians
were besieging Antioch, he was reposing alone in his tent, when he was
startled by the shock of the earthquake, which had so alarmed the whole
host. Through violent terror of the shock he could only ejaculate, God help
me! when turning round he saw two men standing before him, whom he at
once recognised by the halo of glory around them as beings of another
world. One of them appeared to be an aged man, with reddish hair sprinkled
with grey, black eyes, and a long flowing grey beard. The other was
younger, larger, and handsomer, and had something more divine in his
aspect. The elderly man alone spoke, and informed him that he was the holy
apostle St. Andrew, and desired him to seek out the Count Raymond, the
Bishop of Puy, and Raymond of Altopulto, and ask them why the bishop did
not exhort the people, and sign them with the cross which he bore. The
apostle then took him, naked in his shirt as he was, and transported him
through the air into the heart of the city of Antioch, where he led him into
the church of St. Peter, at that time a Saracen mosque. The apostle made
him stop by the pillar close to the steps by which they ascend on the south
side to the altar, where hung two lamps, which gave out a light brighter than
that of the noonday sun; the younger man, whom he did not at that time
know, standing afar off, near the steps of the altar. The apostle then
descended into the ground and brought up a lance, which he gave into his
hand, telling him that it was the very lance that had opened the side whence
had flowed the salvation of the world. With tears of joy he held the holy
lance, and implored the apostle to allow him to take it away and deliver it
into the hands of Count Raymond. The apostle refused, and buried the lance
again in the ground, commanding him, when the city was won from the
infidels, to go with twelve chosen men, and dig it up again in the same
place. The apostle then transported him back to his tent, and the two
vanished from his sight. He had neglected, he said, to deliver this message,
afraid that his wonderful tale would not obtain credence from men of such
high rank. After some days he again saw the holy vision, as he was gone out
of the camp to look for food. This time the divine eyes of the younger
looked reproachfully upon him. He implored the apostle to choose some
one else more fitted for the mission, but the apostle refused, and smote him
with a disorder of the eyes, as a punishment for his disobedience. With an
obstinacy unaccountable even to himself, he had still delayed. A third time
the apostle and his companion had appeared to him, as he was in a tent with
his master William at St. Simeon. On that occasion St. Andrew told him to
bear his command to the Count of Toulouse not to bathe in the waters of the
Jordan when he came to it, but to cross over in a boat, clad in a shirt and
breeches of linen, which he should sprinkle with the sacred waters of the
river. These clothes he was afterwards to preserve along with the holy lance.
His master William, although he could not see the saint, distinctly heard the
voice giving orders to that effect. Again he neglected to execute the
commission, and again the saints appeared to him, when he was at the port
of Mamistra, about to sail for Cyprus, and St. Andrew threatened him with
eternal perdition if he refused longer. Upon this he made up his mind to
divulge all that had been revealed to him.
The Count of Toulouse, who, in all probability, concocted this tale with
the priest, appeared struck with the recital, and sent immediately for the
Bishop of Puy and Raymond of Altapulto. The bishop at once expressed his
disbelief of the whole story, and refused to have any thing to do in the
matter. The Count of Toulouse, on the contrary, saw abundant motives, if
not for believing, for pretending to believe; and, in the end, he so impressed
upon the mind of the bishop the advantage that might be derived from it, in
working up the popular mind to its former excitement, that the latter
reluctantly agreed to make search in due form for the holy weapon. The day
after the morrow was fixed upon for the ceremony; and, in the mean time,
Peter was consigned to the care of Raymond, the count’s chaplain, in order
that no profane curiosity might have an opportunity of cross-examining
him, and putting him to a nonplus.
Twelve devout men were forthwith chosen for the undertaking, among
whom were the Count of Toulouse and his chaplain. They began digging at
sunrise, and continued unwearied till near sunset, without finding the lance;
they might have dug till this day with no better success, had not Peter
himself sprung into the pit, praying to God to bring the lance to light, for
the strengthening and victory of his people. Those who hide know where to
find; and so it was with Peter, for both he and the lance found their way into
the hole at the same time. On a sudden, he and Raymond the chaplain
beheld its point in the earth, and Raymond, drawing it forth, kissed it with
tears of joy, in sight of the multitude which had assembled in the church. It
was immediately enveloped in a rich purple cloth, already prepared to
receive it, and exhibited in this state to the faithful, who made the building
resound with their shouts of gladness.
THE HOLY LANCE.
Peter had another vision the same night, and became from that day forth
“dreamer of dreams” in general to the army. He stated on the following day,
that the Apostle Andrew and “the youth with the divine aspect” appeared to
him again, and directed that the Count of Toulouse, as a reward for his
persevering piety, should carry the Holy Lance at the head of the army, and
that the day on which it was found should be observed as a solemn festival
throughout Christendom. St. Andrew shewed him at the same time the holes
in the feet and hands of his benign companion; and he became convinced
that he stood in the awful presence of the Redeemer.
Peter gained so much credit by his visions that dreaming became
contagious. Other monks beside himself were visited by the saints, who
promised victory to the host if it would valiantly hold out to the last, and
crowns of eternal glory to those who fell in the fight. Two deserters,
wearied of the fatigues and privations of the war, who had stealthily left the
camp, suddenly returned, and seeking Bohemund, told him that they had
been met by two apparitions, who, with great anger, had commanded them
to return. The one of them said, that he recognised his brother, who had
been killed in battle some months before, and that he had a halo of glory
around his head. The other, still more hardy, asserted that the apparition
which had spoken to him was the Saviour himself, who had promised
eternal happiness as his reward if he returned to his duty, but the pains of
eternal fire if he rejected the cross. No one thought of disbelieving these
men. The courage of the army immediately revived; despondency gave way
to hope; every arm grew strong again, and the pangs of hunger were for a
time disregarded. The enthusiasm which had led them from Europe, burned
forth once more as brightly as ever, and they demanded, with loud cries, to
be led against the enemy. The leaders were not unwilling. In a battle lay
their only chance of salvation; and although Godfrey, Bohemund, and
Tancred received the story of the lance with much suspicion, they were too
wise to throw discredit upon an imposture which bade fair to open the gates
of victory.
Peter the Hermit was previously sent to the camp of Kerbogha to
propose that the quarrel between the two religions should be decided by a
chosen number of the bravest soldiers of each army. Kerbogha turned from
him with a look of contempt, and said he could agree to no proposals from a
set of such miserable beggars and robbers. With this uncourteous answer
Peter returned to Antioch. Preparations were immediately commenced for
an attack upon the enemy: the latter continued to be perfectly well informed
of all the proceedings of the Christian camp. The citadel of Antioch, which
remained in their possession, overlooked the town, and the commander of
the fortress could distinctly see all that was passing within. On the morning
of the 28th of June, 1098, a black flag, hoisted from its highest tower,
announced to the besieging army that the Christians were about to sally
forth.
The Moslem leaders knew the sad inroads that famine and disease had
made upon the numbers of the foe; they knew that not above two hundred
of the knights had horses to ride upon, and that the foot soldiers were sick
and emaciated; but they did not know the almost incredible valour which
superstition had infused into their hearts. The story of the lance they treated
with the most supreme contempt, and, secure of an easy victory, they gave
themselves no trouble in preparing for the onslaught. It is related that
Kerbogha was playing a game at chess, when the black flag on the citadel
gave warning of the enemy’s approach, and that, with true oriental coolness,
he insisted upon finishing the game ere he bestowed any of his attention
upon a foe so unworthy. The defeat of his advanced post of two thousand
men aroused him from his apathy.
The Crusaders, after this first victory, advanced joyfully towards the
mountains, hoping to draw the Turks to a place where their cavalry would
be unable to manœuvre. Their spirits were light and their courage high, as,
led on by the Duke of Normandy, Count Robert of Flanders, and Hugh of
Vermandois, they came within sight of the splendid camp of the enemy.
Godfrey of Bouillon and Adhemar Bishop of Puy, followed immediately
after these leaders, the latter clad in complete armour, and bearing the Holy
Lance within sight of the whole army: Bohemund and Tancred brought up
the rear.
Kerbogha, aware at last that his enemy was not so despicable, took
vigorous measures to remedy his mistake, and, preparing himself to meet
the Christians in front, he despatched the Sultan Soliman of Roum to attack
them in the rear. To conceal this movement, he set fire to the dried weeds
and grass with which the ground was covered, and Soliman, taking a wide
circuit with his cavalry, succeeded, under cover of the smoke, in making
good his position in the rear. The battle raged furiously in front; the arrows
of the Turks fell thick as hail, and their well-trained squadrons trod the
Crusaders under their hoofs like stubble. Still the affray was doubtful; for
the Christians had the advantage of the ground, and were rapidly gaining
upon the enemy, when the overwhelming forces of Soliman arrived in the
rear. Godfrey and Tancred flew to the rescue of Bohemund, spreading
dismay in the Turkish ranks by their fierce impetuosity. The Bishop of Puy
was left almost alone with the Provençals to oppose the legions commanded
by Kerbogha in person; but the presence of the Holy Lance made a hero of
the meanest soldier in his train. Still, however, the numbers of the enemy
seemed interminable. The Christians, attacked on every side, began at last
to give way, and the Turks made sure of victory.
At this moment a cry was raised in the Christian host that the saints
were fighting on their side. The battle-field was clear of the smoke from the
burning weeds, which had curled away, and hung in white clouds of
fantastic shape on the brow of the distant mountains. Some imaginative
zealot, seeing this dimly through the dust of the battle, called out to his
fellows, to look at the army of saints, clothed in white, and riding upon
white horses, that were pouring over the hills to the rescue. All eyes were
immediately turned to the distant smoke; faith was in every heart; and the
old battle-cry, God wills it! God wills it! resounded through the field, as
every soldier, believing that God was visibly sending his armies to his aid,
fought with an energy unfelt before. A panic seized the Persian and Turkish
hosts, and they gave way in all directions. In vain Kerbogha tried to rally
them. Fear is more contagious than enthusiasm, and they fled over the
mountains like deer pursued by the hounds. The two leaders, seeing the
uselessness of further efforts, fled with the rest; and that immense army was
scattered over Palestine, leaving nearly seventy thousand of its dead upon
the field of battle.
Their magnificent camp fell into the hands of the enemy, with its rich
stores of corn, and its droves of sheep and oxen. Jewels, gold, and rich
velvets in abundance were distributed among the army. Tancred followed
the fugitives over the hills, and reaped as much plunder as those who had
remained in the camp. The way, as they fled, was covered with valuables,
and horses of the finest breed of Arabia became so plentiful that every
knight of the Christians was provided with a steed. The Crusaders, in this
battle, acknowledge to have lost nearly ten thousand men.
Their return to Antioch was one of joy indeed: the citadel was
surrendered at once, and many of the Turkish garrison embraced the
Christian faith, and the rest were suffered to depart. A solemn thanksgiving
was offered up by the Bishop of Puy, in which the whole army joined, and
the Holy Lance was visited by every soldier.
The enthusiasm lasted for some days, and the army loudly demanded to
be led forward to Jerusalem, the grand goal of all their wishes: but none of
their leaders was anxious to move;—the more prudent among them, such as
Godfrey and Tancred, for reasons of expediency; and the more ambitious,
such as the Count of Toulouse and Bohemund, for reasons of self-interest.
Violent dissensions sprang up again between all the chiefs. Raymond of
Toulouse, who was left at Antioch to guard the town, had summoned the
citadel to surrender, as soon as he saw that there was no fear of any attack
upon the part of the Persians; and the other chiefs found, upon their return,
his banner waving on its walls. This had given great offence to Bohemund,
who had stipulated the principality of Antioch as his reward for winning the
town in the first instance. Godfrey and Tancred supported his claim, and,
after a great deal of bickering, the flag of Raymond was lowered from the
tower, and that of Bohemund hoisted in its stead, who assumed from that
time the title of Prince of Antioch. Raymond, however, persisted in
retaining possession of one of the city gates and its adjacent towers, which
he held for several months, to the great annoyance of Bohemund and the
scandal of the army. The count became in consequence extremely
unpopular, although his ambition was not a whit more unreasonable than
that of Bohemund himself, nor of Baldwin, who had taken up his quarters at
Edessa, where he exercised the functions of a petty sovereign.
The fate of Peter Barthelemy deserves to be recorded. Honours and
consideration had come thick upon him after the affair of the lance, and he
consequently felt bound in conscience to continue the dreams which had
made him a personage of so much importance. The mischief of it was, that,
like many other liars, he had a very bad memory, and he contrived to make
his dreams contradict each other in the most palpable manner. St. John one
night appeared to him, and told one tale; while, a week after, St. Paul told a
totally different story, and held out hopes quite incompatible with those of
his apostolic brother. The credulity of that age had a wide maw, and Peter’s
visions must have been absurd and outrageous indeed, when the very men
who had believed in the lance refused to swallow any more of his wonders.
Bohemund at last, for the purpose of annoying the Count of Toulouse,
challenged poor Peter to prove the truth of his story of the lance by the fiery
ordeal. Peter could not refuse a trial so common in that age, and being
besides encouraged by the count and his chaplain Raymond, an early day
was appointed for the ceremony. The previous night was spent in prayer and
fasting, according to custom, and Peter came forth in the morning bearing
the lance in his hand, and walked boldly up to the fire. The whole army
gathered round, impatient for the result, many thousands still believing that
the lance was genuine, and Peter a holy man. Prayers having been said by
Raymond d’Agilles, Peter walked into the flames, and had got nearly
through, when pain caused him to lose his presence of mind: the heat too
affected his eyes, and, in his anguish, he turned round unwittingly, and
passed through the fire again, instead of stepping out of it, as he should
have done. The result was, that he was burned so severely that he never
recovered, and, after lingering for some days, he expired in great agony.
Most of the soldiers were suffering either from wounds, disease, or
weariness; and it was resolved by Godfrey,—the tacitly acknowledged chief
of the enterprise,—that the army should have time to refresh itself ere they
advanced upon Jerusalem. It was now July, and he proposed that they
should pass the hot months of August and September within the walls of
Antioch, and march forward in October with renewed vigour, and numbers
increased by fresh arrivals from Europe. This advice was finally adopted,
although the enthusiasts of the army continued to murmur at the delay. In
the mean time the Count of Vermandois was sent upon an embassy to the
Emperor Alexius at Constantinople, to reproach him for his base desertion
of the cause, and urge him to send the reinforcements he had promised. The
count faithfully executed his mission (of which, by the way, Alexius took
no notice whatever), and remained for some time at Constantinople, till his
zeal, never very violent, totally evaporated. He then returned to France, sick
of the Crusade, and determined to intermeddle with it no more.
The chiefs, though they had determined to stay at Antioch for two
months, could not remain quiet for so long a time. They would, in all
probability, have fallen upon each other, had there been no Turks in
Palestine upon whom they might vent their impetuosity. Godfrey proceeded
to Edessa, to aid his brother Baldwin in expelling the Saracens from his
principality, and the other leaders carried on separate hostilities against
them as caprice or ambition dictated. At length the impatience of the army
to be led against Jerusalem became so great that the chiefs could no longer
delay, and Raymond, Tancred, and Robert of Normandy marched forward
with their divisions, and laid siege to the small but strong town of Marah.
With their usual improvidence, they had not food enough to last a
beleaguering army for a week. They suffered great privations in
consequence, till Bohemund came to their aid and took the town by storm.
In connexion with this siege, the chronicler, Raymond d’Agilles (the same
Raymond the chaplain who figured in the affair of the Holy Lance), relates
a legend, in the truth of which he devoutly believed, and upon which Tasso
has founded one of the most beautiful passages of his poem. It is worth
preserving, as shewing the spirit of the age and the source of the
extraordinary courage manifested by the Crusaders on occasions of extreme
difficulty. “One day,” says Raymond, “Anselme de Ribeaumont beheld
young Engelram, the son of the Count de St. Paul, who had been killed at
Marah, enter his tent. ‘How is it,’ said Anselme to him, ‘that you, whom I
saw lying dead on the field of battle, are full or life?’—‘You must know,’
replied Engelram, ‘that those who fight for Jesus Christ never die.’ ‘But
whence,’ resumed Anselme, ‘comes that strange brightness that surrounds
you?’ Upon this Engelram pointed to the sky, where Anselme saw a palace
of diamond and crystal. ‘It is thence,’ said he, ‘that I derive the beauty
which surprises you. My dwelling is there; a still finer one is prepared for
you, and you shall soon come to inhabit it. Farewell! we shall meet again
to-morrow.’ With these words Engelram returned to heaven. Anselme,
struck by the vision, sent the next morning for the priests, received the
sacrament, and although full of health, took a last farewell of all his friends,
telling them that he was about to leave this world. A few hours afterwards,
the enemy having made a sortie, Anselme went out against them sword in
hand, and was struck on the forehead by a stone from a Turkish sling, which
sent him to heaven, to the beautiful palace that was prepared for him.”
SHRINE OF THE NATIVITY.
New disputes arose between the Prince of Antioch and the Count of
Toulouse with regard to the capture of this town, which were with the
utmost difficulty appeased by the other chiefs. Delays also took place in the
progress of the army, especially before Archas, and the soldiery were so
exasperated that they were on the point of choosing new leaders to conduct
them to Jerusalem. Godfrey, upon this, set fire to his camp at Archas, and
marched forward. He was immediately joined by hundreds of the
Provençals of the Count of Toulouse. The latter, seeing the turn affairs were
taking, hastened after them, and the whole host proceeded towards the holy
city, so long desired amid sorrow, and suffering, and danger. At Emmaus
they were met by a deputation from the Christians of Bethlehem, praying
for immediate aid against the oppression of the infidels. The very name of
Bethlehem, the birthplace of the Saviour, was music to their ears, and many
of them wept with joy to think they were approaching a spot so hallowed.
Albert of Aix informs us that their hearts were so touched that sleep was
banished from the camp, and that, instead of waiting till the morning’s
dawn to recommence their march, they set out shortly after midnight, full of
hope and enthusiasm. For upwards of four hours the mail-clad legions
tramped stedfastly forward in the dark, and when the sun arose in
unclouded splendour, the towers and pinnacles of Jerusalem gleamed upon
their sight. All the tender feelings of their nature were touched; no longer
brutal fanatics, but meek and humble pilgrims, they knelt down upon the
sod, and with tears in their eyes, exclaimed to one another “Jerusalem!
Jerusalem!” Some of them kissed the holy ground, others stretched
themselves at full length upon it, in order that their bodies might come in
contact with the greatest possible extent of it, and others prayed aloud. The
women and children who had followed the camp from Europe, and shared
in all its dangers, fatigues, and privations, were more boisterous in their joy;
the former from long-nourished enthusiasm, and the latter from mere
imitation,9 and prayed, and wept, and laughed till they almost put the more
sober to the blush.
THE PILGRIMS AT THE FIRST SIGHT OF JERUSALEM.
The first ebullition of their gladness having subsided, the army marched
forward, and invested the city on all sides. The assault was almost
immediately begun; but after the Christians had lost some of their bravest
knights, that mode of attack was abandoned, and the army commenced its
preparations for a regular siege. Mangonels, moveable towers, and
battering-rams, together with a machine called a sow, made of wood, and
covered with raw hides, inside of which miners worked to undermine the
walls, were forthwith constructed; and to restore the courage and discipline
of the army, which had suffered from the unworthy dissensions of the
chiefs, the latter held out the hand of friendship to each other, and Tancred
and the Count of Toulouse embraced in sight of the whole camp. The clergy
aided the cause with their powerful voice, and preached union and goodwill
to the highest and the lowest. A solemn procession was also ordered round
the city, in which the entire army joined, prayers being offered up at every
spot which gospel records had taught them to consider as peculiarly sacred.
The Saracens upon the ramparts beheld all these manifestations without
alarm. To incense the Christians, whom they despised, they constructed
rude crosses, and fixed them upon the walls, and spat upon and pelted them
with dirt and stones. This insult to the symbol of their faith raised the wrath
of the Crusaders to that height that bravery became ferocity, and enthusiasm
madness. When all the engines of war were completed, the attack was
recommenced, and every soldier of the Christian army fought with a vigour
which the sense of private wrong invariably inspires. Every man had been
personally outraged, and the knights worked at the battering-rams with as
much readiness as the meanest soldiers. The Saracen arrows and balls of
fire fell thick and fast among them, but the tremendous rams still heaved
against the walls, while the best marksmen of the host were busily
employed in the several floors of the moveable towers in dealing death
among the Turks upon the battlements. Godfrey, Raymond, Tancred, and
Robert of Normandy, each upon his tower, fought for hours with unwearied
energy, often repulsed, but ever ready to renew the struggle. The Turks, no
longer despising the enemy, defended themselves with the utmost skill and
bravery till darkness brought a cessation of hostilities. Short was the sleep
that night in the Christian camp. The priests offered up solemn prayers in
the midst of the attentive soldiery for the triumph of the cross in this last
great struggle; and as soon as morning dawned, every one was in readiness
for the affray. The women and children lent their aid, the latter running
unconcerned to and fro while the arrows fell fast around them, bearing
water to the thirsty combatants. The saints were believed to be aiding their
efforts, and the army, impressed with this idea, surmounted difficulties
under which a force thrice as numerous, but without their faith, would have
quailed and been defeated. Raymond of Toulouse at last forced his way into
the city by escalade, while at the very same moment Tancred and Robert of
Normandy succeeded in bursting open one of the gates. The Turks flew to
repair the mischief, and Godfrey of Bouillon, seeing the battlements
comparatively deserted, let down the drawbridge of his moveable tower,
and sprang forward, followed by all the knights of his train. In an instant
after, the banner of the cross floated upon the walls of Jerusalem. The
Crusaders, raising once more their redoubtable war-cry, rushed on from
every side, and the city was taken. The battle raged in the streets for several
hours, and the Christians, remembering their insulted faith, gave no quarter
to young or old, male or female, sick or strong. Not one of the leaders
thought himself at liberty to issue orders for staying the carnage, and if he
had, he would not have been obeyed. The Saracens fled in great numbers to
the mosque of Soliman, but they had not time to fortify themselves within it
ere the Christians were upon them. Ten thousand persons are said to have
perished in that building alone.
Peter the Hermit, who had remained so long under the veil of neglect,
was repaid that day for all his zeal and all his sufferings. As soon as the
battle was over, the Christians of Jerusalem issued forth from their hiding-
places to welcome their deliverers. They instantly recognised the Hermit as
the pilgrim who, years before, had spoken to them so eloquently of the
wrongs and insults they had endured, and promised to stir up the princes
and people of Europe in their behalf. They clung to the skirts of his
garments in the fervour of their gratitude, and vowed to remember him for
ever in their prayers. Many of them shed tears about his neck, and attributed
the deliverance of Jerusalem solely to his courage and perseverance. Peter
afterwards held some ecclesiastical office in the holy city, but what it was,
or what was his ultimate fate, history has forgotten to inform us. Some say
that he returned to France and founded a monastery, but the story does not
rest upon sufficient authority.
SIEGE OF JERUSALEM.
The grand object for which the popular swarms of Europe had forsaken
their homes was now accomplished. The Moslem mosques of Jerusalem
were converted into churches for a purer faith, and the mount of Calvary
and the sepulchre of Christ were profaned no longer by the presence or the
power of the infidel. Popular frenzy had fulfilled its mission, and, as a
natural consequence, it began to subside from that time forth. The news of
the capture of Jerusalem brought numbers of pilgrims from Europe, and,
among others, Stephen count of Chartres and Hugh of Vermandois, to atone
for their desertion; but nothing like the former enthusiasm existed among
the nations.
Thus then ends the history of the first Crusade. For the better
understanding of the second, it will be necessary to describe the interval
between them, and to enter into a slight sketch of the history of Jerusalem
under its Latin kings, the long and fruitless wars they continued to wage
with the unvanquished Saracens, and the poor and miserable results which
sprang from so vast an expenditure of zeal, and so deplorable a waste of
human life.
JERUSALEM.
The necessity of having some recognised chief was soon felt by the
Crusaders, and Godfrey de Bouillon, less ambitious than Bohemund or
Raymond of Toulouse, gave his cold consent to wield a sceptre which the
latter chiefs would have clutched with eagerness. He was hardly invested
with the royal mantle before the Saracens menaced his capital. With much
vigour and judgment he exerted himself to follow up the advantages he had
gained, and marching out to meet the enemy before they had time to
besiege him in Jerusalem, he gave them battle at Ascalon, and defeated
them with great loss. He did not, however, live long to enjoy his new
dignity, being seized with a fatal illness when he had only reigned nine
months. To him succeeded his brother, Baldwin of Edessa. The latter
monarch did much to improve the condition of Jerusalem and to extend its
territory, but was not able to make a firm footing for his successors. For
fifty years, in which the history of Jerusalem is full of interest to the
historical student, the Crusaders were exposed to fierce and constant
hostilities, often gaining battles and territory, and as often losing them, but
becoming every day weaker and more divided, while the Saracens became
stronger and more united to harass and root them out. The battles of this
period were of the most chivalrous character, and deeds of heroism were
done by the handful of brave knights that remained in Syria, which have
hardly their parallel in the annals of war. In the course of time, however, the
Christians could not avoid feeling some respect for the courage, and
admiration for the polished manners and advanced civilisation of the
Saracens, so much superior to the rudeness and semi-barbarism of Europe
at that day. Difference of faith did not prevent them from forming alliances
with the dark-eyed maidens of the East. One of the first to set the example
of taking a Paynim spouse was King Baldwin himself, and these
connexions in time became not only frequent, but almost universal, among
such of the knights as had resolved to spend their lives in Palestine. These
Eastern ladies were obliged, however, to submit to the ceremony of baptism
before they could be received to the arms of a Christian lord. These, and
their offspring, naturally looked upon the Saracens with less hatred than did
the zealots who conquered Jerusalem, and who thought it a sin deserving
the wrath of God to spare an unbeliever. We find, in consequence, that the
most obstinate battles waged during the reigns of the later kings of
Jerusalem were fought by the new and raw levies who from time to time
arrived from Europe, lured by the hope of glory or spurred by fanaticism.
The latter broke without scruple the truces established between the original
settlers and the Saracens, and drew down severe retaliation upon many
thousands of their brethren in the faith, whose prudence was stronger than
their zeal, and whose chief desire was to live in peace.
BIBLE OF BALDWIN’S QUEEN.
Things remained in this unsatisfactory state till the close of the year
1145, when Edessa, the strong frontier town of the Christian kingdom, fell
into the hands of the Saracens. The latter were commanded by Zenghi, a
powerful and enterprising monarch, and, after his death, by his son
Nourheddin, as powerful and enterprising as his father. An unsuccessful
attempt was made by the Count of Edessa to regain the fortress, but
Nourheddin with a large army came to the rescue, and after defeating the
count with great slaughter, marched into Edessa and caused its fortifications
to be razed to the ground, that the town might never more be a bulwark of
defence for the kingdom of Jerusalem. The road to the capital was now
open, and consternation seized the hearts of the Christians. Nourheddin, it
was known, was only waiting for a favourable opportunity to advance upon
Jerusalem, and the armies of the cross, weakened and divided, were not in a
condition to make any available resistance. The clergy were filled with grief
and alarm, and wrote repeated letters to the Pope and the sovereigns of
Europe, urging the expediency of a new Crusade for the relief of Jerusalem.
By far the greater number of the priests of Palestine were natives of France,
and these naturally looked first to their own country. The solicitations they
sent to Louis VII. were urgent and oft repeated, and the chivalry of France
began to talk once more of arming in defence of the birthplace of Jesus. The
kings of Europe, whose interest it had not been to take any part in the first
Crusade, began to bestir themselves in this; and a man appeared, eloquent
as Peter the Hermit, to arouse the people as that preacher had done.
We find, however, that the enthusiasm of the second did not equal that
of the first Crusade; in fact, the mania had reached its climax in the time of
Peter the Hermit, and decreased regularly from that period. The third
Crusade was less general than the second, and the fourth than the third, and
so on, until the public enthusiasm was quite extinct, and Jerusalem returned
at last to the dominion of its old masters without a convulsion in
Christendom. Various reasons have been assigned for this; and one very
generally put forward is, that Europe was wearied with continued struggles,
and had become sick of “precipitating itself upon Asia.” M. Guizot, in his
admirable lectures upon European civilisation, successfully combats this
opinion, and offers one of his own, which is far more satisfactory. He says,
in his eighth lecture, “It has been often repeated that Europe was tired of
continually invading Asia. This expression appears to me exceedingly
incorrect. It is not possible that human beings can be wearied with what
they have not done—that the labours of their forefathers can fatigue them.
Weariness is a personal, not an inherited feeling. The men of the thirteenth
century were not fatigued by the Crusades of the twelfth. They were
influenced by another cause. A great change had taken place in ideas,
sentiments, and social conditions. The same desires and the same wants
were no longer felt. The same things were no longer believed. The people
refused to believe what their ancestors were persuaded of.”
This is, in fact, the secret of the change; and its truth becomes more
apparent as we advance in the history of the Crusades, and compare the
state of the public mind at the different periods when Godfrey of Bouillon,
Louis VII., and Richard I., were chiefs and leaders of the movement. The
Crusades themselves were the means of operating a great change in national
ideas, and advancing the civilisation of Europe. In the time of Godfrey, the
nobles were all-powerful and all-oppressive, and equally obnoxious to
kings and people. During their absence along with that portion of the
community the deepest sunk in ignorance and superstition, both kings and
people fortified themselves against the renewal of aristocratic tyranny, and
in proportion as they became free became civilised. It was during this
period that in France, the grand centre of the crusading madness, the
communes began to acquire strength, and the monarch to possess a practical
and not a merely theoretic authority. Order and comfort began to take root,
and, when the second Crusade was preached, men were in consequence
much less willing to abandon their homes than they had been during the
first. Such pilgrims as had returned from the Holy Land came back with
minds more liberal and expanded than when they set out. They had come in
contact with a people more civilised than themselves; they had seen
something more of the world, and had lost some portion, however small, of
the prejudice and bigotry of ignorance. The institution of chivalry had also
exercised its humanising influence, and coming bright and fresh through the
ordeal of the Crusades, had softened the character and improved the hearts
of the aristocratic order. The Trouvères and Troubadours, singing of love
and war in strains pleasing to every class of society, helped to root out the
gloomy superstitions which, at the first Crusade, filled the minds of all
those who were able to think. Men became in consequence less exclusively
under the mental thraldom of the priesthood, and lost much of the credulity
which formerly distinguished them.
The Crusades appear never to have excited so much attention in
England as on the continent of Europe; not because the people were less
fanatical than their neighbours, but because they were occupied in matters
of graver interest. The English were suffering too severely from the recent
successful invasion of their soil, to have much sympathy to bestow upon the
distresses of people so far away as the Christians of Palestine; and we find
that they took no part in the first Crusade, and very little in the second.
Even then those who engaged in it were chiefly Norman knights and their
vassals, and not the Saxon franklins and population, who no doubt thought,
in their sorrow, as many wise men have thought since, that charity should
begin at home.
Germany was productive of more zeal in the cause, and her raw
uncivilised hordes continued to issue forth under the banners of the cross in
numbers apparently undiminished, when the enthusiasm had long been on
the wane in other countries. They were sunk at that time in a deeper slough
of barbarism than the livelier nations around them, and took, in
consequence, a longer period to free themselves from their prejudices. In
fact the second Crusade drew its chief supplies of men from that quarter,
where alone the expedition can be said to have retained any portion of
popularity.
Such was the state of mind of Europe when Pope Eugenius, moved by
the reiterated entreaties of the Christians of Syria, commissioned St.
Bernard to preach a new Crusade. St. Bernard was a man eminently
qualified for the mission. He was endowed with an eloquence of the highest
order, could move an auditory to tears, or laughter, or fury, as it pleased
him, and had led a life of such rigid and self-denying virtue, that not even
calumny could lift her finger and point it at him. He had renounced high
prospects in the Church, and contented himself with the simple abbacy of
Clairvaux, in order that he might have the leisure he desired, to raise his
powerful voice against abuses wherever he found them. Vice met in him an
austere and uncompromising reprover; no man was too high for his
reproach, and none too low for his sympathy. He was just as well suited for
his age as Peter the Hermit had been for the age preceding. He appealed
more to the reason, his predecessor to the passions; Peter the Hermit
collected a mob, while St. Bernard collected an army. Both were endowed
with equal zeal and perseverance, springing in the one from impulse, and in
the other from conviction, and a desire to increase the influence of the
Church, that great body of which he was a pillar and an ornament.
CATHEDRAL OF VEZELAI.
One of the first converts he made was in himself a host. Louis VII. was
both superstitious and tyrannical, and, in a fit of remorse for the infamous
slaughter he had authorised at the sacking of Vitry, he made a vow to
undertake the journey to the Holy Land.10 He was in this disposition when
St. Bernard began to preach, and wanted but little persuasion to embark in
the cause. His example had great influence upon the nobility, who,
impoverished as many of them were by the sacrifices made by their fathers
in the holy wars, were anxious to repair their ruined fortunes by conquests
on a foreign shore. These took the field with such vassals as they could
command, and in a very short time an army was raised amounting to two
hundred thousand men. At Vezelai the monarch received the cross from the
hands of St. Bernard, on a platform elevated in sight of all the people.
Several nobles, three bishops, and his queen, Eleanor of Aquitaine, were
present at this ceremony, and enrolled themselves under the banner of the
cross, St. Bernard cutting up his red sacerdotal vestments, and making
crosses of them, to be sewn on the shoulders of the people. An exhortation
from the Pope was read to the multitude, granting remission of their sins to
all who should join the Crusade, and directing that no man on that holy
pilgrimage should encumber himself with heavy baggage and vain
superfluities, and that the nobles should not travel with dogs or falcons, to
lead them from the direct road, as had happened to so many during the first
Crusade.
The command of the army was offered to St. Bernard; but he wisely
refused to accept a station for which his habits had unqualified him. After
consecrating Louis with great solemnity, at St. Denis, as chief of the
expedition, he continued his course through the country, stirring up the
people wherever he went. So high an opinion was entertained of his
sanctity, that he was thought to be animated by the spirit of prophecy, and to
be gifted with the power of working miracles. Many women, excited by his
eloquence, and encouraged by his predictions, forsook their husbands and
children, and, clothing themselves in male attire, hastened to the war. St.
Bernard himself wrote a letter to the Pope detailing his success, and stating,
that in several towns there did not remain a single male inhabitant capable
of bearing arms, and that every where castles and towns were to be seen
filled with women weeping for their absent husbands. But in spite of this
apparent enthusiasm, the numbers who really took up arms were
inconsiderable, and not to be compared to the swarms of the first Crusade.
A levy of no more than two hundred thousand men, which was the utmost
the number amounted to, could hardly have depopulated a country like
France, to the extent mentioned by St. Bernard. His description of the state
of the country appears, therefore, to have been much more poetical than
true.
Suger, the able minister of Louis, endeavoured to dissuade him from
undertaking so long a journey at a time when his own dominions so much
needed his presence. But the king was pricked in his conscience by the
cruelties of Vitry, and was anxious to make the only reparation which the
religion of that day considered sufficient. He was desirous, moreover, of
testifying to the world, that though he could brave the temporal power of
the Church when it encroached upon his prerogatives, he could render all
due obedience to its spiritual decrees whenever it suited his interest or
tallied with his prejudices to do so. Suger, therefore, implored in vain, and
Louis received the pilgrim’s staff at St. Denis, and made all preparations for
his pilgrimage.
In the mean time St. Bernard passed into Germany, where similar
success attended his preaching. The renown of his sanctity had gone before
him, and he found every where an admiring audience. Thousands of people,
who could not understand a word he said, flocked around him to catch a
glimpse of so holy a man; and the knights enrolled themselves in great
numbers in the service of the cross, each receiving from his hands the
symbol of the cause. But the people were not led away as in the days of
Gottschalk. We do not find that they rose in such tremendous masses of two
and three hundred thousand men, swarming over the country like a plague
of locusts. Still the enthusiasm was very great. The extraordinary tales that
were told and believed of the miracles worked by the preacher brought the
country people from far and near. Devils were said to vanish at his sight,
and diseases of the most malignant nature to be cured by his touch.11 The
Emperor Conrad caught at last the contagion from his subjects, and
declared his intention to follow the cross.
The preparations were carried on so vigorously under the orders of
Conrad, that in less than three months he found himself at the head of an
army containing at least one hundred and fifty thousand effective men,
besides a great number of women who followed their husbands and lovers
to the war. One troop of them rode in the attitude and armour of men: their
chief wore gilt spurs and buskins, and thence acquired the epithet of the
golden-footed lady. Conrad was ready to set out long before the French
monarch, and in the month of June 1147, he arrived before Constantinople,
having passed through Hungary and Bulgaria without offence to the
inhabitants.
PILGRIM’S STAFF.
Manuel Comnenus, the Greek emperor, successor not only to the throne
but to the policy of Alexius, looked with alarm upon the new levies who
had come to eat up his capital and imperil its tranquillity. Too weak to
refuse them a passage through his dominions, too distrustful of them to
make them welcome when they came, and too little assured of the
advantages likely to result to himself from the war, to feign a friendship
which he did not feel, the Greek emperor gave offence at the very outset.
His subjects, in the pride of superior civilisation, called the Germans
barbarians; while the latter, who, if semi-barbarous, were at least honest and
straightforward, retorted upon the Greeks by calling them double-faced
knaves and traitors. Disputes continually arose between them, and Conrad,
who had preserved so much good order among his followers during their
passage, was unable to restrain their indignation when they arrived at
Constantinople. For some offence or other which the Greeks had given
them, but which is rather hinted at than stated by the scanty historians of the
day, the Germans broke into the magnificent pleasure-garden of the
emperor, where he had a valuable collection of tame animals, for which the
grounds had been laid out in woods, caverns, groves, and streams, that each
might follow in captivity his natural habits. The enraged Germans, meriting
the name of barbarians that had been bestowed upon them, laid waste this
pleasant retreat, and killed or let loose the valuable animals it contained.
Manuel, who is said to have beheld the devastation from his palace
windows without power or courage to prevent it, was completely disgusted
with his guests, and resolved, like his predecessor Alexius, to get rid of
them on the first opportunity. He sent a message to Conrad respectfully
desiring an interview, but the German refused to trust himself within the
walls of Constantinople. The Greek emperor, on his part, thought it
compatible neither with his dignity nor his safety to seek the German, and
several days were spent in insincere negotiations. Manuel at length agreed
to furnish the crusading army with guides to conduct it through Asia Minor;
and Conrad passed over the Hellespont with his forces, the advanced guard
being commanded by himself, and the rear by the warlike Bishop of
Freysinghen.
Historians are almost unanimous in their belief that the wily Greek gave
instructions to his guides to lead the army of the German emperor into
dangers and difficulties. It is certain that, instead of guiding them through
such districts of Asia Minor as afforded water and provisions, they led them
into the wilds of Cappadocia, where neither was to be procured, and where
they were suddenly attacked by the sultan of the Seljukian Turks, at the
head of an immense force. The guides, whose treachery is apparent from
this fact alone, fled at the first sight of the Turkish army, and the Christians
were left to wage unequal warfare with their enemy, entangled and
bewildered in desert wilds. Toiling in their heavy mail, the Germans could
make but little effective resistance to the attacks of the Turkish light horse,
who were down upon them one instant, and out of sight the next. Now in
the front and now in the rear, the agile foe showered his arrows upon them,
enticing them into swamps and hollows, from which they could only
extricate themselves after long struggles and great losses. The Germans,
confounded by this mode of warfare, lost all conception of the direction
they were pursuing, and went back instead of forward. Suffering at the same
time for want of provisions, they fell an easy prey to their pursuers. Count
Bernhard, one of the bravest leaders of the German expedition, was
surrounded, with his whole division, not one of whom escaped the Turkish
arrows. The emperor himself had nearly fallen a victim, and was twice
severely wounded. So persevering was the enemy, and so little able were
the Germans to make even a shew of resistance, that when Conrad at last
reached the city of Nice, he found that, instead of being at the head of an
imposing force of one hundred thousand foot and seventy thousand horse,
he had but fifty or sixty thousand men, and these in the most worn and
wearied condition.
Totally ignorant of the treachery of the Greek emperor, although he had
been warned to beware of it, Louis VII. proceeded, at the head of his army,
through Worms and Ratisbon, towards Constantinople. At Ratisbon he was
met by a deputation from Manuel, bearing letters so full of hyperbole and
flattery, that Louis is reported to have blushed when they were read to him
by the Bishop of Langres. The object of the deputation was to obtain from
the French king a promise to pass through the Grecian territories in a
peaceable and friendly manner, and to yield to the Greek emperor any
conquest he might make in Asia Minor. The first part of the proposition was
immediately acceded to, but no notice was taken of the second and more
unreasonable. Louis marched on, and, passing through Hungary, pitched his
tents in the outskirts of Constantinople.
On his arrival, Manuel sent him a friendly invitation to enter the city at
the head of a small train. Louis at once accepted it, and was met by the
emperor at the porch of his palace. The fairest promises were made; every
art that flattery could suggest was resorted to, and every argument
employed, to induce him to yield his future conquests to the Greek. Louis
obstinately refused to pledge himself, and returned to his army convinced
that the emperor was a man not to be trusted. Negotiations were, however,
continued for several days, to the great dissatisfaction of the French army.
The news that arrived of a treaty entered into between Manuel and the
Turkish sultan changed their dissatisfaction into fury, and the leaders
demanded to be led against Constantinople, swearing that they would raze
the treacherous city to the ground. Louis did not feel inclined to accede to
this proposal, and, breaking up his camp, he crossed over into Asia.
Here he heard, for the first time, of the mishaps of the German emperor,
whom he found in a woful plight under the walls of Nice. The two
monarchs united their forces, and marched together along the sea-coast to
Ephesus; but Conrad, jealous, it would appear, of the superior numbers of
the French, and not liking to sink into a vassal, for the time being, of his
rival, withdrew abruptly with the remnant of his legions, and returned to
Constantinople. Manuel was all smiles and courtesy. He condoled with the
German so feelingly upon his losses, and cursed the stupidity or treachery
of the guides with such apparent heartiness, that Conrad was half inclined to
believe in his sincerity.
Louis, marching onward in the direction of Jerusalem, came up with the
enemy on the banks of the Meander. The Turks contested the passage of the
river, but the French bribed a peasant to point out a ford lower down:
crossing the river without difficulty, they attacked the Turks with much
vigour, and put them to flight. Whether the Turks were really defeated, or
merely pretended to be so, is doubtful; but the latter supposition seems to be
the true one. It is probable that it was part of a concerted plan to draw the
invaders onwards to more unfavourable ground, where their destruction
might be more certain. If such were the scheme, it succeeded to the heart’s
wish of its projectors. The Crusaders, on the third day after their victory,
arrived at a steep mountain-pass, on the summit of which the Turkish host
lay concealed so artfully, that not the slightest vestige of their presence
could be perceived. “With labouring steps and slow,” they toiled up the
steep ascent, when suddenly a tremendous fragment of rock came bounding
down the precipices with an awful crash, bearing dismay and death before
it. At the same instant the Turkish archers started from their hiding-places,
and discharged a shower of arrows upon the foot-soldiers, who fell by
hundreds at a time. The arrows rebounded harmlessly against the iron mail
of the knights, which the Turks observing, took aim at their steeds, and
horse and rider fell down the steep into the rapid torrent which rushed
below. Louis, who commanded the rear-guard, received the first intimation
of the onslaught from the sight of the wounded and flying soldiers, and, not
knowing the numbers of the enemy, he pushed vigorously forward to stay,
by his presence, the panic which had taken possession of his army. All his
efforts were in vain. Immense stones continued to be hurled upon them as
they advanced, bearing men and horse before them; and those who
succeeded in forcing their way to the top were met hand-to-hand by the
Turks, and cast down headlong upon their companions. Louis himself
fought with the energy of desperation, but had great difficulty to avoid
falling into the enemy’s hands. He escaped at last under cover of the night,
with the remnant of his forces, and took up his position before Attalia. Here
he restored the discipline and the courage of his disorganised and
disheartened followers, and debated with his captains the plan that was to
be pursued. After suffering severely both from disease and famine, it was
resolved that they should march to Antioch, which still remained an
independent principality under the successors of Bohemund of Tarentum. At
this time the sovereignty was vested in the person of Raymond, the uncle of
Eleanor of Aquitaine. This prince, presuming upon his relationship to the
French queen, endeavoured to withdraw Louis from the grand object of the
Crusade—the defence of the kingdom of Jerusalem, and secure his co-
operation in extending the limits and the power of his principality of
Antioch. The Prince of Tripoli formed a similar design; but Louis rejected
the offers of both, and marched, after a short delay, to Jerusalem. The
Emperor Conrad was there before him, having left Constantinople with
promises of assistance from Manuel Comnenus—assistance which never
arrived, and was never intended.
DAMASCUS.
A great council of the Christian princes of Palestine, and the leaders of
the Crusade, was then summoned, to discuss the future operations of the
war. It was ultimately determined that it would further the cause of the cross
in a greater degree if the united armies, instead of proceeding to Edessa,
laid siege to the city of Damascus, and drove the Saracens from that strong
position. This was a bold scheme, and, had it been boldly followed out,
would have insured, in all probability, the success of the war. But the
Christian leaders never learned from experience the necessity of union, that
very soul of great enterprises. Though they all agreed upon the policy of the
plan, yet every one had his own notions as to the means of executing it. The
princes of Antioch and Tripoli were jealous of each other, and of the king of
Jerusalem. The Emperor Conrad was jealous of the king of France, and the
king of France was disgusted with them all. But he had come out to
Palestine in accordance with a solemn vow; his religion, though it may be
called bigotry, was sincere; and he determined to remain to the very last
moment that a chance was left of effecting any good for the cause he had
set his heart on.
The siege of Damascus was accordingly commenced, and with so much
ability and vigour that the Christians gained a considerable advantage at the
very outset. For weeks the siege was pressed, till the shattered fortifications
and diminishing resistance of the besieged gave evidence that the city could
not hold out much longer. At that moment the insane jealousy of the leaders
led to dissensions that soon caused the utter failure, not only of the siege but
of the Crusade. A modern cookery-book, in giving a recipe for cooking a
hare, says, “first catch your hare, and then kill it”—a maxim of indisputable
wisdom. The Christian chiefs, on this occasion, had not so much sagacity,
for they began a violent dispute among themselves for the possession of a
city which was still unconquered. There being already a prince of Antioch
and a prince of Tripoli, twenty claimants started for the principality of
Damascus; and a grand council of the leaders was held to determine the
individual on whom the honour should devolve. Many valuable days were
wasted in this discussion, the enemy in the meanwhile gaining strength
from their inactivity. It was at length, after a stormy deliberation, agreed
that Count Robert of Flanders, who had twice visited the Holy Land, should
be invested with the dignity. The other claimants refused to recognise him
or to co-operate in the siege until a more equitable arrangement had been
made. Suspicion filled the camp; the most sinister rumours of intrigues and
treachery were set afloat; and the discontented candidates withdrew at last
to the other side of the city, and commenced operations on their own
account without a probability of success. They were soon joined by the rest
of the army. The consequence was that the weakest side of the city, and that
on which they had already made considerable progress in the work of
demolition, was left uncovered. The enemy was prompt to profit by the
mistake, and received an abundant supply of provisions, and refortified the
walls, before the Crusaders came to their senses again. When this desirable
event happened, it was too late. Saph Eddin, the powerful emir of Mousoul,
was in the neighbourhood, at the head of a large army, advancing by forced
marches to the relief of the city. The siege was abruptly abandoned, and the
foolish Crusaders returned to Jerusalem, having done nothing to weaken the
enemy, but every thing to weaken themselves.
The freshness of enthusiasm had now completely subsided; even the
meanest soldiers were sick at heart. Conrad, from whose fierce zeal at the
outset so much might have been expected, was wearied with reverses, and
returned to Europe with the poor remnant of his host. Louis lingered a short
time longer, for very shame, but the pressing solicitations of his minister
Suger induced him to return to France. Thus ended the second Crusade. Its
history is but a chronicle of defeats. It left the kingdom of Jerusalem in a
worse state than when it quitted Europe, and gained nothing but disgrace for
its leaders, and discouragement for all concerned.
St. Bernard, who had prophesied a result so different, fell after this into
some disrepute, and experienced, like many other prophets, the fate of
being without honour in his own country. What made the matter worse, he
could not obtain it in any other. Still, however, there were not wanting
zealous advocates to stand forward in his behalf, and stem the tide of
incredulity, which, unopposed, would have carried away his reputation. The
Bishop of Freysinghen declared that prophets were not always able to
prophesy, and that the vices of the Crusaders drew down the wrath of
heaven upon them. But the most ingenious excuse ever made for St.
Bernard is to be found in his life by Geoffroi de Clairvaux, where he
pertinaciously insists that the Crusade was not unfortunate. St. Bernard, he
says, had prophesied a happy result, and that result could not be considered
other than happy which had peopled heaven with so glorious an army of
martyrs. Geoffroi was a cunning pleader, and, no doubt, convinced a few of
the zealous; but plain people, who were not wanting even in those days,
retained their own opinion, or, what amounts to the same thing, “were
convinced against their will.”
We now come to the consideration of the third Crusade, and of the
causes which rendered it necessary. The epidemic frenzy, which had been
cooling ever since the issue of the first expedition, was now extinct, or very
nearly so, and the nations of Europe looked with cold indifference upon the
armaments of their princes. But chivalry had flourished in its natural
element of war, and was now in all its glory. It continued to supply armies
for the Holy Land when the popular ranks refused to deliver up their able-
bodied swarms. Poetry, which, more than religion, inspired the third
Crusade, was then but “caviare to the million,” who had other matters, of
sterner import, to claim all their attention. But the knights and their
retainers listened with delight to the martial and amatory strains of the
minstrels, minnesängers, trouvères, and troubadours, and burned to win
favour in ladies’ eyes by shewing prowess in the Holy Land. The third was
truly the romantic era of the Crusades. Men fought then, not so much for
the sepulchre of Jesus, and the maintenance of a Christian kingdom in the
East, as to gain glory for themselves in the best and almost only field where
glory could be obtained. They fought, not as zealots, but as soldiers; not for
religion, but for honour; not for the crown of martyrdom, but for the favour
of the lovely.
SEAL OF BARBAROSSA.
It is not necessary to enter into a detail of the events by which Saladin
attained the sovereignty of the East, or how, after a succession of
engagements, he planted the Moslem banner once more upon the
battlements of Jerusalem. The Christian knights and population, including
the grand orders of St. John, the Hospitallers, and the Templars, were sunk
in an abyss of vice, and, torn by unworthy jealousies and dissensions, were
unable to resist the well-trained armies which the wise and mighty Saladin
brought forward to crush them. But the news of their fall created a painful
sensation among the chivalry of Europe, whose noblest members were
linked to the dwellers in Palestine by many ties, both of blood and
friendship. The news of the great battle of Tiberias, in which Saladin
defeated the Christian host with terrible slaughter, arrived first in Europe,
and was followed in quick succession by that of the capture of Jerusalem,
Antioch, Tripoli, and other cities. Dismay seized upon the clergy. The Pope
(Urban III.) was so affected by the news that he pined away for grief, and
was scarcely seen to smile again, until he sank into the sleep of death.12 His
successor, Gregory VIII., felt the loss as acutely, but had better strength to
bear it, and instructed all the clergy of the Christian world to stir up the
people to arms for the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre. William Archbishop
of Tyre, a humble follower in the path of Peter the Hermit, left Palestine to
preach to the kings of Europe the miseries he had witnessed, and to incite
them to the rescue. The renowned Frederick Barbarossa, the emperor of
Germany, speedily collected an army, and passing over into Syria with less
delay than had ever before awaited a crusading force, defeated the Saracens,
and took possession of the city of Iconium. He was unfortunately cut off in
the middle of his successful career, by imprudently bathing in the Cydnus13
while he was overheated, and the Duke of Suabia took the command of the
expedition. The latter did not prove so able a general, and met with nothing
but reverses, although he was enabled to maintain a footing at Antioch until
assistance arrived from Europe.
HENRY II. OF ENGLAND.
Henry II. of England and Philip Augustus of France, at the head of their
chivalry, supported the Crusade with all their influence, until wars and
dissensions nearer home estranged them from it for a time. The two kings
met at Gisors in Normandy in the month of January, 1188, accompanied by
a brilliant train of knights and warriors. William of Tyre was present, and
expounded the cause of the cross with considerable eloquence, and the
whole assembly bound themselves by oath to proceed to Jerusalem. It was
agreed at the same time that a tax, called Saladin’s tithe, and consisting of
the tenth part of all possessions, whether landed or personal, should be
enforced over Christendom, upon every one who was either unable or
unwilling to assume the cross. The lord of every feof, whether lay or
ecclesiastical, was charged to raise the tithe within his own jurisdiction; and
any one who refused to pay his quota, became by that act the bondsman and
absolute property of his lord. At the same time the greatest indulgence was
shewn to those who assumed the cross; no man was at liberty to stay them
by process of any kind, whether for debt, or robbery, or murder. The king of
Prance, at the breaking up of the conference, summoned a parliament at
Paris, where these resolutions were solemnly confirmed, while Henry II. did
the same for his Norman possessions at Rouen, and for England at
Geddington, in Northamptonshire. To use the words of an ancient
chronicler,14 “he held a parliament about the voyage into the Holy Land,
and troubled the whole land with the paying of tithes towards it.”
CHATEAU OF GISORS.
But it was not England alone that was “troubled” by the tax. The people
of France also looked upon it with no pleasant feelings, and appear from
that time forth to have changed their indifference for the Crusade into
aversion. Even the clergy, who were exceedingly willing that other people
should contribute half, or even all their goods in furtherance of their
favourite scheme, were not at all anxious to contribute a single sous
themselves. Millot15 relates that several of them cried out against the
impost. Among the rest, the clergy of Rheims were called upon to pay their
quota, but sent a deputation to the king, begging him to be contented with
the aid of their prayers, as they were too poor to contribute in any other
shape. Philip Augustus knew better, and by way of giving them a lesson,
employed three nobles of the vicinity to lay waste the Church lands. The
clergy, informed of the outrage, applied to the king for redress. “I will aid
you with my prayers,” said the monarch condescendingly, “and will entreat
those gentlemen to let the Church alone.” He did as he had promised, but in
such a manner that the nobles, who appreciated the joke, continued their
devastations as before. Again the clergy applied to the king. “What would
you have of me?” he replied, in answer to their remonstrances: “you gave
me your prayers in my necessity, and I have given you mine in yours.” The
clergy understood the argument, and thought it the wiser course to pay their
quota of Saladin’s tithe without further parley.
PHILIP AUGUSTUS.
This anecdote shews the unpopularity of the Crusade. If the clergy
disliked to contribute, it is no wonder that the people felt still greater
antipathy. But the chivalry of Europe was eager for the affray: the tithe was
rigorously collected, and armies from England, France, Burgundy, Italy,
Flanders, and Germany, were soon in the field. The two kings who were to
have led it were, however, drawn into broils by an aggression of Richard
duke of Guienne, better known as Richard Cœur de Lion, upon the territory
of the Count of Toulouse, and the proposed journey to Palestine was
delayed. War continued to rage between France and England, and with so
little probability of a speedy termination, that many of the nobles, bound to
the Crusade, left the two monarchs to settle the differences at their leisure,
and proceeded to Palestine without them.
Death at last stepped in and removed Henry II. from the hostility of his
foes, and the treachery and ingratitude of his children. His son Richard
immediately concluded an alliance with Philip Augustus; and the two
young, valiant, and impetuous monarchs united all their energies to forward
the Crusade. They met with a numerous and brilliant retinue at Nonancourt
in Normandy, where, in sight of their assembled chivalry, they embraced as
brothers, and swore to live as friends and true allies, until a period of forty
days after their return from the Holy Land. With a view of purging their
camp from the follies and vices which had proved so ruinous to preceding
expeditions, they drew up a code of laws for the government of the army.
Gambling had been carried to a great extent, and proved the fruitful source
of quarrels and bloodshed; and one of their laws prohibited any person in
the army, beneath the degree of a knight, from playing at any game for
money.16 Knights and clergymen might play for money, but no one was
permitted to lose or gain more than twenty shillings in a day, under a
penalty of one hundred shillings. The personal attendants of the monarchs
were also allowed to play to the same extent. The penalty in their case for
infraction was that they should be whipped naked through the army for the
space of three days. Any Crusader, who struck another and drew blood, was
ordered to have his hand cut off; and whoever slew a brother Crusader was
condemned to be tied alive to the corpse of his victim, and buried with him.
No young women were allowed to follow the army, to the great sorrow of
many vicious and of many virtuous dames, who had not courage to elude
the decree by dressing in male attire. But many high-minded and
affectionate maidens and matrons, bearing the sword or the spear, followed
their husbands and lovers to the war in spite of King Richard, and in
defiance of danger. The only women allowed to accompany the army in
their own habiliments were washerwomen of fifty years complete, and any
others of the fair sex who had reached the same age.
These rules having been promulgated, the two monarchs marched
together to Lyons, where they separated, agreeing to meet again at Messina.
Philip proceeded across the Alps to Genoa, where he took ship, and was
conveyed in safety to the place of rendezvous. Richard turned in the
direction of Marseilles, where he also took ship for Messina. His impetuous
disposition hurried him into many squabbles by the way, and his knights
and followers, for the most part as brave and as foolish as himself, imitated
him very zealously in this particular. At Messina the Sicilians charged the
most exorbitant prices for every necessary of life. Richard’s army in vain
remonstrated. From words they came to blows, and, as a last resource,
plundered the Sicilians, since they could not trade with them. Continual
battles were the consequence, in one of which Lebrun, the favourite
attendant of Richard, lost his life. The peasantry from far and near came
flocking to the aid of the townspeople, and the battle soon became general.
Richard, irritated at the loss of his favourite, and incited by report that
Tancred, the king of Sicily, was fighting at the head of his own people,
joined the mêlée with his boldest knights, and, beating back the Sicilians,
attacked the city sword in hand, stormed the battlements, tore down the flag
of Sicily, and planted his own in its stead. This collision gave great offence
to the king of France, who became from that time jealous of Richard, and
apprehensive that his design was not so much to re-establish the Christian
kingdom of Jerusalem, as to make conquests for himself. He, however,
exerted his influence to restore peace between the English and Sicilians,
and shortly afterwards set sail for Acre, with distrust of his ally germinating
in his heart.
THE ISLAND OF RHODES.
Richard remained behind for some weeks in a state of inactivity quite
unaccountable in one of his temperament. He appears to have had no more
squabbles with the Sicilians, but to have lived an easy, luxurious life,
forgetting, in the lap of pleasure, the objects for which he had quitted his
own dominions and the dangerous laxity he was introducing into his army.
The superstition of his soldiers recalled him at length to a sense of his duty:
a comet was seen for several successive nights, which was thought to
menace them with the vengeance of Heaven for their delay. Shooting stars
gave them similar warning; and a fanatic, of the name of Joachim, with his
drawn sword in his hand, and his long hair streaming wildly over his
shoulders, went through the camp, howling all night long, and predicting
plague, famine, and every other calamity, if they did not set out
immediately. Richard did not deem it prudent to neglect the intimations;
and, after doing humble penance for his remissness, he set sail for Acre.
A violent storm dispersed his fleet, but he arrived safely at Rhodes with
the principal part of the armament. Here he learned that three of his ships
had been stranded on the rocky coasts of Cyprus, and that the ruler of the
island, Isaac Comnenus, had permitted his people to pillage the unfortunate
crews, and had refused shelter to his betrothed bride, the Princess
Berengaria, and his sister, who, in one of the vessels, had been driven by
stress of weather into the port of Limisso. The fiery monarch swore to be
revenged, and, collecting all his vessels, sailed back to Limisso. Isaac
Comnenus refused to apologise or explain, and Richard, in no mood to be
trifled with, landed on the island, routed with great loss the forces sent to
oppose him, and laid the whole country under contribution.
RICHARD I. AND BERENGARIA.
On his arrival at Acre he found the whole of the chivalry of Europe
there before him. Guy of Lusignan, the king of Jerusalem, had long before
collected the bold Knights of the Temple, the Hospital, and St. John, and
had laid siege to Acre, which was resolutely defended by the Sultan
Saladin, with an army magnificent both for its numbers and its discipline.
For nearly two years the Crusaders had pushed the siege, and made efforts
almost superhuman to dislodge the enemy. Various battles had taken place
in the open fields with no decisive advantage to either party, and Guy of
Lusignan had begun to despair of taking that strong position without aid
from Europe. His joy was extreme on the arrival of Philip with all his
chivalry, and he only awaited the coming of Cœur de Lion to make one last
decisive attack upon the town. When the fleet of England was first seen
approaching the shores of Syria, a universal shout arose from the Christian
camp; and when Richard landed with his train, one louder still pierced to
the very mountains of the south, where Saladin lay with all his army.
It may be remarked as characteristic of this Crusade, that the Christians
and the Moslems no longer looked upon each other as barbarians, to whom
mercy was a crime. Each host entertained the highest admiration for the
bravery and magnanimity of the other, and, in their occasional truces, met
upon the most friendly terms. The Moslem warriors were full of courtesy to
the Christian knights, and had no other regret than to think that such fine
fellows were not Mahomedans. The Christians, with a feeling precisely
similar, extolled to the skies the nobleness of the Saracens, and sighed to
think that such generosity and valour should be sullied by disbelief in the
Gospel of Jesus. But when the strife began, all these feelings disappeared,
and the struggle became mortal.
The jealousy excited in the mind of Philip by the events of Messina still
rankled, and the two monarchs refused to act in concert. Instead of making
a joint attack upon the town, the French monarch assailed it alone, and was
repulsed. Richard did the same, and with the same result. Philip tried to
seduce the soldiers of Richard from their allegiance by the offer of three
gold pieces per month to every knight who would forsake the banners of
England for those of France. Richard endeavoured to neutralise the offer by
a larger one, and promised four pieces to every French knight who should
join the Lion of England. In this unworthy rivalry their time was wasted, to
the great detriment of the discipline and efficiency of their followers. Some
good was nevertheless effected; for the mere presence of two such armies
prevented the besieged city from receiving supplies, and the inhabitants
were reduced by famine to the most woful straits. Saladin did not deem it
prudent to risk a general engagement by coming to their relief, but preferred
to wait till dissension had weakened his enemy, and made him an easy prey.
Perhaps if he had been aware of the real extent of the extremity in Acre, he
would have changed his plan; but, cut off from the town, he did not know
its misery till it was too late. After a short truce the city capitulated upon
terms so severe that Saladin afterwards refused to ratify them. The chief
conditions were, that the precious wood of the true cross, captured by the
Moslems in Jerusalem, should be restored; that a sum of two hundred
thousand gold pieces should be paid; and that all the Christian prisoners in
Acre should be released, together with two hundred knights and a thousand
soldiers detained in captivity by Saladin. The eastern monarch, as may be
well conceived, did not set much store on the wood of the cross, but was
nevertheless anxious to keep it, as he knew its possession by the Christians
would do more than a victory to restore their courage. He refused, therefore,
to deliver it up, or to accede to any of the conditions; and Richard, as he had
previously threatened, barbarously ordered all the Saracen prisoners in his
power to be put to death.
The possession of the city only caused new and unhappy dissensions
between the Christian leaders. The Archduke of Austria unjustifiably
hoisted his flag on one of the towers of Acre, which Richard no sooner saw
than he tore it down with his own hands, and trampled it under his feet.
Philip, though he did not sympathise with the archduke, was piqued at the
assumption of Richard, and the breach between the two monarchs became
wider than ever. A foolish dispute arose at the same time between Guy of
Lusignan and Conrad of Montferrat for the crown of Jerusalem. The inferior
knights were not slow to imitate the pernicious example, and jealousy,
distrust, and ill-will reigned in the Christian camp. In the midst of this
confusion the king of France suddenly announced his intention to return to
his own country. Richard was filled with indignation, and exclaimed,
“Eternal shame light on him, and on all France, if, for any cause, he leave
this work unfinished!” But Philip was not to be stayed. His health had
suffered by his residence in the East; and, ambitious of playing a first part,
he preferred to play none at all than to play second to King Richard.
Leaving a small detachment of Burgundians behind, he returned to France
with the remainder of his army; and Cœur de Lion, without feeling, in the
multitude of his rivals, that he had lost the greatest, became painfully
convinced that the right arm of the enterprise was lopped off.
After his departure, Richard re-fortified Acre, restored the Christian
worship in the churches, and, leaving a Christian garrison to protect it,
marched along the sea-coast towards Ascalon. Saladin was on the alert, and
sent his light horse to attack the rear of the Christian army, while he
himself, miscalculating their weakness since the defection of Philip,
endeavoured to force them to a general engagement. The rival armies met
near Azotus. A fierce battle ensued, in which Saladin was defeated and put
to flight, and the road to Jerusalem left free for the Crusaders.
Again discord exerted its baleful influence, and prevented Richard from
following up his victory. His opinion was constantly opposed by the other
leaders, all jealous of his bravery and influence; and the army, instead of
marching to Jerusalem, or even to Ascalon, as was first intended, proceeded
to Jaffa, and remained in idleness until Saladin was again in a condition to
wage war against them.
BETHLEHEM.
Many months were spent in fruitless hostilities and as fruitless
negotiations. Richard’s wish was to recapture Jerusalem; but there were
difficulties in the way, which even his bold spirit could not conquer. His
own intolerable pride was not the least cause of the evil; for it estranged
many a generous spirit, who would have been willing to co-operate with
him in all cordiality. At length it was agreed to march to the Holy City; but
the progress made was so slow and painful, that the soldiers murmured, and
the leaders meditated retreat. The weather was hot and dry, and there was
little water to be procured. Saladin had choked up the wells and cisterns on
the route, and the army had not zeal enough to push forward amid such
privation. At Bethlehem a council was held, to debate whether they should
retreat or advance. Retreat was decided upon, and immediately commenced.
It is said, that Richard was first led to a hill, whence he could obtain a sight
of the towers of Jerusalem, and that he was so affected at being so near it,
and so unable to relieve it, that he hid his face behind his shield, and sobbed
aloud.
The army separated into two divisions, the smaller falling back upon
Jaffa, and the larger, commanded by Richard and the Duke of Burgundy,
returning to Acre. Before the English monarch had made all his
preparations for his return to Europe, a messenger reached Acre with the
intelligence that Jaffa was besieged by Saladin, and that, unless relieved
immediately, the city would be taken. The French, under the Duke of
Burgundy, were so wearied with the war, that they refused to aid their
brethren in Jaffa. Richard, blushing with shame at their pusillanimity, called
his English to the rescue, and arrived just in time to save the city. His very
name put the Saracens to flight, so great was their dread of his prowess.
Saladin regarded him with the warmest admiration, and when Richard, after
his victory, demanded peace, willingly acceded. A truce was concluded for
three years and eight months, during which Christian pilgrims were to enjoy
the liberty of visiting Jerusalem without hindrance or payment of any tax.
The Crusaders were allowed to retain the cities of Tyre and Jaffa, with the
country intervening. Saladin, with a princely generosity, invited many of the
Christians to visit Jerusalem; and several of the leaders took advantage of
his offer to feast their eyes upon a spot which all considered so sacred.
Many of them were entertained for days in the sultan’s own palace, from
which they returned with their tongues laden with the praises of the noble
infidel. Richard and Saladin never met, though the impression that they did
will remain on many minds, who have been dazzled by the glorious fiction
of Sir Walter Scott. But each admired the prowess and nobleness of soul of
his rival, and agreed to terms far less onerous than either would have
accepted, had this mutual admiration not existed.17
The king of England no longer delayed his departure, for messengers
from his own country brought imperative news that his presence was
required to defeat the intrigues that were fomenting against his crown. His
long imprisonment in the Austrian dominions and final ransom are too well
known to be dwelt upon. And thus ended the third Crusade, less destructive
of human life than the two first, but quite as useless.
The flame of popular enthusiasm now burned pale indeed, and all the
efforts of popes and potentates were insufficient to rekindle it. At last, after
flickering unsteadily, like a lamp expiring in the socket, it burned up
brightly for one final instant, and was extinguished for ever.
The fourth Crusade, as connected with popular feeling, requires little or
no notice. At the death of Saladin, which happened a year after the
conclusion of his truce with Richard of England, his vast empire fell to
pieces. His brother Saif Eddin, or Saphaddin, seized upon Syria, in the
possession of which he was troubled by the sons of Saladin. When this
intelligence reached Europe, the Pope, Celestine III., judged the moment
favourable for preaching a new Crusade. But every nation in Europe was
unwilling and cold towards it. The people had no ardour, and kings were
occupied with more weighty matters at home. The only monarch of Europe
who encouraged it was the Emperor Henry of Germany, under whose
auspices the Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria took the field at the head of a
considerable force. They landed in Palestine, and found any thing but a
welcome from the Christian inhabitants. Under the mild sway of Saladin,
they had enjoyed repose and toleration, and both were endangered by the
arrival of the Germans. They looked upon them in consequence as over-
officious intruders, and gave them no encouragement in the warfare against
Saphaddin. The result of this Crusade was even more disastrous than the
last; for the Germans contrived not only to embitter the Saracens against the
Christians of Judea, but to lose the strong city of Jaffa, and cause the
destruction of nine-tenths of the army with which they had quitted Europe.
And so ended the fourth Crusade.
The fifth was more important, and had a result which its projectors
never dreamed of—no less than the sacking of Constantinople, and the
placing of a French dynasty upon the imperial throne of the eastern Cæsars.
Each succeeding pope, however much he may have differed from his
predecessors on other points, zealously agreed in one, that of maintaining
by every possible means the papal ascendency. No scheme was so likely to
aid in this endeavour as the Crusades. As long as they could persuade the
kings and nobles of Europe to fight and die in Syria, their own sway was
secured over the minds of men at home. Such being their object, they never
inquired whether a Crusade was or was not likely to be successful, whether
the time were well or ill chosen, or whether men and money could be
procured in sufficient abundance. Pope Innocent III. would have been proud
if he could have bent the refractory monarchs of England and France into so
much submission. But John and Philip Augustus were both engaged. Both
had deeply offended the Church, and had been laid under her ban, and both
were occupied in important reforms at home; Philip in bestowing
immunities upon his subjects, and John in having them forced from him.
The emissaries of the pope therefore plied them in vain; but as in the first
and second Crusades, the eloquence of a powerful preacher incited the
nobility, and through them a certain portion of the people; Foulque bishop
of Neuilly, an ambitious and enterprising prelate, entered fully into the
views of the court of Rome, and preached the Crusade wherever he could
find an audience. Chance favoured him to a degree he did not himself
expect, for he had in general found but few proselytes, and those few but
cold in the cause. Theobald count of Champagne had instituted a grand
tournament, to which he had invited all the nobles from far and near.
Upwards of two thousand knights were present with their retainers, besides
a vast concourse of people to witness the sports. In the midst of the
festivities Foulque arrived upon the spot, and conceiving the opportunity to
be a favourable one, he addressed the multitude in eloquent language, and
passionately called upon them to enrol themselves for the new Crusade. The
Count de Champagne, young, ardent, and easily excited, received the cross
at his hands. The enthusiasm spread rapidly. Charles count of Blois
followed the example, and of the two thousand knights present, scarcely
one hundred and fifty refused. The popular phrensy seemed on the point of
breaking out as in the days of yore. The Count of Flanders, the Count of
Bar, the Duke of Burgundy, and the Marquis of Montferrat, brought all their
vassals to swell the train, and in a very short space of time an effective army
was on foot and ready to march to Palestine.
The dangers of an overland journey were too well understood, and the
Crusaders endeavoured to make a contract with some of the Italian states to
convey them over in their vessels. Dandolo, the aged doge of Venice,
offered them the galleys of the Republic; but the Crusaders, on their arrival
in that city, found themselves too poor to pay even half the sum demanded.
Every means was tried to raise money; the Crusaders melted down their
plate, and ladies gave up their trinkets. Contributions were solicited from
the faithful, but came in so slowly as to make it evident to all concerned,
that the faithful of Europe were outnumbered by the prudent. As a last
resource, Dandolo offered to convey them to Palestine at the expense of the
Republic, if they would previously aid in the recapture of the city of Zara,
which had been seized from the Venetians a short time previously by the
king of Hungary. The Crusaders consented, much to the displeasure of the
pope, who threatened excommunication upon all who should be turned
aside from the voyage to Jerusalem. But notwithstanding the fulminations
of the Church, the expedition never reached Palestine. The siege of Zara
was speedily undertaken. After a long and brave defence, the city
surrendered at discretion, and the Crusaders were free, if they had so chosen
it, to use their swords against the Saracens. But the ambition of the chiefs
had been directed, by unforeseen circumstances, elsewhere.
After the death of Manuel Comnenus, the Greek empire had fallen a
prey to intestine divisions. His son Alexius II. had succeeded him, but was
murdered after a short reign by his uncle Andronicus, who seized upon the
throne. His reign also was but of short duration. Isaac Angelus, a member of
the same family, took up arms against the usurper, and having defeated and
captured him in a pitched battle, had him put to death. He also mounted the
throne only to be cast down from it. His brother Alexius deposed him, and
to incapacitate him from reigning, put out his eyes, and shut him up in a
dungeon. Neither was Alexius III. allowed to remain in peaceable
possession of the throne; the son of the unhappy Isaac, whose name also
was Alexius, fled from Constantinople, and hearing that the Crusaders had
undertaken the siege of Zara, made them the most magnificent offers if they
would afterwards aid him in deposing his uncle. His offers were, that if by
their means he was re-established in his father’s dominions, he would place
the Greek Church under the authority of the Pope of Rome, lend the whole
force of the Greek empire to the conquest of Palestine, and distribute two
hundred thousand marks of silver among the crusading army. The offer was
accepted, with a proviso on the part of some of the leaders, that they should
be free to abandon the design, if it met with the disapproval of the pope. But
this was not to be feared. The submission of the schismatic Greeks to the
See of Rome was a greater bribe to the Pontiff than the utter annihilation of
the Saracen power in Palestine would have been.
The Crusaders were soon in movement for the imperial city. Their
operations were skilfully and courageously directed, and spread such
dismay as to paralyse the efforts of the usurper to retain possession of his
throne. After a vain resistance, he abandoned the city to its fate, and fled no
one knew whither. The aged and blind Isaac was taken from his dungeon by
his subjects, and placed upon the throne ere the Crusaders were apprised of
the flight of his rival. His son Alexius IV. was afterwards associated with
him in the sovereignty.
But the conditions of the treaty gave offence to the Grecian people,
whose prelates refused to place themselves under the dominion of the See
of Rome. Alexius at first endeavoured to persuade his subjects to admission,
and prayed the Crusaders to remain in Constantinople until they had
fortified him in the possession of a throne which was yet far from secure.
He soon became unpopular with his subjects; and breaking faith with regard
to the subsidies, he offended the Crusaders. War was at length declared
upon him by both parties; by his people for his tyranny, and by his former
friends for his treachery. He was seized in his palace by his own guards and
thrown into prison, while the Crusaders were making ready to besiege his
capital. The Greeks immediately proceeded to the election of a new
monarch; and looking about for a man of courage, energy, and
perseverance, they fixed upon Alexius Ducas, who, with almost every bad
quality, was possessed of the virtues they needed. He ascended the throne
under the name of Murzuphlis. One of his first acts was to rid himself of his
youngest predecessor—a broken heart had already removed the blind old
Isaac, no longer a stumbling-block in his way—and the young Alexius was
soon after put to death in his prison.
CONSTANTINOPLE.
War to the knife was now declared between the Greeks and the Franks;
and early in the spring of the year 1204, preparations were commenced for
an assault upon Constantinople. The French and Venetians entered into a
treaty for the division of the spoils among their soldiery; for so confident
were they of success, that failure never once entered into their calculations.
This confidence led them on to victory; while the Greeks, cowardly as
treacherous people always are, were paralysed by a foreboding of evil. It
has been a matter of astonishment to all historians, that Murzuphlis, with
the reputation for courage which he had acquired, and the immense
resources at his disposal, took no better measures to repel the onset of the
Crusaders. Their numbers were as a mere handful in comparison with those
which he could have brought against them; and if they had the hopes of
plunder to lead them on, the Greeks had their homes to fight for, and their
very existence as a nation to protect. After an impetuous assault, repulsed
for one day, but renewed with double impetuosity on another, the Crusaders
lashed their vessels against the walls, slew every man who opposed them,
and, with little loss to themselves, entered the city. Murzuphlis fled, and
Constantinople was given over to be pillaged by the victors. The wealth
they found was enormous. In money alone there was sufficient to distribute
twenty marks of silver to each knight, ten to each squire or servant at arms,
and five to each archer. Jewels, velvets, silks, and every luxury of attire,
with rare wines and fruits, and valuable merchandise of every description,
also fell into their hands, and were bought by the trading Venetians, and the
proceeds distributed among the army. Two thousand persons were put to the
sword; but had there been less plunder to take up the attention of the
victors, the slaughter would in all probability have been much greater.
In many of the bloody wars which defile the page of history, we find
that soldiers, utterly reckless of the works of God, will destroy his
masterpiece, man, with unsparing brutality, but linger with respect round
the beautiful works of art. They will slaughter women and children, but
spare a picture; will hew down the sick, the helpless, and the hoary-headed,
but refrain from injuring a fine piece of sculpture. The Latins, on their
entrance into Constantinople, respected neither the works of God nor man,
but vented their brutal ferocity upon the one, and satisfied their avarice
upon the other. Many beautiful bronze statues, above all price as works of
art, were broken into pieces to be sold as old metal. The finely-chiselled
marble, which could be put to no such vile uses, was also destroyed with a
recklessness, if possible, still more atrocious.18
The carnage being over, and the spoil distributed, six persons were
chosen from among the Franks and six from among the Venetians, who
were to meet and elect an emperor, previously binding themselves by oath
to select the individual best qualified among the candidates. The choice
wavered between Baldwin count of Flanders and Boniface marquis of
Montferrat, but fell eventually upon the former. He was straightway robed
in the imperial purple, and became the founder of a new dynasty. He did not
live long to enjoy his power, or to consolidate it for his successors, who, in
their turn, were soon swept away. In less than sixty years the rule of the
Franks at Constantinople was brought to as sudden and disastrous a
termination as the reign of Murzuphlis: and this was the grand result of the
fifth Crusade.
Pope Innocent III., although he had looked with no very unfavourable
eye upon these proceedings, regretted that nothing had been done for the
relief of the Holy Land; still, upon every convenient occasion, he enforced
the necessity of a new Crusade. Until the year 1213, his exhortations had no
other effect than to keep the subject in the mind of Europe. Every spring
and summer detachments of pilgrims continued to set out for Palestine to
the aid of their brethren, but not in sufficient numbers to be of much
service. These periodical passages were called the passagium Martii, or the
passage of March, and the passagium Johannis, or the passage of the
festival of St. John. These did not consist entirely of soldiers, armed against
the Saracen, but of pilgrims led by devotion, and in performance of their
vows, bearing nothing with them but their staff and their wallet. Early in the
spring of 1213 a more extraordinary body of Crusaders was raised in France
and Germany. An immense number of boys and girls, amounting, according
to some accounts, to thirty thousand, were incited by the persuasion of two
monks to undertake the journey to Palestine. They were no doubt composed
of the idle and deserted children who generally swarm in great cities,
nurtured in vice and daring, and ready for any thing. The object of the
monks seems to have been the atrocious one of inveigling them into slave-
ships, on pretence of sending them to Syria, and selling them for slaves on
the coast of Africa.19 Great numbers of these poor victims were shipped at
Marseilles; but the vessels, with the exception of two or three, were
wrecked on the shores of Italy, and every soul perished. The remainder
arrived safely in Africa, and were bought up as slaves, and sent off into the
interior of the country. Another detachment arrived at Genoa; but the
accomplices in this horrid plot having taken no measures at that port,
expecting them all at Marseilles, they were induced to return to their homes
by the Genoese.
Fuller, in his quaint history of the Holy Warre, says that this Crusade
was done by the instinct of the devil; and he adds a reason, which may
provoke mirth now, but which was put forth by the worthy historian in all
soberness and sincerity. He says, “the devil, being cloyed with the
murdering of men, desired a cordial of children’s blood to comfort his weak
stomach;” as epicures, when tired of mutton, resort to lamb for a change.
It appears from other authors that the preaching of the vile monks had
such an effect upon these deluded children that they ran about the country,
exclaiming, “O Lord Jesus, restore thy cross to us!” and that neither bolts
nor bars, the fear of fathers, nor the love of mothers, was sufficient to
restrain them from journeying to Jerusalem.
The details of these strange proceedings are exceedingly meagre and
confused, and none of the contemporary writers who mention the subject
have thought it worth while to state the names of the monks who originated
the scheme, or the fate they met for their wickedness. Two merchants of
Marseilles, who were to have shared in the profits, were, it is said, brought
to justice for some other crime, and suffered death; but we are not informed
whether they divulged any circumstances relating to this matter.
Pope Innocent III. does not seem to have been aware that the causes of
this juvenile Crusade were such as have been stated, for, upon being
informed that numbers of them had taken the cross, and were marching to
the Holy Land, he exclaimed, “These children are awake while we sleep!”
He imagined, apparently, that the mind of Europe was still bent on the
recovery of Palestine, and that the zeal of these children implied a sort of
reproach upon his own lukewarmness. Very soon afterwards, he bestirred
himself with more activity, and sent an encyclical letter to the clergy of
Christendom, urging them to preach a new Crusade. As usual, a number of
adventurous nobles, who had nothing else to do, enrolled themselves with
their retainers. At a Council of Lateran, which was held while these bands
were collecting, Innocent announced that he himself would take the Cross,
and lead the armies of Christ to the defence of his sepulchre. In all
probability he would have done so, for he was zealous enough; but death
stepped in, and destroyed his project ere it was ripe. His successor
encouraged the Crusade, though he refused to accompany it; and the
armament continued in France, England, and Germany. No leaders of any
importance joined it from the former countries. Andrew king of Hungary
was the only monarch who had leisure or inclination to leave his dominions.
The Dukes of Austria and Bavaria joined him with a considerable army of
Germans, and marching to Spalatro, took ship for Cyprus, and from thence
to Acre.
The whole conduct of the king of Hungary was marked by pusillanimity
and irresolution. He found himself in the Holy Land at the head of a very
efficient army; the Saracens were taken by surprise, and were for some
weeks unprepared to offer any resistance to his arms. He defeated the first
body sent to oppose him, and marched towards Mount Tabor with the
intention of seizing upon an important fortress which the Saracens had
recently constructed. He arrived without impediment at the mount, and
might have easily taken it; but a sudden fit of cowardice came over him,
and he returned to Acre without striking a blow. He very soon afterwards
abandoned the enterprise altogether, and returned to his own country.
Tardy reinforcements arrived at intervals from Europe; and the Duke of
Austria, now the chief leader of the expedition, had still sufficient forces at
his command to trouble the Saracens very seriously. It was resolved by him,
in council with the other chiefs, that the whole energy of the Crusade should
be directed upon Egypt, the seat of the Saracen power in its relationship to
Palestine, and from whence were drawn the continual levies that were
brought against them by the sultan. Damietta, which commanded the river
Nile, and was one of the most important cities of Egypt, was chosen as the
first point of attack. The siege was forthwith commenced, and carried on
with considerable energy, until the Crusaders gained possession of a tower,
which projected into the middle of the stream, and was looked upon as the
very key of the city.
While congratulating themselves upon this success, and wasting in
revelry the time which should have been employed in turning it to further
advantage, they received the news of the death of the wise Sultan
Saphaddin. His two sons, Camhel and Cohreddin, divided his empire
between them. Syria and Palestine fell to the share of Cohreddin, while
Egypt was consigned to the other brother, who had for some time exercised
the functions of lieutenant of that country. Being unpopular among the
Egyptians, they revolted against him, giving the Crusaders a finer
opportunity for making a conquest than they had ever enjoyed before. But,
quarrelsome and licentious as they had been from time immemorial, they
did not see that the favourable moment had come; or seeing, could not
profit by it. While they were revelling or fighting among themselves, under
the walls of Damietta, the revolt was suppressed, and Camhel firmly
established on the throne of Egypt. In conjunction with his brother
Cohreddin, his next care was to drive the Christians from Damietta, and for
upwards of three months they bent all their efforts to throw in supplies to
the besieged, or draw on the besiegers to a general engagement. In neither
were they successful; and the famine in Damietta became so dreadful that
vermin of every description were thought luxuries, and sold for exorbitant
prices. A dead dog became more valuable than a live ox in time of
prosperity. Unwholesome food brought on disease, and the city could hold
out no longer for absolute want of men to defend the walls.
Cohreddin and Camhel were alike interested in the preservation of so
important a position, and, convinced of the certain fate of the city, they
opened a conference with the crusading chiefs, offering to yield the whole
of Palestine to the Christians upon the sole condition of the evacuation of
Egypt. With a blindness and wrong-headedness almost incredible, these
advantageous terms were refused, chiefly through the persuasion of
Cardinal Pelagius, an ignorant and obstinate fanatic, who urged upon the
Duke of Austria and the French and English leaders, that infidels never kept
their word; that their offers were deceptive, and merely intended to betray.
The conferences were brought to an abrupt termination by the Crusaders,
and a last attack made upon the walls of Damietta. The besieged made but
slight resistance, for they had no hope, and the Christians entered the city,
and found, out of seventy thousand people, but three thousand remaining:
so fearful had been the ravages of the twin fiends, plague and famine.
Several months were spent in Damietta. The climate either weakened
the frames or obscured the understandings of the Christians; for, after their
conquest, they lost all energy, and abandoned themselves more
unscrupulously than ever to riot and debauchery. John of Brienne, who, by
right of his wife, was the nominal sovereign of Jerusalem, was so disgusted
with the pusillanimity, arrogance, and dissensions of the chiefs, that he
withdrew entirely from them and retired to Acre. Large bodies also returned
to Europe, and Cardinal Pelagius was left at liberty to blast the whole
enterprise whenever it pleased him. He managed to conciliate John of
Brienne, and marched forward with these combined forces to attack Cairo.
It was only when he had approached within a few hours’ march of that city
that he discovered the inadequacy of his army. He turned back immediately;
but the Nile had risen since his departure; the sluices were opened, and
there was no means of reaching Damietta. In this strait, he sued for the
peace he had formerly spurned, and, happily for himself, found the
generous brothers Camhel and Cohreddin still willing to grant it. Damietta
was soon afterwards given up, and the cardinal returned to Europe. John of
Brienne retired to Acre, to mourn the loss of his kingdom, embittered
against the folly of his pretended friends, who had ruined where they should
have aided him. And thus ended the sixth Crusade.
The seventh was more successful. Frederic II., emperor of Germany,
had often vowed to lead his armies to the defence of Palestine, but was as
often deterred from the journey by matters of more pressing importance.
Cohreddin was a mild and enlightened monarch, and the Christians of Syria
enjoyed repose and toleration under his rule: but John of Brienne was not
willing to lose his kingdom without an effort; and the popes in Europe were
ever willing to embroil the nations for the sake of extending their own
power. No monarch of that age was capable of rendering more effective
assistance than Frederic of Germany. To inspire him with more zeal, it was
proposed that he should wed the young Princess Violante, daughter of John
of Brienne, and heiress of the kingdom of Jerusalem. Frederic consented
with joy and eagerness. The princess was brought from Acre to Rome
without delay, and her marriage celebrated on a scale of great magnificence.
Her father, John of Brienne, abdicated all his rights in favour of his son-in-
law, and Jerusalem had once more a king, who had not only the will, but the
power, to enforce his claims. Preparations for the new Crusade were
immediately commenced, and in the course of six months the emperor was
at the head of a well-disciplined army of sixty thousand men. Matthew Paris
informs us, that an army of the same amount was gathered in England; and
most of the writers upon the Crusades adopt his statement. When John of
Brienne was in England, before his daughter’s marriage with the emperor
was thought of, praying for the aid of Henry III. and his nobles to recover
his lost kingdom, he did not meet with much encouragement. Grafton, in his
Chronicle, says, “he departed again without any great comfort.” But when a
man of more influence in European politics appeared upon the scene, the
English nobles were as ready to sacrifice themselves in the cause as they
had been in the time of Cœur de Lion.
The army of Frederic encamped at Brundusium; but a pestilential
disease having made its appearance among them, their departure was
delayed for several months. In the mean time the Empress Violante died in
childbed. John of Brienne, who had already repented of his abdication, and
was besides incensed against Frederic for many acts of neglect and insult,
no sooner saw the only tie which bound them severed by the death of his
daughter, than he began to bestir himself, and make interest with the pope to
undo what he had done, and regain the honorary crown he had renounced.
Pope Gregory IX., a man of a proud, unconciliating, and revengeful
character, owed the emperor a grudge for many an act of disobedience to
his authority, and encouraged the overtures of John of Brienne more than he
should have done. Frederic, however, despised them both, and, as soon as
his army was convalescent, set sail for Acre. He had not been many days at
sea when he was himself attacked with the malady, and obliged to return to
Otranto, the nearest port. Gregory, who had by this time decided in the
interest of John of Brienne, excommunicated the emperor for returning
from so holy an expedition on any pretext whatever. Frederic at first treated
the excommunication with supreme contempt; but when he got well, he
gave his holiness to understand that he was not to be outraged with
impunity, and sent some of his troops to ravage the papal territories. This,
however, only made the matter worse, and Gregory despatched messengers
to Palestine forbidding the faithful, under severe pains and penalties, to hold
any intercourse with the excommunicated emperor. Thus between them
both, the scheme which they had so much at heart bade fair to be as
effectually ruined as even the Saracens could have wished. Frederic still
continued his zeal in the Crusade, for he was now king of Jerusalem, and
fought for himself, and not for Christendom, or its representative, Pope
Gregory. Hearing that John of Brienne was preparing to leave Europe, he
lost no time in taking his own departure, and arrived safely at Acre. It was
here that he first experienced the evil effects of excommunication. The
Christians of Palestine refused to aid him in any way, and looked with
distrust, if not with abhorrence, upon him. The Templars, Hospitallers, and
other knights, shared at first the general feeling; but they were not men to
yield a blind obedience to a distant potentate, especially when it
compromised their own interests. When, therefore, Frederic prepared to
march upon Jerusalem without them, they joined his banners to a man.
TEMPLAR AND HOSPITALLER.
It is said that, previous to quitting Europe, the German emperor had
commenced a negotiation with the Sultan Camhel for the restoration of the
Holy Land, and that Camhel, who was jealous of the ambition of his brother
Cohreddin, was willing to stipulate to that effect, on condition of being
secured by Frederic in the possession of the more important territory of
Egypt. But before the Crusaders reached Palestine, Camhel was relieved
from all fears by the death of his brother. He nevertheless did not think it
worth while to contest with the Crusaders the barren corner of the earth
which had already been dyed with so much Christian and Saracen blood,
and proposed a truce of three years, only stipulating, in addition, that the
Moslems should be allowed to worship freely in the temple of Jerusalem.
This happy termination did not satisfy the bigoted Christians of Palestine.
The tolerance they sought for themselves, they were not willing to extend to
others, and they complained bitterly of the privilege of free worship
allowed to their opponents. Unmerited good fortune had made them
insolent, and they contested the right of the emperor to become a party to
any treaty, as long as he remained under the ecclesiastical ban. Frederic was
disgusted with his new subjects; but, as the Templars and Hospitallers
remained true to him, he marched to Jerusalem to be crowned. All the
churches were shut against him, and he could not even find a priest to
officiate at his coronation. He had despised the papal authority too long to
quail at it now, when it was so unjustifiably exerted, and, as there was
nobody to crown him, he very wisely crowned himself. He took the royal
diadem from the altar with his own hands, and boldly and proudly placed it
on his brow. No shouts of an applauding populace made the welkin ring; no
hymns of praise and triumph resounded from the ministers of religion; but a
thousand swords started from their scabbards to testify that their owners
would defend the new monarch to the death.
It was hardly to be expected that he would renounce for any long period
the dominion of his native land for the uneasy crown and barren soil of
Palestine. He had seen quite enough of his new subjects before he was six
months among them, and more important interests called him home. John of
Brienne, openly leagued with Pope Gregory against him, was actually
employed in ravaging his territories at the head of a papal army. This
intelligence decided his return. As a preliminary step, he made those who
had contemned his authority feel, to their sorrow, that he was their master.
He then set sail, loaded with the curses of Palestine. And thus ended the
seventh Crusade, which, in spite of every obstacle and disadvantage, had
been productive of more real service to the Holy Land than any that had
gone before; a result solely attributable to the bravery of Frederic and the
generosity of the Sultan Camhel.
Soon after the emperor’s departure a new claimant started for the throne
of Jerusalem, in the person of Alice queen of Cyprus, and half-sister of the
Mary who, by her marriage, had transferred her right to John of Brienne.
The grand military orders, however, clung to Frederic, and Alice was
obliged to withdraw.
So peaceful a termination to the Crusade did not give unmixed pleasure
in Europe. The chivalry of France and England were unable to rest, and
long before the conclusion of the truce, were collecting their armies for an
eighth expedition. In Palestine also the contentment was far from universal.
Many petty Mahomedan states in the immediate vicinity were not parties to
the truce, and harassed the frontier towns incessantly. The Templars, ever
turbulent, waged bitter war with the sultan of Aleppo, and in the end were
almost exterminated. So great was the slaughter among them that Europe
resounded with the sad story of their fate, and many a noble knight took
arms to prevent the total destruction of an order associated with so many
high and inspiring remembrances. Camhel, seeing the preparations that
were making, thought that his generosity had been sufficiently shewn, and
the very day the truce was at an end assumed the offensive, and marching
forward to Jerusalem, took possession of it, after routing the scanty forces
of the Christians. Before this intelligence reached Europe a large body of
Crusaders was on the march, headed by the king of Navarre, the Duke of
Burgundy, the Count de Bretagne, and other leaders. On their arrival, they
learned that Jerusalem had been taken, but that the sultan was dead, and his
kingdom torn by rival claimants to the supreme power. The dissensions of
their foes ought to have made them united, but as in all previous Crusades,
each feudal chief was master of his own host, and acted upon his own
responsibility, and without reference to any general plan. The consequence
was that nothing could be done. A temporary advantage was gained by one
leader, who had no means of improving it; while another was defeated,
without means of retrieving himself. Thus the war lingered till the battle of
Gaza, when the king of Navarre was defeated with great loss, and
compelled to save himself from total destruction by entering into a hard and
oppressive treaty with the emir of Karac.
At this crisis aid arrived from England, commanded by Richard earl of
Cornwall, the namesake of Cœur de Lion, and inheritor of his valour. His
army was strong and full of hope. They had confidence in themselves and in
their leader, and looked like men accustomed to victory. Their coming
changed the aspect of affairs. The new sultan of Egypt was at war with the
sultan of Damascus, and had not forces to oppose two enemies so powerful.
He therefore sent messengers to meet the English earl, offering an exchange
of prisoners and the complete cession of the Holy Land. Richard, who had
not come to fight for the mere sake of fighting, agreed at once to terms so
advantageous, and became the deliverer of Palestine without striking a
blow. The sultan of Egypt then turned his whole force against his Moslem
enemies, and the Earl of Cornwall returned to Europe. Thus ended the
eighth Crusade, the most beneficial of all. Christendom had no further
pretence for sending her fierce levies to the East. To all appearance the holy
wars were at an end: the Christians had entire possession of Jerusalem,
Tripoli, Antioch, Edessa, Acre, Jaffa, and, in fact, of nearly all Judea; and,
could they have been at peace among themselves, they might have
overcome, without great difficulty, the jealousy and hostility of their
neighbours. A circumstance, as unforeseen as it was disastrous, blasted this
fair prospect, and reillumed, for the last time, the fervour and fury of the
Crusades.
Gengis Khan and his successors had swept over Asia like a tropical
storm, overturning in their progress the landmarks of ages. Kingdom after
kingdom was cast down as they issued, innumerable, from the far recesses
of the North and East, and, among others, the empire of Korasmin was
overrun by these all-conquering hordes. The Korasmins, a fierce,
uncivilised race, thus driven from their homes, spread themselves, in their
turn, over the south of Asia with fire and sword, in search of a resting-place.
In their impetuous course they directed themselves towards Egypt, whose
sultan, unable to withstand the swarm that had cast their longing eyes on the
fertile valleys of the Nile, endeavoured to turn them from their course. For
this purpose, he sent emissaries to Barbaquan, their leader, inviting them to
settle in Palestine; and the offer being accepted by the wild horde, they
entered the country before the Christians received the slightest intimation of
their coming. It was as sudden as it was overwhelming. Onwards, like the
simoom, they came, burning and slaying, and were at the walls of Jerusalem
before the inhabitants had time to look round them. They spared neither life
nor property; they slew women and children, and priests at the altar, and
profaned even the graves of those who had slept for ages. They tore down
every vestige of the Christian faith, and committed horrors unparalleled in
the history of warfare. About seven thousand of the inhabitants of Jerusalem
sought safety in retreat; but before they were out of sight, the banner of the
cross was hoisted upon the walls by the savage foe to decoy them back. The
artifice was but too successful. The poor fugitives imagined that help had
arrived from another direction, and turned back to regain their homes.
Nearly the whole of them were massacred, and the streets of Jerusalem ran
with blood.
JAFFA.
The Templars, Hospitallers, and Teutonic knights forgot their long and
bitter animosities, and joined hand in hand to rout out this desolating foe.
They entrenched themselves in Jaffa with all the chivalry of Palestine that
yet remained, and endeavoured to engage the sultans of Emissa and
Damascus to assist them against the common enemy. The aid obtained from
the Moslems amounted at first to only four thousand men, but with these
reinforcements Walter of Brienne, the lord of Jaffa, resolved to give battle
to the Korasmins. The conflict was as deadly as despair on the one side, and
unmitigated ferocity on the other, could make it. It lasted with varying
fortune for two days, when the sultan of Emissa fled to his fortifications,
and Walter of Brienne fell into the enemy’s hands. The brave knight was
suspended by the arms to a cross in sight of the walls of Jaffa, and the
Korasminian leader declared that he should remain in that position until the
city surrendered. Walter raised his feeble voice, not to advise surrender, but
to command his soldiers to hold out to the last. But his gallantry was
unavailing. So great had been the slaughter, that out of the grand array of
knights, there now remained but sixteen Hospitallers, thirty-three Templars,
and three Teutonic cavaliers. These with the sad remnant of the army fled to
Acre, and the Korasmins were masters of Palestine.
The sultans of Syria preferred the Christians to this fierce horde for their
neighbours. Even the sultan of Egypt began to regret the aid he had given to
such barbarous foes, and united with those of Emissa and Damascus to root
them from the land. The Korasmins amounted to but twenty thousand men,
and were unable to resist the determined hostility which encompassed them
on every side. The sultans defeated them in several engagements, and the
peasantry rose up in masses to take vengeance upon them. Gradually their
numbers were diminished. No mercy was shewn them in defeat. Barbaquan
their leader was slain; and after five years of desperate struggles, they were
finally extirpated, and Palestine became once more the territory of the
Mussulmans.
WILLIAM LONGSWORD.
A short time previous to this devastating eruption, Louis IX. fell sick in
Paris, and dreamed in the delirium of his fever that he saw the Christian and
Moslem host fighting before Jerusalem, and the Christians defeated with
great slaughter. The dream made a great impression on his superstitious
mind, and he made a solemn vow, that if ever he recovered his health, he
would take a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. When the news of the
misfortunes of Palestine, and the awful massacres at Jerusalem and Jaffa,
arrived in Europe, St. Louis remembered him of his dream. More persuaded
than ever that it was an intimation direct from heaven, he prepared to take
the cross at the head of his armies, and march to the deliverance of the Holy
Sepulchre. From that moment he doffed the royal mantle of purple and
ermine, and dressed in the sober serge becoming a pilgrim. All his thoughts
were directed to the fulfilment of his design, and although his kingdom
could but ill spare him, he made every preparation to leave it. Pope
Innocent IV. applauded his zeal and afforded him every assistance. He
wrote to Henry III. of England to forward the cause in his dominions, and
called upon the clergy and laity all over Europe to contribute towards it.
William Longsword, the celebrated Earl of Salisbury, took the cross at the
head of a great number of valiant knights and soldiers. But the fanaticism of
the people was not to be awakened either in France or England. Great
armies were raised, but the masses no longer sympathised. Taxation had
been the great cooler of zeal. It was no longer a disgrace even to a knight if
he refused to take the cross. Rutebeuf, a French minstrel, who flourished
about this time (1250), composed a dialogue between a Crusader and a non-
Crusader, which the reader will find translated in Way’s Fabliaux. The
Crusader uses every argument to persuade the non-Crusader to take up
arms, and forsake every thing, in the holy cause; but it is evident from the
greater force of the arguments used by the non-Crusader, that he was the
favourite of the minstrel. To a most urgent solicitation of his friend the
Crusader, he replies:
“I read thee right, thou holdest good
To this same land I straight should hie,
And win it back with mickle blood,
Nor gaine one foot of soil thereby;
While here dejected and forlorn
My wife and babes are left to mourn;
My goodly mansion rudely marred,
All trusted to my dogs to guard.
But I, fair comrade, well I wot
An ancient saw of pregnant wit
Doth bid us keep what we have got;
And troth I mean to follow it.”
This being the general feeling, it is not to be wondered at that Louis IX. was
occupied fully three years in organising his forces, and in making the
necessary preparations for his departure. When all was ready he set sail for
Cyprus, accompanied by his queen, his two brothers, the Counts d’Anjou
and d’Artois, and a long train of the noblest chivalry of France. His third
brother, the Count de Poitiers, remained behind to collect another corps of
Crusaders, and followed him in a few months afterwards. The army united
at Cyprus, and amounted to fifty thousand men, exclusive of the English
Crusaders under William Longsword. Again, a pestilential disease made its
appearance, to which many hundreds fell victims. It was in consequence
found necessary to remain in Cyprus until the spring. Louis then embarked
for Egypt with his whole host; but a violent tempest separated his fleet, and
he arrived before Damietta with only a few thousand men. They were,
however, impetuous and full of hope; and although the Sultan Melick Shah
was drawn up on the shore with a force infinitely superior, it was resolved
to attempt a landing without waiting the arrival of the rest of the army.
Louis himself, in wild impatience, sprang from his boat, and waded on
shore; while his army, inspired by his enthusiastic bravery, followed,
shouting the old war-cry of the first Crusaders, Dieu le veut! Dieu le veut! A
panic seized the Turks. A body of their cavalry attempted to bear down
upon the Crusaders, but the knights fixed their large shields deep in the
sands of the shore, and rested their lances upon them, so that they projected
above, and formed a barrier so imposing, that the Turks, afraid to breast it,
turned round and fairly took to flight. At the moment of this panic, a false
report was spread in the Saracen host, that the sultan had been slain. The
confusion immediately became general—the deroute was complete:
Damietta itself was abandoned, and the same night the victorious Crusaders
fixed their head-quarters in that city. The soldiers who had been separated
from their chief by the tempest arrived shortly afterwards; and Louis was in
a position to justify the hope, not only of the conquest of Palestine, but of
Egypt itself.
But too much confidence proved the bane of his army. They thought, as
they had accomplished so much, that nothing more remained to be done,
and gave themselves up to ease and luxury. When, by the command of
Louis, they marched towards Cairo, they were no longer the same men;
success, instead of inspiring, had unnerved them; debauchery had brought
on disease, and disease was aggravated by the heat of a climate to which
none of them were accustomed. Their progress towards Massoura, on the
road to Cairo, was checked by the Thanisian canal, on the banks of which
the Saracens were drawn up to dispute the passage. Louis gave orders that a
bridge should be thrown across: and the operations commenced under cover
of two cat-castles, or high movable towers. The Saracens soon destroyed
them by throwing quantities of Greek fire, the artillery of that day, upon
them, and Louis was forced to think of some other means of effecting his
design. A peasant agreed, for a considerable bribe, to point out a ford where
the army might wade across, and the Count d’Artois was despatched with
fourteen hundred men to attempt it, while Louis remained to face the
Saracens with the main body of the army. The Count d’Artois got safely
over, and defeated the detachment that had been sent to oppose his landing.
Flushed with the victory, the brave count forgot the inferiority of his
numbers, and pursued the panic-stricken enemy into Massoura. He was now
completely cut off from the aid of his brother Crusaders, which the
Moslems perceiving, took courage and returned upon him, with a force
swollen by the garrison of Massoura, and by reinforcements from the
surrounding districts. The battle now became hand to hand. The Christians
fought with the energy of desperate men, but the continually increasing
numbers of the foe surrounded them completely, and cut off all hope, either
of victory or escape. The Count d’Artois was among the foremost of the
slain; and when Louis arrived to the rescue, the brave advanced-guard was
nearly cut to pieces. Of the fourteen hundred but three hundred remained.
The fury of the battle was now increased threefold. The French king and his
troops performed prodigies of valour, and the Saracens, under the command
of the Emir Ceccidun, fought as if they were determined to exterminate, in
one last decisive effort, the new European swarm that had settled upon their
coast. At the fall of the evening dews the Christians were masters of the
field of Massoura, and flattered themselves that they were the victors. Self-
love would not suffer them to confess that the Saracens had withdrawn, and
not retreated; but their leaders were too wofully convinced that that fatal
field had completed the disorganisation of the Christian army, and that all
hopes of future conquest were at an end.
Impressed with this truth, the Crusaders sued for peace. The sultan
insisted upon the immediate evacuation of Damietta, and that Louis himself
should be delivered as hostage for the fulfilment of the condition. His army
at once refused, and the negotiations were broken off. It was now resolved
to attempt a retreat; but the agile Saracens, now in the front and now in the
rear, rendered it a matter of extreme difficulty, and cut off the stragglers in
great numbers. Hundreds of them were drowned in the Nile; and sickness
and famine worked sad ravages upon those who escaped all other
casualties. Louis himself was so weakened by disease, fatigue, and
discouragement, that he was hardly able to sit upon his horse. In the
confusion of the flight he was separated from his attendants, and left a total
stranger upon the sands of Egypt, sick, weary, and almost friendless. One
knight, Geffry de Sergines, alone attended him, and led him to a miserable
hut in a small village, where for several days he lay in the hourly
expectation of death. He was at last discovered and taken prisoner by the
Saracens, who treated him with all the honour due to his rank and all the
pity due to his misfortunes. Under their care his health rapidly improved,
and the next consideration was that of his ransom.
The Saracens demanded, besides money, the cession of Acre, Tripoli,
and other cities of Palestine. Louis unhesitatingly refused, and conducted
himself with so much pride and courage that the sultan declared he was the
proudest infidel he had ever beheld. After a good deal of haggling, the
sultan agreed to waive these conditions, and a treaty was finally concluded.
The city of Damietta was restored; a truce of ten years agreed upon, and ten
thousand golden bezants paid for the release of Louis and the liberation of
all the captives. Louis then withdrew to Jaffa, and spent two years in putting
that city, and Cesarea, with the other possessions of the Christians in
Palestine, into a proper state of defence. He then returned to his own
country, with great reputation as a saint, but very little as a soldier.
Matthew Paris informs us that, in the year 1250, while Louis was in
Egypt, “thousands of the English were resolved to go to the holy war, had
not the king strictly guarded his ports and kept his people from running out
of doors.” When the news arrived of the reverses and captivity of the
French king, their ardour cooled; and the Crusade was sung of only, but not
spoken of.
In France, a very different feeling was the result. The news of the king’s
capture spread consternation through the country. A fanatic monk of
Citeaux suddenly appeared in the villages, preaching to the people, and
announcing that the Holy Virgin, accompanied by a whole army of saints
and martyrs, had appeared to him, and commanded him to stir up the
shepherds and farm-labourers to the defence of the cross. To them only was
his discourse addressed; and his eloquence was such, that thousands flocked
around him, ready to follow wherever he should lead. The pastures and the
corn-fields were deserted, and the shepherds, or pastoureaux, as they were
termed, became at last so numerous as to amount to upwards of fifty
thousand,—Millot says one hundred thousand men.20 The Queen Blanche,
who governed as regent during the absence of the king, encouraged at first
the armies of the pastoureaux; but they soon gave way to such vile excesses
that the peaceably disposed were driven to resistance. Robbery, murder, and
violation marked their path; and all good men, assisted by the government,
united in putting them down. They were finally dispersed, but not before
three thousand of them had been massacred. Many authors say that the
slaughter was still greater.
The ten years’ truce concluded in 1264, and St. Louis was urged by two
powerful motives to undertake a second expedition for the relief of
Palestine. These were, fanaticism on the one hand, and a desire of retrieving
his military fame on the other, which had suffered more than his parasites
liked to remind him of. The pope, of course, encouraged his design, and
once more the chivalry of Europe began to bestir themselves. In 1268,
Edward, the heir of the English monarchy, announced his determination to
join the Crusade; and the pope (Clement IV.) wrote to the prelates and
clergy to aid the cause by their persuasions and their revenues. In England,
they agreed to contribute a tenth of their possessions; and by a
parliamentary order, a twentieth was taken from the corn and movables of
all the laity at Michaelmas.
In spite of the remonstrances of the few clear-headed statesmen who
surrounded him, urging the ruin that might in consequence fall upon his
then prosperous kingdom, Louis made every preparation for his departure.
The warlike nobility were nothing loath; and in the spring of 1270, the king
set sail with an army of sixty thousand men. He was driven by stress of
weather into Sardinia, and while there, a change in his plans took place.
Instead of proceeding to Acre, as he originally intended, he shaped his
course for Tunis, on the African coast. The king of Tunis had some time
previously expressed himself favourably disposed towards the Christians
and their religion, and Louis, it appears, had hopes of converting him, and
securing his aid against the sultan of Egypt. “What honour would be mine,”
he used to say, “if I could become godfather to this Mussulman king!”
Filled with this idea he landed in Africa, near the site of the city of
Carthage, but found that he had reckoned without his host. The king of
Tunis had no thoughts of renouncing his religion, nor intention of aiding the
Crusaders in any way. On the contrary, he opposed their landing with all the
forces that could be collected on so sudden an emergency. The French,
however, made good their first position, and defeated the Moslems with
considerable loss. They also gained some advantage over the
reinforcements that were sent to oppose them; but an infectious flux
appeared in the army, and put a stop to all future victories. The soldiers died
at the rate of a hundred in a day. The enemy, at the same time, made as great
havoc as the plague. St. Louis himself was one of the first attacked by the
disease. His constitution had been weakened by fatigues, and even before
he left France he was unable to bear the full weight of his armour. It was
soon evident to his sorrowing soldiers that their beloved monarch could not
long survive. He lingered for some days, and died in Carthage in the fifty-
sixth year of his age, deeply regretted by his army and his subjects, and
leaving behind him one of the most singular reputations in history. He is the
model-king of ecclesiastical writers, in whose eyes his very defects became
virtues, because they were manifested in furtherance of their cause. More
unprejudiced historians, while they condemn his fanaticism, admit that he
was endowed with many high and rare qualities; that he was in no one point
behind his age, and in many in advance of it.
His brother, Charles of Anjou, in consequence of a revolution in Sicily,
had become king of that country. Before he heard of the death of Louis, he
had sailed from Messina with large reinforcements. On his landing near
Carthage, he advanced at the head of his army, amid the martial music of
drums and trumpets. He was soon informed how inopportune was his
rejoicing, and shed tears before his whole army, such as no warrior would
have been ashamed to shed. A peace was speedily agreed upon with the
king of Tunis, and the armies of France and Sicily returned to their homes.
SEAL OF EDWARD I.
So little favour had the Crusade found in England, that even the
exertions of the heir to the throne had only collected a small force of fifteen
hundred men. With these few Prince Edward sailed from Dover to
Bourdeaux, in the expectation that he would find the French king in that
city. St. Louis, however, had left a few weeks previously; upon which
Edward followed him to Sardinia, and afterwards to Tunis. Before his
arrival in Africa, St. Louis was no more, and peace had been concluded
between France and Tunis. He determined, however, not to relinquish the
Crusade. Returning to Sicily, he passed the winter in that country, and
endeavoured to augment his little army. In the spring he set sail for
Palestine, and arrived in safety at Acre. The Christians were torn, as usual,
by mutual jealousies and animosities. The two great military orders were as
virulent and as intractable as ever; opposed to each other, and to all the
world. The arrival of Edward had the effect of causing them to lay aside
their unworthy contention, and of uniting heart to heart in one last effort for
the deliverance of their adopted country. A force of six thousand effective
warriors was soon formed to join those of the English prince, and
preparations were made for the renewal of hostilities. The Sultan Bibars or
Bendocdar,21 a fierce Mamluke, who had been placed on the throne by a
bloody revolution, was at war with all his neighbours, and unable, for that
reason, to concentrate his whole strength against them. Edward took
advantage of this, and marching boldly forward to Nazareth, defeated the
Turks and gained possession of that city. This was the whole amount of his
successes. The hot weather engendered disease among his troops, and he
himself, the life and soul of the expedition, fell sick among the first. He had
been ill for some time, and was slowly recovering, when a messenger
desired to speak with him on important matters, and to deliver some
despatches into his own hand. While the prince was occupied in examining
them, the traitorous messenger drew a dagger from his belt and stabbed him
in the breast. The wound fortunately was not deep, and Edward had
regained a portion of his strength. He struggled with the assassin, and put
him to death with his own dagger, at the same time calling loudly for
assistance.22 His attendants came at his call, and found him bleeding
profusely, and ascertained on inspection that the dagger was poisoned.
Means were instantly taken to purify the wound, and an antidote was sent
by the Grand Master of the Templars which removed all danger from the
effects of the poison. Camden, in his history, has adopted the more popular,
and certainly more beautiful version of this story, which says that the
Princess Eleonora, in her love for her gallant husband, sucked the poison
from his wound at the risk of her own life: to use the words of old Fuller, “it
is a pity so pretty a story should not be true; and that so sovereign a remedy
as a woman’s tongue, anointed with the virtue of loving affection,” should
not have performed the good deed.
Edward suspected, and doubtless not without reason, that the assassin
was employed by the sultan of Egypt. But it amounted to suspicion only;
and by the sudden death of the assassin the principal clue to the discovery
of the truth was lost for ever. Edward, on his recovery, prepared to resume
the offensive; but the sultan, embarrassed by the defence of interests which,
for the time being, he considered of more importance, made offers of peace
to the Crusaders. This proof of weakness on the part of the enemy was
calculated to render a man of Edward’s temperament more anxious to
prosecute the war; but he had also other interests to defend. News arrived in
Palestine of the death of his father, King Henry III.; and his presence being
necessary in England, he agreed to the terms of the sultan. These were, that
the Christians should be allowed to retain their possessions in the Holy
Land, and that a truce of ten years should be proclaimed. Edward then set
sail for England; and thus ended the last Crusade.
The after-fate of the Holy Land may be told in a few words. The
Christians, unmindful of their past sufferings and of the jealous neighbours
they had to deal with, first broke the truce by plundering some Egyptian
traders near Margat. The sultan immediately revenged the outrage by taking
possession of Margat, and war once more raged between the nations.
Margat made a gallant defence, but no reinforcements arrived from Europe
to prevent its fall. Tripoli was the next, and other cities in succession, until
at last Acre was the only city of Palestine that remained in possession of the
Christians.
TOMB OF QUEEN ELEANOR.
The Grand Master of the Templars collected together his small and
devoted band, and, with the trifling aid afforded by the King of Cyprus,
prepared to defend to the death the last possession of his order. Europe was
deaf to his cry for aid, the numbers of the foe were overwhelming, and
devoted bravery was of no avail. In that disastrous siege the Christians were
all but exterminated. The king of Cyprus fled when he saw that resistance
was vain, and the Grand Master fell at the head of his knights, pierced with
a hundred wounds. Seven Templars, and as many Hospitallers, alone
escaped from the dreadful carnage. The victorious Moslems then set fire to
the city, and the rule of the Christians in Palestine was brought to a close for
ever.
This intelligence spread alarm and sorrow among the clergy of Europe,
who endeavoured to rouse once more the energy and enthusiasm of the
nations in the cause of the Holy Land. But the popular mania had run its
career; the spark of zeal had burned its appointed time, and was never again
to be re-illumined. Here and there a solitary knight announced his
determination to take up arms, and now and then a king gave cold
encouragement to the scheme; but it dropped almost as soon as spoken of,
to be renewed again, still more feebly, at some longer interval.
Now what was the grand result of all these struggles? Europe expended
millions of her treasures, and the blood of two millions of her children; and
a handful of quarrelsome knights retained possession of Palestine for about
one hundred years! Even had Christendom retained it to this day, the
advantage, if confined to that, would have been too dearly purchased. But
notwithstanding the fanaticism that originated, and the folly that conducted
them, the Crusades were not productive of unmitigated evil. The feudal
chiefs became better members of society by coming in contact, in Asia,
with a civilisation superior to their own; the people secured some small
instalments of their rights; kings, no longer at war with their nobility, had
time to pass some good laws; the human mind learned some little wisdom
from hard experience, and, casting off the slough of superstition in which
the Roman clergy had so long enveloped it, became prepared to receive the
seeds of the approaching Reformation. Thus did the all-wise Disposer of
events bring good out of evil, and advance the civilisation and ultimate
happiness of the nations of the West by means of the very fanaticism that
had led them against the East. But the whole subject is one of absorbing
interest, and, if carried fully out in all its bearings, would consume more
space than the plan of this work will allow. The philosophic student will
draw his own conclusions; and he can have no better field for the exercise
of his powers than this European madness—its advantages and
disadvantages, its causes and results.
ARRAS.
The Witch Mania
Table of Contents
What wrath of gods, or wicked influence
Of tears, conspiring wretched men t’ afflict,
Hath pour’d on earth this noyous pestilence
That mortal minds doth inwardly infect
With love of blindness and of ignorance?
Spencer’s Tears of the Muses.
Countrymen. Hang her! beat her! kill her!
Justice. How now? Forbear this violence!
Mother Sawyer. A crew of villains—a knot of bloody hangmen!
set to torment me! I know not why.
Justice. Alas, neighbour Banks! are you a ringleader in
mischief? Fie! to abuse an aged woman!
Banks. Woman! a she hell-cat, a witch! To prove her one, we
no sooner set fire on the thatch of her house, but in she
came running, as if the devil had sent her in a barrel of
gunpowder.
Ford’s Witch of Edmonton.
The belief that disembodied spirits may be permitted to revisit this world
has its foundation upon that sublime hope of immortality which is at once
the chief solace and greatest triumph of our reason. Even if revelation did
not teach us, we feel that we have that within us which shall never die; and
all our experience of this life but makes us cling the more fondly to that one
repaying hope. But in the early days of “little knowledge” this grand belief
became the source of a whole train of superstitions, which, in their turn,
became the fount from whence flowed a deluge of blood and horror.
Europe, for a period of two centuries and a half, brooded upon the idea, not
only that parted spirits walked the earth to meddle in the affairs of men, but
that men had power to summon evil spirits to their aid to work woe upon
their fellows. An epidemic terror seized upon the nations; no man thought
himself secure, either in his person or possessions, from the machinations of
the devil and his agents. Every calamity that befell him he attributed to a
witch. If a storm arose and blew down his barn, it was witchcraft; if his
cattle died of a murrain—if disease fastened upon his limbs, or death
entered suddenly and snatched a beloved face from his hearth—they were
not visitations of Providence, but the works of some neighbouring hag,
whose wretchedness or insanity caused the ignorant to raise their finger and
point at her as a witch. The word was upon every body’s tongue. France,
Italy, Germany, England, Scotland, and the far north successively ran mad
upon this subject, and for a long series of years furnished their tribunals
with so many trials for witchcraft, that other crimes were seldom or never
spoken of. Thousands upon thousands of unhappy persons fell victims to
this cruel and absurd delusion. In many cities of Germany, as will be shewn
more fully in its due place hereafter, the average number of executions for
this pretended crime was six hundred annually, or two every day, if we
leave out the Sundays, when it is to be supposed that even this madness
refrained from its work.
A misunderstanding of the famous text of the Mosaic law, “Thou shalt
not suffer a witch to live,” no doubt led many conscientious men astray,
whose superstition, warm enough before, wanted but a little corroboration
to blaze out with desolating fury. In all ages of the world men have tried to
hold converse with superior beings, and to pierce by their means the secrets
of futurity. In the time of Moses, it is evident that there were impostors who
trafficked upon the credulity of mankind, and insulted the supreme majesty
of the true God by pretending to the power of divination. Hence the law
which Moses, by Divine command, promulgated against these criminals;
but it did not follow, as the superstitious monomaniacs of the middle ages
imagined, that the Bible established the existence of the power of divination
by its edicts against those who pretended to it. From the best authorities, it
appears that the Hebrew word, which has been rendered venefica and witch,
means a poisoner and divineress, a dabbler in spells, or fortune-teller. The
modern witch was a very different character, and joined to her pretended
power of foretelling future events that of working evil upon the life, limbs,
and possessions of mankind. This power was only to be acquired by an
express compact, signed in blood, with the devil himself, by which the
wizard or witch renounced baptism, and sold his or her immortal soul to the
evil one, without any saving clause of redemption.
There are so many wondrous appearances in nature for which science
and philosophy cannot even now account, that it is not surprising that, when
natural laws were still less understood, men should have attributed to
supernatural agency every appearance which they could not otherwise
explain. The merest tyro now understands various phenomena which the
wisest of old could not fathom. The schoolboy knows why, upon high
mountains, there should on certain occasions appear three or four suns in
the firmament at once, and why the figure of a traveller upon one eminence
should be reproduced, inverted and of a gigantic stature, upon another. We
all know the strange pranks which imagination can play in certain diseases;
that the hypochondriac can see visions and spectres; and that there have
been cases in which men were perfectly persuaded that they were teapots.
Science has lifted up the veil, and rolled away all the fantastic horrors in
which our forefathers shrouded these and similar cases. The man who now
imagines himself a wolf is sent to the hospital instead of to the stake, as in
the days of the witch mania; and earth, air, and sea are unpeopled of the
grotesque spirits that were once believed to haunt them.
Before entering further into the history of Witchcraft, it may be as well
if we consider the absurd impersonation of the evil principle formed by the
monks in their legends. We must make acquaintance with the primum
mobile, and understand what sort of a personage it was who gave the
witches, in exchange for their souls, the power to torment their fellow-
creatures. The popular notion of the devil was, that he was a large, ill-
formed, hairy sprite, with horns, a long tail, cloven feet, and dragon’s
wings. In this shape he was constantly brought on the stage by the monks in
their early “miracles” and “mysteries.” In these representations he was an
important personage, and answered the purpose of the clown in the modern
pantomime. The great fun for the people was to see him well belaboured by
the saints with clubs or cudgels, and to hear him howl with pain as he
limped off, maimed by the blow of some vigorous anchorite. St. Dunstan
generally served him the glorious trick for which he is renowned, catching
hold of his nose with a pair of red-hot pincers, till
“Rocks and distant dells resounded with his cries.”
Some of the saints spat in his face, to his very great annoyance; and others
chopped pieces off of his tail, which, however, always grew on again. This
was paying him in his own coin, and amused the populace mightily, for they
all remembered the scurvy tricks he had played them and their forefathers.
It was believed that he endeavoured to trip people up by laying his long
invisible tail in their way, and giving it a sudden whisk when their legs were
over it;—that he used to get drunk, and swear like a trooper, and be so
mischievous in his cups as to raise tempests and earthquakes, to destroy the
fruits of the earth, and the barns and homesteads of true believers;—that he
used to run invisible spits into people by way of amusing himself in the
long winter evenings, and to proceed to taverns and regale himself with the
best, offering in payment pieces of gold which, on the dawn of the
following morning, invariably turned into slates. Sometimes, disguised as a
large drake, he used to lurk among the bulrushes, and frighten the weary
traveller out of his wits by his awful quack. The reader will remember the
lines of Burns in his address to the “De’il,” which so well express the
popular notion on this point:
“Ae dreary, windy, winter night,
The stars shot down wi’ sklentin light,
Wi’ you mysel, I got a fright
Ayont the lough;
Ye, like a rash-bush, stood in sight
Wi’ waving sough.
The cudgel in my nieve did shake,
Each bristled hair stood like a stake,
When wi’ an eldritch stour, ‘quaick! quaick!’
Among the springs
Awa’ ye squattered, like a drake,
On whistling wings.”
In all the stories circulated and believed about him, he was represented
as an ugly, petty, mischievous spirit, who rejoiced in playing off all manner
of fantastic tricks upon poor humanity. Milton seems to have been the first
who succeeded in giving any but a ludicrous description of him. The
sublime pride, which is the quintessence of evil, was unconceived before
his time. All other limners made him merely grotesque, but Milton made
him awful. In this the monks shewed themselves but miserable romancers;
for their object undoubtedly was to represent the fiend as terrible as
possible. But there was nothing grand about their Satan; on the contrary, he
was a low, mean devil, whom it was easy to circumvent, and fine fun to
play tricks with. But, as is well and eloquently remarked by a modern
writer,23 the subject has also its serious side. An Indian deity, with its wild
distorted shape and grotesque attitude, appears merely ridiculous when
separated from its accessories and viewed by daylight in a museum; but
restore it to the darkness of its own hideous temple, bring back to our
recollection the victims that have bled upon its altar or been crushed
beneath its car, and our sense of the ridiculous subsides into aversion and
horror. So, while the superstitious dreams of former times are regarded as
mere speculative insanities, we may be for a moment amused with the wild
incoherencies of the patients; but when we reflect that out of these hideous
misconceptions of the principle of evil arose the belief in witchcraft—that
this was no dead faith, but one operating on the whole being of society,
urging on the wisest and the mildest to deeds of murder, or cruelties
scarcely less than murder—that the learned and the beautiful, young and
old, male and female, were devoted by its influence to the stake and the
scaffold—every feeling disappears, except that of astonishment that such
things could be, and humiliation at the thought that the delusion was as
lasting as it was universal.
Besides this chief personage, there was an infinite number of inferior
demons, who played conspicuous parts in the creed of witchcraft. The pages
of Bekker, Leloyer, Bodin, Delrio, and De Lancre, abound with descriptions
of the qualities of these imps, and the functions which were assigned them.
From these authors,—three of whom were commissioners for the trial of
witches, and who wrote from the confessions made by the supposed
criminals and the evidence delivered against them,—and from the more
recent work of M. Jules Garinet, the following summary of the creed has
been, with great pains, extracted. The student who is desirous of knowing
more is referred to the works in question; he will find enough in every leaf
to make his blood curdle with shame and horror: but the purity of these
pages shall not be soiled by any thing so ineffably humiliating and
disgusting as a complete exposition of them; what is here culled will be a
sufficient sample of the popular belief, and the reader would but lose time
who should seek in the writings of the demonologists for more ample
details. He will gain nothing by lifting the veil which covers their
unutterable obscenities, unless, like Sterne, he wishes to gather fresh
evidence of “what a beast man is.” In that case, he will find plenty there to
convince him that the beast would be libelled by the comparison.
It was thought that the earth swarmed with millions of demons of both
sexes, many of whom, like the human race, traced their lineage up to Adam,
who after the fall was led astray by devils, assuming the forms of beautiful
women to deceive him. These demons “increased and multiplied” among
themselves with the most extraordinary rapidity. Their bodies were of the
thin air, and they could pass through the hardest substances with the
greatest ease. They had no fixed residence or abiding place, but were tossed
to and fro in the immensity of space. When thrown together in great
multitudes, they excited whirlwinds in the air and tempests in the waters,
and took delight in destroying the beauty of nature and the monuments of
the industry of man. Although they increased among themselves like
ordinary creatures, their numbers were daily augmented by the souls of
wicked men, of children still-born, of women who died in childbed, and of
persons killed in duels. The whole air was supposed to be full of them, and
many unfortunate men and women drew them by thousands into their
mouths and nostrils at every inspiration; and the demons, lodging in their
bowels or other parts of their bodies, tormented them with pains and
diseases of every kind, and sent them frightful dreams. St. Gregory of Nice
relates a story of a nun who forgot to say her benedicite and make the sign
of the cross before she sat down to supper, and who in consequence
swallowed a demon concealed among the leaves of a lettuce. Most persons
said the number of these demons was so great that they could not be
counted, but Wierus asserted that they amounted to no more than seven
millions four hundred and five thousand nine hundred and twenty-six; and
that they were divided into seventy-two companies or battalions, to each of
which there was a prince or captain. They could assume any shape they
pleased. When they were male, they were called incubi; and when female,
succubi. They sometimes made themselves hideous; and at other times they
assumed shapes of such transcendent loveliness, that mortal eyes never saw
beauty to compete with theirs.
Although the devil and his legions could appear to mankind at any time,
it was generally understood that he preferred the night between Friday and
Saturday. If Satan himself appeared in human shape, he was never perfectly
and in all respects like a man. He was either too black or too white, too
large or too small, or some of his limbs were out of proportion to the rest of
his body. Most commonly his feet were deformed, and he was obliged to
curl up and conceal his tail in some part of his habiliments; for, take what
shape he would, he could not get rid of that encumbrance. He sometimes
changed himself into a tree or a river; and upon one occasion he
transformed himself into a barrister, as we learn from Wierus, book iv.
chapter 9. In the reign of Philippe le Bel, he appeared to a monk in the
shape of a dark man riding a tall black horse, then as a friar, afterwards as
an ass and finally as a coach-wheel. Instances are not rare in which both he
and his inferior demons have taken the form of handsome young men, and,
successfully concealing their tails, have married beautiful young women,
who have had children by them. Such children were easily recognisable by
their continual shrieking, by their requiring five nurses to suckle them, and
by their never growing fat.
All these demons were at the command of any individual who would
give up his immortal soul to the prince of evil for the privilege of enjoying
their services for a stated period. The wizard or witch could send them to
execute the most difficult missions: whatever the witch commanded was
performed, except it was a good action, in which case the order was
disobeyed, and evil worked upon herself instead.
At intervals, according to the pleasure of Satan, there was a general
meeting of the demons and all the witches. This meeting was called the
Sabbath, from its taking place on the Saturday, or immediately after
midnight on Fridays. These sabbaths were sometimes held for one district,
sometimes for another, and once at least every year it was held on the
Brocken, or among other high mountains, as a general sabbath of the fiends
for the whole of Christendom.
The devil generally chose a place where four roads met as the scene of
this assembly, or if that was not convenient, the neighbourhood of a lake.
Upon this spot nothing would ever afterwards grow, as the hot feet of the
demons and witches burnt the principle of fecundity from the earth, and
rendered it barren for ever. When orders had been once issued for the
meeting of the sabbath, all the wizards and witches who failed to attend it
were lashed by demons with a rod made of serpents or scorpions, as a
punishment for their inattention or want of punctuality.
In France and England the witches were supposed to ride uniformly
upon broomsticks; but in Italy and Spain, the devil himself, in the shape of
a goat, used to transport them on his back, which lengthened or shortened
according to the number of witches he was desirous of accommodating. No
witch, when proceeding to the sabbath, could get out by a door or window,
were she to try ever so much. Their general mode of ingress was by the
keyhole, and of egress by the chimney, up which they flew, broom and all,
with the greatest ease. To prevent the absence of the witches from being
noticed by their neighbours, some inferior demon was commanded to
assume their shapes and lie in their beds, feigning illness, until the sabbath
was over.
When all the wizards and witches had arrived at the place of
rendezvous, the infernal ceremonies of the sabbath began. Satan, having
assumed his favourite shape of a large he-goat, with a face in front and
another in his haunches, took his seat upon a throne; and all present, in
succession, paid their respects to him, and kissed him in his face behind.
This done, he appointed a master of the ceremonies, in company with
whom he made a personal examination of all the wizards and witches, to
see whether they had the secret mark about them by which they were
stamped as the devil’s own. This mark was always insensible to pain. Those
who had not yet been marked, received the mark from the master of the
ceremonies, the devil at the same time bestowing nicknames upon them.
This done, they all began to sing and dance in the most furious manner,
until some one arrived who was anxious to be admitted into their society.
They were then silent for a while, until the new-comer had denied his
salvation, kissed the devil, spat upon the Bible, and sworn obedience to him
in all things. They then began dancing again with all their might, and
singing these words,
“Alegremos, Alegremos!
Que gente va tenemos!”
In the course of an hour or two they generally became wearied of this
violent exercise, and then they all sat down and recounted the evil deeds
they had done since their last meeting. Those who had not been malicious
and mischievous enough towards their fellow-creatures, received personal
chastisement from Satan himself, who flogged them with thorns or
scorpions till they were covered with blood, and unable to sit or stand.
When this ceremony was concluded, they were all amused by a dance of
toads. Thousands of these creatures sprang out of the earth, and standing on
their hind legs, danced, while the devil played the bagpipes or the trumpet.
These toads were all endowed with the faculty of speech, and entreated the
witches to reward them with the flesh of unbaptised babes for their
exertions to give them pleasure. The witches promised compliance. The
devil bade them remember to keep their word; and then stamping his foot,
caused all the toads to sink into the earth in an instant. The place being thus
cleared, preparation was made for the banquet, where all manner of
disgusting things were served up and greedily devoured by the demons and
witches; although the latter were sometimes regaled with choice meats and
expensive wines from golden plates and crystal goblets; but they were never
thus favoured unless they had done an extraordinary number of evil deeds
since the last period of meeting.
After the feast, they began dancing again; but such as had no relish for
any more exercise in that way, amused themselves by mocking the holy
sacrament of baptism. For this purpose, the toads were again called up, and
sprinkled with filthy water; the devil making the sign of the cross, and all
the witches calling out, “In nomine Patricâ, Aragueaco Petrica, agora!
agora! Valentia, jouando goure gaits goustia!” which meant, “In the name
of Patrick, Petrick of Aragon, now, now, all our ills are over!”
When the devil wished to be particularly amused, he made the witches
strip off their clothes and dance before him, each with a cat tied round her
neck, and another dangling from her body in form of a tail. When the cock
crew, they all disappeared, and the sabbath was ended.
This is a summary of the belief which prevailed for many centuries
nearly all over Europe, and which is far from eradicated even at this day. It
was varied in some respects in several countries, but the main points were
the same in France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Spain, and the far North
of Europe.
The early annals of France abound with stories of supposed sorcery, but
it was not until the time of Charlemagne that the crime acquired any great
importance. “This monarch,” says M. Jules Garinet,24 “had several times
given orders that all necromancers, astrologers, and witches should be
driven from his states; but as the number of criminals augmented daily, he
found it necessary at last to resort to severer measures. In consequence, he
published several edicts, which may be found at length in the Capitulaire de
Baluse. By these, every sort of magic, enchantment, and witchcraft was
forbidden; and the punishment of death decreed against those who in any
way evoked the devil, compounded love-philters, afflicted either man or
woman with barrenness, troubled the atmosphere, excited tempests,
destroyed the fruits of the earth, dried up the milk of cows, or tormented
their fellow-creatures with sores and diseases. All persons found guilty of
exercising these execrable arts were to be executed immediately upon
conviction, that the earth might be rid of the burden and curse of their
presence; and those even who consulted them might also be punished with
death.”25
After this time, prosecutions for witchcraft are continually mentioned,
especially by the French historians. It was a crime imputed with so much
ease, and repelled with so much difficulty, that the powerful, whenever they
wanted to ruin the weak, and could fix no other imputation upon them, had
only to accuse them of witchcraft to ensure their destruction. Instances in
which this crime was made the pretext for the most violent persecution,
both of individuals and of communities, whose real offences were purely
political or religious, must be familiar to every reader. The extermination of
the Stedinger in 1234, of the Templars from 1307 to 1313, the execution of
Joan of Arc in 1429, and the unhappy scenes of Arras in 1459, are the most
prominent. The first of these is perhaps the least known, but is not among
the least remarkable. The following account, from Dr. Kortüm’s interesting
history26 of the republican confederacies of the middle ages, will shew the
horrible convenience of imputations of witchcraft when royal or priestly
wolves wanted a pretext for a quarrel with the sheep.
The Frieslanders, inhabiting the district from the Weser to the
Zuydersee, had long been celebrated for their attachment to freedom, and
their successful struggles in its defence. As early as the eleventh century
they had formed a general confederacy against the encroachments of the
Normans and the Saxons, which was divided into seven seelands, holding
annually a diet under a large oak-tree at Aurich, near the Upstalboom. Here
they managed their own affairs, without the control of the clergy and
ambitious nobles who surrounded them, to the great scandal of the latter.
They already had true notions of a representative government. The deputies
of the people levied the necessary taxes, deliberated on the affairs of the
community, and performed, in their simple and patriarchal manner, nearly
all the functions of the representative assemblies of the present day. Finally,
the Archbishop of Bremen, together with the Count of Oldenburg and other
neighbouring potentates, formed a league against that section of the
Frieslanders known by the name of the Stedinger, and succeeded, after
harassing them and sowing dissensions among them for many years, in
bringing them under the yoke. But the Stedinger, devotedly attached to their
ancient laws, by which they had attained a degree of civil and religious
liberty very uncommon in that age, did not submit without a violent
struggle. They arose in insurrection in the year 1204, in defence of the
ancient customs of their country, refused to pay taxes to the feudal chiefs or
tithes to the clergy—who had forced themselves into their peaceful retreats
—and drove out many of their oppressors. For a period of eight-and-twenty
years the brave Stedinger continued the struggle single-handed against the
forces of the Archbishops of Bremen and the Counts of Oldenburg, and
destroyed, in the year 1232, the strong castle of Slutterberg, near
Delmenhorst, built by the latter nobleman as a position from which he could
send out his marauders to plunder and destroy the possessions of the
peasantry.
The invincible courage of these poor people proving too strong for their
oppressors to cope with by the ordinary means of warfare, the Archbishop
of Bremen applied to Pope Gregory IX. for his spiritual aid against them.
That prelate entered cordially into the cause, and launching forth his
anathema against the Stedinger as heretics and witches, encouraged all true
believers to assist in their extermination. A large body of thieves and
fanatics broke into their country in the year 1233, killing and burning
wherever they went, and not sparing either women or children, the sick or
the aged, in their rage. The Stedinger, however, rallied in great force, routed
their invaders, and killed in battle their leader, Count Burckhardt of
Oldenburg, with many inferior chieftains.
Again the pope was applied to, and a crusade against the Stedinger was
preached in all that part of Germany. The pope wrote to all the bishops and
leaders of the faithful an exhortation to arm, to root out from the land those
abominable witches and wizards. “The Stedinger,” said his holiness,
“seduced by the devil, have abjured all the laws of God and man, slandered
the Church, insulted the holy sacraments, consulted witches to raise evil
spirits, shed blood like water, taken the lives of priests, and concocted an
infernal scheme to propagate the worship of the devil, whom they adore
under the name of Asmodi. The devil appears to them in different shapes,—
sometimes as a goose or a duck, and at others in the figure of a pale black-
eyed youth, with a melancholy aspect, whose embrace fills their hearts with
eternal hatred against the holy Church of Christ. This devil presides at their
sabbaths, when they all kiss him and dance around him. He then envelopes
them in total darkness, and they all, male and female, give themselves up to
the grossest and most disgusting debauchery.”
In consequence of these letters of the pope, the emperor of Germany,
Frederic II., also pronounced his ban against them. The Bishops of
Ratzebourg, Lubeck, Osnabrück, Munster, and Minden took up arms to
exterminate them, aided by the Duke of Brabant, the Counts of Holland, of
Clêves, of the Mark, of Oldenburg, of Egmond, of Diest, and many other
powerful nobles. An army of forty thousand men was soon collected, which
marched, under the command of the Duke of Brabant, into the country of
the Stedinger. The latter mustered vigorously in defence of their lives and
liberties, but could raise no greater force, including every man capable of
bearing arms, than eleven thousand men to cope against the overwhelming
numbers of their foe. They fought with the energy of despair, but all in vain.
Eight thousand of them were slain on the field of battle; the whole race was
exterminated; and the enraged conquerors scoured the country in all
directions, slew the women and children and old men, drove away the
cattle, fired the woods and cottages, and made a total waste of the land.
PHILIP IV.
Just as absurd and effectual was the charge brought against the Templars
in 1307, when they had rendered themselves obnoxious to the potentates
and prelacy of Christendom. Their wealth, their power, their pride, and their
insolence had raised up enemies on every side; and every sort of accusation
was made against them, but failed to work their overthrow, until the terrible
cry of witchcraft was let loose upon them. This effected its object, and the
Templars were extirpated. They were accused of having sold their souls to
the devil, and of celebrating all the infernal mysteries of the witches’
sabbath. It was pretended that, when they admitted a novice into their order,
they forced him to renounce his salvation and curse Jesus Christ; that they
then made him submit to many unholy and disgusting ceremonies, and
forced him to kiss the superior on the cheek, the navel, and the breech, and
spit three times upon a crucifix; that all the members were forbidden to
have connexion with women, but might give themselves up without
restraint to every species of unmentionable debauchery; that when by any
mischance a Templar infringed this order, and a child was born, the whole
order met, and tossed it about like a shuttlecock from one to the other until
it expired; that they then roasted it by a slow fire, and with the fat which
trickled from it anointed the hair and beard of a large image of the devil. It
was also said that when one of the knights died, his body was burnt into a
powder, and then mixed with wine and drunk by every member of the order.
Philip IV., who, to exercise his own implacable hatred, invented, in all
probability, the greater part of these charges, issued orders for the
immediate arrest of all the Templars in his dominions. The pope afterwards
took up the cause with almost as much fervour as the king of France; and in
every part of Europe the Templars were thrown into prison, and their goods
and estates confiscated. Hundreds of them, when put to the rack, confessed
even the most preposterous of the charges against them, and by so doing
increased the popular clamour and the hopes of their enemies. It is true that,
when removed from the rack, they denied all they had previously
confessed; but this circumstance only increased the outcry, and was
numbered as an additional crime against them. They were considered in a
worse light than before, and condemned forthwith to the flames as relapsed
heretics. Fifty-nine of these unfortunate victims were all burned together by
a slow fire in a field in the suburbs of Paris, protesting to the very last
moment of their lives their innocence of the crimes imputed to them, and
refusing to accept of pardon upon condition of acknowledging themselves
guilty. Similar scenes were enacted in the provinces; and for four years
hardly a month passed without witnessing the execution of one or more of
these unhappy men. Finally, in 1313, the last scene of this tragedy closed by
the burning of the Grand-Master, Jacques de Molay, and his companion
Guy, the commander of Normandy. Any thing more atrocious it is
impossible to conceive,—disgraceful alike to the monarch who originated,
the pope who supported, and the age which tolerated the monstrous iniquity.
That the malice of a few could invent such a charge is a humiliating thought
for the lover of his species; but that millions of mankind should credit it is
still more so.
The execution of Joan of Arc is the next most notorious example which
history affords us of the imputation of witchcraft against a political enemy.
Instances of similar persecution, in which this crime was made the pretext
for the gratification of political or religious hatred, might be multiplied to a
great extent. But it is better to proceed at once to the consideration of the
bull of Pope Innocent, the torch that set fire to the long-laid train, and
caused so fearful an explosion over the Christian world. It will be
necessary, however, to go back for some years anterior to that event, the
better to understand the motives that influenced the Church in the
promulgation of that fearful document.
Towards the close of the fourteenth and beginning of the fifteenth
century, many witches were burned in different parts of Europe. As a
natural consequence of the severe persecution, the crime, or the pretenders
to it, increased. Those who found themselves accused and threatened with
the penalties, if they happened to be persons of a bad and malicious
disposition, wished they had the power imputed to them, that they might be
revenged upon their persecutors. Numerous instances are upon record of
half-crazed persons being found muttering the spells which were supposed
to raise the evil one. When religion and law alike recognised the crime, it is
no wonder that the weak in reason and the strong in imagination, especially
when they were of a nervous temperament, fancied themselves endued with
the terrible powers of which all the world was speaking. The belief of their
neighbours did not lag behind their own, and execution was the speedy
consequence.
JOAN OF ARC.
As the fear of witchcraft increased, the Catholic clergy strove to fix the
imputation of it upon those religious sects, the pioneers of the Reformation,
who began about this time to be formidable to the Church of Rome. If a
charge of heresy could not ensure their destruction, that of sorcery and
witchcraft never failed. In the year 1459, a devoted congregation of the
Waldenses at Arras, who used to repair at night to worship God in their own
manner in solitary places, fell victims to an accusation of sorcery. It was
rumoured in Arras that in the desert places to which they retired the devil
appeared before them in human form, and read from a large book his laws
and ordinances, to which they all promised obedience; that he then
distributed money and food among them, to bind them to his service, which
done, they gave themselves up to every species of lewdness and
debauchery. Upon these rumours several creditable persons in Arras were
seized and imprisoned, together with a number of decrepit and idiotic old
women. The rack, that convenient instrument for making the accused
confess any thing, was of course put in requisition. Monstrelet, in his
chronicle, says that they were tortured until some of them admitted the truth
of the whole accusations, and said, besides, that they had seen and
recognised in their nocturnal assemblies many persons of rank; many
prelates, seigneurs, governors of bailliages, and mayors of cities, being such
names as the examiners had themselves suggested to the victims. Several
who had been thus informed against were thrown into prison, and so
horribly tortured, that reason fled, and in their ravings of pain they also
confessed their midnight meetings with the devil, and the oaths they had
taken to serve him. Upon these confessions judgment was pronounced. The
poor old women, as usual in such cases, were hanged and burned in the
market-place; the more wealthy delinquents were allowed to escape upon
payment of large sums. It was soon after universally recognised that these
trials had been conducted in the most odious manner, and that the judges
had motives of private vengeance against many of the more influential
persons who had been implicated. The parliament of Paris afterwards
declared the sentence illegal, and the judges iniquitous; but its arrêt was too
late to be of service even to those who had paid the fine, or to punish the
authorities who had misconducted themselves, for it was not delivered until
thirty-two years after the executions had taken place.
In the mean time, accusations of witchcraft spread rapidly in France,
Italy, and Germany. Strange to say, that although in the first instance chiefly
directed against heretics, the latter were as firm believers in the crime as
even the Catholics themselves. In after times we also find that the Lutherans
and Calvinists became greater witch-burners than ever the Romanists had
been, so deeply was the prejudice rooted. Every other point of belief was in
dispute, but that was considered by every sect to be as well established as
the authenticity of the Scriptures or the existence of a God.
But at this early period of the epidemic the persecutions were directed
by the heads of the Catholic Church. The spread of heresy betokened, it was
thought, the coming of Antichrist. Florimond, in his work concerning
Antichrist, exposed the secret of these prosecutions. He says: “All who have
afforded us some signs of the approach of Antichrist agree that the increase
of sorcery and witchcraft is to distinguish the melancholy period of his
advent; and was ever age so afflicted as ours? The seats destined for
criminals in our courts of justice are blackened with persons accused of this
guilt. There are not judges enough to try them. Our dungeons are gorged
with them. No day passes that we do not render our tribunals bloody by the
dooms which we pronounce, or in which we do not return to our homes
discountenanced and terrified at the horrible confessions which we have
heard. And the devil is accounted so good a master, that we cannot commit
so great a number of his slaves to the flames but what there shall arise from
their ashes a sufficient number to supply their place.”
Florimond here spoke the general opinion of the Church of Rome; but it
never suggested itself to the mind of any person engaged in these trials, that
if it were indeed a devil who raised up so many new witches to fill the
places of those consumed, it was no other than one in their own employ—
the devil of persecution. But so it was. The more they burned, the more they
found to burn, until it became a common prayer with women in the humbler
walks of life, that they might never live to grow old. It was sufficient to be
aged, poor, and half-crazed, to ensure death at the stake or the scaffold.
GATE OF CONSTANCE.
In the year 1487 there was a severe storm in Switzerland, which laid
waste the country for four miles around Constance. Two wretched old
women, whom the popular voice had long accused of witchcraft, were
arrested on the preposterous charge of having raised the tempest. The rack
was displayed, and the two poor creatures were extended upon it. In reply to
various questions from their tormentors, they owned in their agony that they
were in the constant habit of meeting the devil; that they had sold their
souls to him; and that at their command he had raised the tempest. Upon
this insane and blasphemous charge they were condemned to die. In the
criminal registers of Constance there stands against the name of each the
simple but significant phrase, “convicta et combusta.”
This case and hundreds of others were duly reported to the ecclesiastical
powers. There happened at that time to be a pontiff at the head of the
Church who had given much of his attention to the subject of witchcraft,
and who, with the intention of rooting out the supposed crime, did more to
increase it than any other man that ever lived. John Baptist Cibo, elected to
the papacy in 1485, under the designation of Innocent VIII., was sincerely
alarmed at the number of witches, and launched forth his terrible manifesto
against them. In his celebrated bull of 1488, he called the nations of Europe
to the rescue of the Church of Christ upon earth, imperilled by the arts of
Satan, and set forth the horrors that had reached his ears; how that numbers
of both sexes had intercourse with the infernal fiends; how by their
sorceries they afflicted both man and beast; how they blighted the marriage-
bed, destroyed the births of women and the increase of cattle; and how they
blasted the corn on the ground, the grapes of the vineyard, the fruits of the
trees, and the herbs of the field. In order that criminals so atrocious might
no longer pollute the earth, he appointed inquisitors in every country, armed
with the apostolic power to convict and punish.
It was now that the Witch Mania, properly so called, may be said to
have fairly commenced. Immediately a class of men sprang up in Europe,
who made it the sole business of their lives to discover and burn the
witches. Sprenger, in Germany, was the most celebrated of these national
scourges. In his notorious work, the Malleus Maleficarum, he laid down a
regular form of trial, and appointed a course of examination by which the
inquisitors in other countries might best discover the guilty. The questions,
which were always enforced by torture, were of the most absurd and
disgusting nature. The inquisitors were required to ask the suspected
whether they had midnight meetings with the devil? whether they attended
the witches’ sabbath on the Brocken? whether they had their familiar
spirits? whether they could raise whirlwinds and call down the lightning?
and whether they had had sexual intercourse with Satan?
Straightway the inquisitors set to work: Cumanus, in Italy, burned forty-
one poor women in one province alone; and Sprenger, in Germany, burned
a number which can never be ascertained correctly, but which, it is agreed
on all hands, amounted to more than five hundred in a year. The great
resemblance between the confessions of the unhappy victims was regarded
as a new proof of the existence of the crime. But this is not astonishing. The
same questions from the Malleus Maleficarum were put to them all, and
torture never failed to educe the answer required by the inquisitor. Numbers
of people, whose imaginations were filled with these horrors, went further
in the way of confession than even their tormentors anticipated, in the hope
that they would thereby be saved from the rack, and put out of their misery
at once. Some confessed that they had had children by the devil; but no one
who had ever been a mother gave utterance to such a frantic imagining,
even in the extremity of her anguish. The childless only confessed it, and
were burned instanter as unworthy to live.
For fear the zeal of the enemies of Satan should cool, successive popes
appointed new commissions. One was appointed by Alexander VI. in 1494,
another by Leo X. in 1521, and a third by Adrian VI. in 1522. They were all
armed with the same powers to hunt out and destroy, and executed their
fearful functions but too rigidly. In Geneva alone five hundred persons were
burned in the years 1515 and 1516, under the title of Protestant witches. It
would appear that their chief crime was heresy, and their witchcraft merely
an aggravation. Bartolomeo de Spina has a list still more fearful. He
informs us that in the year 1524 no less than a thousand persons suffered
death for witchcraft in the district of Como, and that for several years
afterwards the average number of victims exceeded a hundred annually.
One inquisitor, Remigius, took great credit to himself for having, during
fifteen years, convicted and burned nine hundred.
In France, about the year 1520, fires for the execution of witches blazed
in almost every town. Danæus, in his Dialogues of Witches, says they were
so numerous that it would be next to impossible to tell the number of them.
So deep was the thraldom of the human mind, that the friends and relatives
of the accused parties looked on and approved. The wife or sister of a
murderer might sympathise in his fate, but the wives and husbands of
sorcerers and witches had no pity. The truth is that pity was dangerous, for
it was thought no one could have compassion on the sufferings of a witch
who was not a dabbler in sorcery: to have wept for a witch would have
insured the stake. In some districts, however, the exasperation of the people
broke out, in spite of superstition. The inquisitor of a rural township in
Piedmont burned the victims so plentifully and so fast, that there was not a
family in the place which did not lose a member. The people at last arose,
and the inquisitor was but too happy to escape from the country with whole
limbs. The archbishop of the diocese proceeded afterwards to the trial of
such as the inquisitor had left in prison.
Some of the charges were so utterly preposterous that the poor wretches
were at once liberated; others met a harder, but the usual fate. Some of them
were accused of having joined the witches’ dance at midnight under a
blasted oak, where they had been seen by creditable people. The husbands
of several of these women (two of whom were young and beautiful) swore
positively that at the time stated their wives were comfortably asleep in
their arms; but it was all in vain. Their word was taken, but the archbishop
told them they had been deceived by the devil and their own senses. It was
true they might have had the semblance of their wives in their beds, but the
originals were far away at the devil’s dance under the oak. The honest
fellows were confounded, and their wives burned forthwith.
CHARLES IX.
In the year 1561, five poor women of Verneuil were accused of
transforming themselves into cats, and in that shape attending the sabbath
of the fiends—prowling around Satan, who presided over them in the form
of a goat, and dancing, to amuse him, upon his back. They were found
guilty, and burned.27
In 1564, three wizards and a witch appeared before the Presidents
Salvert and D’Avanton: they confessed, when extended on the rack, that
they anointed the sheep-pens with infernal unguents to kill the sheep; that
they attended the sabbath, where they saw a great black goat, which spoke
to them, and made them kiss him, each holding a lighted candle in his hand
while he performed the ceremony. They were all executed at Poitiers.
In 1571 the celebrated sorcerer Trois Echelles was burned in the Place
de Grève in Paris. He confessed, in the presence of Charles IX., and of the
Marshals de Montmorency, De Retz, and the Sieur du Mazille, physician to
the king, that he could perform the most wonderful things by the aid of a
devil to whom he had sold himself. He described at great length the
saturnalia of the fiends, the sacrifices which they offered up, the
debaucheries they committed with the young and handsome witches, and
the various modes of preparing the infernal unguent for blighting cattle. He
said he had upwards of twelve hundred accomplices in the crime of
witchcraft in various parts of France, whom he named to the king, and
many of whom were afterwards arrested and suffered execution.
At Dôle, two years afterwards, Gilles Garnier, a native of Lyons, was
indicted for being a loup-garou, or man-wolf, and for prowling in that shape
about the country at night to devour little children. The indictment against
him, as read by Henri Camus, doctor of laws and counsellor of the king,
was to the effect that he, Gilles Garnier, had seized upon a little girl, twelve
years of age, whom he drew into a vineyard and there killed, partly with his
teeth and partly with his hands, seeming like wolf’s paws; that from thence
he trailed her bleeding body along the ground with his teeth into the wood
of La Serre, where he ate the greatest portion of her at one meal, and carried
the remainder home to his wife; that upon another occasion, eight days
before the festival of All Saints, he was seen to seize another child in his
teeth, and would have devoured her had she not been rescued by the
country people, and that the said child died a few days afterwards of the
injuries he had inflicted; that fifteen days after the same festival of All
Saints, being again in the shape of a wolf, he devoured a boy thirteen years
of age, having previously torn off his leg and thigh with his teeth, and hid
them away for his breakfast on the morrow. He was furthermore indicted
for giving way to the same diabolical and unnatural propensities even in his
shape of a man; and that he had strangled a boy in a wood with the intention
of eating him, which crime he would have effected if he had not been seen
by the neighbours and prevented.
Gilles Garnier was put to the rack after fifty witnesses had deposed
against him. He confessed every thing that was laid to his charge. He was
thereupon brought back into the presence of his judges, when Dr. Camus, in
the name of the parliament of Dôle, pronounced the following sentence:
“Seeing that Gilles Garnier has, by the testimony of credible witnesses,
and by his own spontaneous confession, been proved guilty of the
abominable crimes of lycanthropy and witchcraft, this court condemns
him, the said Gilles, to be this day taken in a cart from this spot to the
place of execution, accompanied by the executioner (maître exécuteur
de la haute justice), where he, by the said executioner, shall be tied to a
stake and burned alive, and that his ashes be then scattered to the
winds. The court further condemns him, the said Gilles, to the costs of
this prosecution.”
“Given at Dôle, this 18th day of January, 1573.”
In 1578, the parliament of Paris was occupied for several days with the
trial of a man named Jacques Rollet. He also was found guilty of being a
loup-garou, and in that shape devouring a little boy. He was burnt alive in
the Place de Grève.
In 1579, so much alarm was excited in the neighbourhood of Melun by
the increase of witches and loup-garous, that a council was held to devise
some measures to stay the evil. A decree was passed that all witches and
consulters with witches should be punished with death; and not only those,
but fortune-tellers and conjurors of every kind. The parliament of Rouen
took up the same question in the following year, and decreed that the
possession of a grimoire, or book of spells, was sufficient evidence of
witchcraft, and that all persons on whom such books were found should be
burned alive. Three councils were held in different parts of France in the
year 1583, all in relation to the same subject. The parliament of Bourdeaux
issued strict injunctions to all curates and clergy whatever to use redoubled
efforts to root out the crime of witchcraft. The parliament of Tours was
equally peremptory, and feared the judgments of an offended God if all
these dealers with the devil were not swept from the face of the land. The
parliament of Rheims was particularly severe against the noueurs
d’aiguillette, or “tyers of the knot”—people of both sexes who took
pleasure in preventing the consummation of marriage, that they might
counteract the command of God to our first parents to increase and
multiply. This parliament held it to be sinful to wear amulets to preserve
from witchcraft; and that this practice might not be continued within its
jurisdiction, drew up a form of exorcism, which would more effectually
defeat the agents of the devil, and put them to flight.
A case of witchcraft, which created a great sensation in its day, occurred
in 1588, at a village in the mountains of Auvergne, about two leagues from
Apchon. A gentleman of that place being at his window, there passed a
friend of his who had been out hunting, and who was then returning to his
own house. The gentleman asked his friend what sport he had had; upon
which the latter informed him that he had been attacked in the plain by a
large and savage wolf, which he had shot at without wounding, and that he
had then drawn out his hunting-knife and cut off the animal’s fore-paw as it
sprang upon his neck to devour him. The huntsman upon this put his hand
into his bag to pull out the paw, but was shocked to find that it was a
woman’s hand, with a wedding-ring on the finger. The gentleman
immediately recognised his wife’s ring, “which,” says the indictment
against her, “made him begin to suspect some evil of her.” He immediately
went in search of her, and found her sitting by the fire in the kitchen, with
her arm hidden underneath her apron. He tore off her apron with great
vehemence, and found that she had no hand, and that the stump was even
then bleeding. She was given into custody, and burnt at Riom in presence of
some thousands of spectators.28
In the midst of these executions, rare were the gleams of mercy. Few
instances are upon record of any acquittal taking place when the crime was
witchcraft. The discharge of fourteen persons by the parliament of Paris, in
the year 1589, is almost a solitary example of a return to reason. Fourteen
persons condemned to death for witchcraft appealed against the judgment to
the parliament of Paris, which for political reasons had been exiled to Tours.
The parliament named four commissioners—Pierre Pigray, the king’s
surgeon, and Messieurs Leroi, Renard, and Falaiseau, the king’s physicians
—to visit and examine these witches, and see whether they had the mark of
the devil upon them. Pigray, who relates the circumstance in his work on
Surgery (book vii. chap. 10), says the visit was made in presence of two
counsellors of the court. The witches were all stripped naked, and the
physicians examined their bodies very diligently, pricking them in all the
marks they could find to see whether they were insensible to pain, which
was always considered a certain proof of guilt. They were, however, very
sensible of the pricking, and some of them called out very lustily when the
pins were driven into them. “We found them,” continues Pierre Pigray, “to
be very poor, stupid people, and some of them insane. Many of them were
quite indifferent about life, and one or two of them desired death as a relief
for their sufferings. Our opinion was, that they stood more in need of
medicine than of punishment; and so we reported to the parliament. Their
case was thereupon taken into further consideration; and the parliament,
after mature counsel amongst all the members, ordered the poor creatures to
be sent to their homes, without inflicting any punishment upon them.”
Such was the dreadful state of Italy, Germany, and France during the
sixteenth century, which was far from being the worst crisis of the popular
madness with regard to witchcraft. Let us see what was the state of England
during the same period. The Reformation, which in its progress had rooted
out so many errors, stopped short at this, the greatest error of all. Luther and
Calvin were as firm believers in witchcraft as Pope Innocent himself; and
their followers shewed themselves more zealous persecutors than the
Romanists. Dr. Hutchinson, in his work on Witchcraft, asserts that the
mania manifested itself later in England, and raged with less virulence than
on the continent. The first assertion only is true; for though the persecution
began later both in England and Scotland, its progress was as fearful as
elsewhere.
It was not until more than fifty years after the issuing of the bull of
Innocent VIII. that the legislature of England thought fit to make any more
severe enactments against sorcery than those already in operation. The
statute of 1541 was the first that specified the particular crime of witchcraft.
At a much earlier period many persons had suffered death for sorcery, in
addition to other offences; but no executions took place for attending the
witches’ sabbath, raising tempests, afflicting cattle with barrenness, and all
the fantastic trumpery of the continent. Two statutes were passed in 1551:
the first relating to false prophecies, caused mainly, no doubt, by the
impositions of Elizabeth Barton, the holy maid of Kent, in 1534; and the
second against conjuration, witchcraft, and sorcery. But even this enactment
did not consider witchcraft as penal in itself, and only condemned to death
those who, by means of spells, incantations, or contracts with the devil,
attempted the lives of their neighbours. The statute of Elizabeth, in 1562, at
last recognised witchcraft as a crime of the highest magnitude, whether
exerted or not to the injury of the lives, limbs, and possessions of the
community. From that date the persecution may be fairly said to have
commenced in England. It reached its climax in the early part of the
seventeenth century, which was the hottest period of the mania all over
Europe.
A few cases of witch persecution in the sixteenth century will enable the
reader to form a more accurate idea of the progress of this great error than if
he plunged at once into that busy period of its history when Matthew
Hopkins and his coadjutors exercised their infernal calling. Several
instances occur in England during the latter years of the reign of Elizabeth.
At this time the public mind had become pretty familiar with the details of
the crime. Bishop Jewell, in his sermons before her majesty, used constantly
to conclude them by a fervent prayer that she might be preserved from
witches. Upon one occasion, in 1598, his words were, “It may please your
grace to understand that witches and sorcerers within these last four years
are marvellously increased within this your grace’s realm. Your grace’s
subjects pine away even unto the death; their colour fadeth—their flesh
rotteth—their speech is benumbed—their senses are bereft! I pray God they
may never practise further than upon the subject!”
JEWELL.
By degrees, an epidemic terror of witchcraft spread into the villages. In
proportion as the doctrine of the Puritans took root, this dread increased,
and, of course, brought persecution in its train. The Church of England has
claimed, and is entitled to the merit, of having been less influenced in these
matters than any other sect of Christians; but still they were tainted with the
superstition of the age. One of the most flagrant instances of cruelty and
delusion upon record was consummated under the authority of the Church,
and commemorated till a very late period by an annual lecture at the
University of Cambridge.
This is the celebrated case of the witches of Warbois, who were
executed about thirty-two years after the passing of the statute of Elizabeth.
Although in the interval but few trials are recorded, there is, unfortunately,
but too much evidence to shew the extreme length to which the popular
prejudice was carried. Many women lost their lives in every part of England
without being brought to trial at all, from the injuries received at the hands
of the people. The number of these can never be ascertained.
The case of the witches of Warbois merits to be detailed at length, not
only from the importance attached to it for so many years by the learned of
the University, but from the singular absurdity of the evidence upon which
men, sensible in all other respects, could condemn their fellow-creatures to
the scaffold.
The principal actors in this strange drama were the families of Sir
Samuel Cromwell and a Mr. Throgmorton, both gentlemen of landed
property near Warbois in the county of Huntingdon. Mr. Throgmorton had
several daughters, the eldest of whom, Mistress Joan, was an imaginative
and melancholy girl, whose head was filled with stories of ghosts and
witches. Upon one occasion she chanced to pass the cottage of one Mrs., or,
as she was called, Mother Samuel, a very aged, a very poor, and a very ugly
woman. Mother Samuel was sitting at her door knitting, with a black cap
upon her head, when this silly young lady passed, and taking her eyes from
her work she looked stedfastly at her. Mistress Joan immediately fancied
that she felt sudden pains in all her limbs, and from that day forth never
ceased to tell her sisters, and every body about her, that Mother Samuel had
bewitched her. The other children took up the cry, and actually frightened
themselves into fits whenever they passed within sight of this terrible old
woman.
Mr. and Mrs. Throgmorton, not a whit wiser than their children,
believed all the absurd tales they had been told; and Lady Cromwell, a
gossip of Mrs. Throgmorton, made herself very active in the business, and
determined to bring the witch to the ordeal. The sapient Sir Samuel joined
in the scheme; and the children, thus encouraged, gave loose reins to their
imaginations, which seem to have been of the liveliest. They soon invented
a whole host of evil spirits, and names for them besides, which they said
were sent by Mother Samuel to torment them continually. Seven spirits
especially, they said, were raised from hell by this wicked woman to throw
them into fits; and as the children were actually subject to fits, their mother
and her commeres gave the more credit to the story. The names of these
spirits were, “First Smack,” “Second Smack,” “Third Smack,” “Blue,”
“Catch,” “Hardname,” and “Pluck.”
Throgmorton, the father, was so pestered by these idle fancies, and yet
so well inclined to believe them, that he marched valiantly forth to the hut
where Mother Samuel resided with her husband and daughter, and dragged
her forcibly into his own grounds. Lady Cromwell, Mrs. Throgmorton, and
the girls were in waiting, armed with long pins to prick the witch, and see if
they could draw blood from her. Lady Cromwell, who seems to have been
the most violent of the party, tore the old woman’s cap off her head, and
plucking out a handful of her grey hair, gave it to Mrs. Throgmorton to
burn, as a charm which would preserve them all from her future
machinations. It was no wonder that the poor creature, subjected to this
rough usage, should give vent to an involuntary curse upon her tormentors.
She did so, and her curse was never forgotten. Her hair, however, was
supposed to be a grand specific, and she was allowed to depart, half dead
with terror and ill-usage. For more than a year the families of Cromwell and
Throgmorton continued to persecute her, and to assert that her imps
afflicted them with pains and fits, turned the milk sour in their pans, and
prevented their cows and ewes from bearing. In the midst of these fooleries,
Lady Cromwell was taken ill and died. It was then remembered that her
death had taken place exactly a year and a quarter since she was cursed by
Mother Samuel, and that on several occasions she had dreamed of the witch
and a black cat, the latter being of course the arch-enemy of mankind
himself.
Sir Samuel Cromwell now conceived himself bound to take more
energetic measures against the sorceress, since he had lost his wife by her
means. The year and a quarter and the black cat were proofs positive. All
the neighbours had taken up the cry of witchcraft against Mother Samuel;
and her personal appearance, unfortunately for her, the very ideal of what a
witch ought to be, increased the popular suspicion. It would appear that at
last the poor woman believed, even to her own disadvantage, that she was
what every body represented her to be. Being forcibly brought into Mr.
Throgmorton’s house, when his daughter Joan was in one of her customary
fits, she was commanded by him and Sir Samuel Cromwell to expel the
devil from the young lady. She was told to repeat her exorcism, and to add,
“as I am a witch, and the causer of Lady Cromwell’s death, I charge thee,
fiend, to come out of her!” She did as was required of her; and moreover
confessed that her husband and daughter were leagued with her in
witchcraft, and had, like her, sold their souls to the devil. The whole family
were immediately arrested, and sent to Huntingdon to prison.
The trial was instituted shortly afterwards before Mr. Justice Fenner,
when all the crazy girls of Mr. Throgmorton’s family gave evidence against
Mother Samuel and her family. They were all three put to the torture. The
old woman confessed in her anguish that she was a witch; that she had cast
her spells upon the young ladies; and that she had caused the death of Lady
Cromwell. The father and daughter, stronger in mind than their unfortunate
wife and parent, refused to confess any thing, and asserted their innocence
to the last. They were all three condemned to be hanged, and their bodies
burned. The daughter, who was young and good-looking, excited the pity of
many persons, and she was advised to plead pregnancy, that she might gain
at least a respite from death. The poor girl refused proudly, on the ground
that she would not be accounted both a witch and a strumpet. Her half-
witted old mother caught at the idea of a few weeks’ longer life, and
asserted that she was pregnant. The court was convulsed with laughter, in
which the wretched victim herself joined; and this was accounted an
additional proof that she was a witch. The whole family were executed on
the 7th of April, 1593.
Sir Samuel Cromwell, as lord of the manor, received the sum of 40l. out
of the confiscated property of the Samuels, which he turned into a rent-
charge of 40s. yearly, for the endowment of an annual sermon or lecture
upon the enormity of witchcraft, and this case in particular, to be preached
by a doctor or bachelor of divinity of Queen’s College, Cambridge. I have
not been able to ascertain the exact date at which this annual lecture was
discontinued; but it appears to have been preached so late as 1718, when Dr.
Hutchinson published his work upon witchcraft.
To carry on in proper chronological order the history of the witch
delusion in the British isles, it will be necessary to examine into what was
taking place in Scotland during all that part of the sixteenth century anterior
to the accession of James VI. to the crown of England. We naturally expect
that the Scotch—a people renowned from the earliest times for their powers
of imagination—should be more deeply imbued with this gloomy
superstition than their neighbours of the south. The nature of their soil and
climate tended to encourage the dreams of early ignorance. Ghosts, goblins,
wraiths, kelpies, and a whole host of spiritual beings, were familiar to the
dwellers by the misty glens of the Highlands and the romantic streams of
the Lowlands. Their deeds, whether of good or ill, were enshrined in song,
and took a greater hold upon the imagination because “verse had sanctified
them.” But it was not till the religious reformers began the practice of
straining Scripture to the severest extremes that the arm of the law was
called upon to punish witchcraft as a crime per se. What Pope Innocent
VIII. had done for Germany and France, the preachers of the Reformation
did for the Scottish people. Witchcraft, instead of being a mere article of
faith, became enrolled in the statute-book; and all good subjects and true
Christians were called upon to take arms against it. The ninth parliament of
Queen Mary passed an act in 1563, which decreed the punishment of death
against witches and consulters with witches, and immediately the whole
bulk of the people were smitten with an epidemic fear of the devil and his
mortal agents. Persons in the highest ranks of life shared and encouraged
the delusion of the vulgar. Many were themselves accused of witchcraft;
and noble ladies were shewn to have dabbled in mystic arts, and proved to
the world that if they were not witches, it was not for want of the will.
Among the dames who became notorious for endeavouring to effect
their wicked ends by the devil’s aid may be mentioned the celebrated Lady
Buccleugh of Branxholme (familiar to all the readers of Sir Walter Scott),
the Countess of Lothian, the Countess of Angus, the Countess of Athol,
Lady Kerr, the Countess of Huntley, Euphemia Macalzean (the daughter of
Lord Cliftonhall), and Lady Fowlis. Among the celebrated of the other sex
who were accused of wizardism was Sir Lewis Ballantyne, the Lord
Justice-Clerk for Scotland, who, if we may believe Scot of Scotstarvet,
“dealt by curiosity with a warlock called Richard Grahame,” and prayed
him to raise the devil. The warlock consented, and raised him in propriâ
personâ in the yard of his house in the Canongate, “at sight of whom the
Lord Justice-Clerk was so terrified, that he took sickness and thereof died.”
By such idle reports as these did the envious ruin the reputation of those
they hated; though it would appear in this case that Sir Lewis had been fool
enough to make the attempt of which he was accused, and that the success
of the experiment was the only apocryphal part of the story.
JOHN KNOX.
The enemies of John Knox invented a similar tale, which found ready
credence among the Roman Catholics, glad to attach any stigma to that
grand scourge of the vices of their Church. It was reported that he and his
secretary went into the churchyard of St. Andrew’s with the intent to raise
“some sanctes;” but that, by a mistake in their conjurations, they raised the
great fiend himself instead of the saints they wished to consult. The popular
rumour added, that Knox’s secretary was so frightened at the great horns,
goggle eyes, and long tail of Satan, that he went mad, and shortly
afterwards died. Knox himself was built of sterner stuff, and was not to be
frightened.
The first name that occurs in the records of the High Court of Justiciary
of persons tried or executed for witchcraft, is that of Janet Bowman in 1572,
nine years after the passing of the act of Mary. No particulars of her crimes
are given, and against her name there only stands the words, “convict and
brynt.” It is not, however, to be inferred, that in this interval no trials or
executions took place; for it appears, on the authority of documents of
unquestioned authenticity in the Advocates’ Library at Edinburgh,29 that the
Privy Council made a practice of granting commissions to resident
gentlemen and ministers in every part of Scotland to examine, try, and
execute witches within their own parishes. No records of those who
suffered from the sentence of these tribunals have been preserved; but if
popular tradition may be believed even to the amount of one-fourth of its
assertions, their number was fearful. After the year 1572, the entries of
executions for witchcraft in the records of the High Court become more
frequent, but do not average more than one per annum,—another proof that
trials for this offence were in general entrusted to the local magistracy. The
latter appear to have ordered witches to the stake with as little compunction,
and after as summary a mode, as modern justices of the peace order a
poacher to the stocks.
As James VI. advanced in manhood, he took great interest in the witch
trials. One of them especially—that of Gellie Duncan, Dr. Fian, and their
accomplices, in the year 1591—engrossed his whole attention, and no doubt
suggested in some degree the famous work on Demonology, which he
wrote shortly afterwards. As these witches had made an attempt upon his
own life, it is not surprising, with his habits, that he should have watched
the case closely, or become strengthened in his prejudice and superstition
by its singular details. No other trial that could be selected would give so
fair an idea of the delusions of the Scottish people as this. Whether we
consider the number of victims, the absurdity of the evidence, and the real
villany of some of the persons implicated, it is equally extraordinary.
Gellie Duncan, the prime witch in these proceedings, was servant to the
deputy bailiff of Tranent, a small town in Haddingtonshire, about ten miles
from Edinburgh. Though neither old nor ugly (as witches usually were), but
young and good-looking, her neighbours, from some suspicious parts of her
behaviour, had long considered her a witch. She had, it appears, some
pretensions to the healing art. Some cures which she effected were so
sudden, that the worthy bailiff, her master, who, like his neighbours,
mistrusted her, considered them no less than miraculous. In order to
discover the truth, he put her to the torture; but she obstinately refused to
confess that she had dealings with the devil. It was the popular belief that
no witch would confess as long as the mark which Satan had put upon her
remained undiscovered upon her body. Somebody present reminded the
torturing bailie of this fact, and on examination, the devil’s mark was found
upon the throat of poor Gellie. She was put to the torture again, and her
fortitude giving way under the extremity of her anguish, she confessed that
she was indeed a witch—that she had sold her soul to the devil, and effected
all her cures by his aid. This was something new in the witch creed,
according to which, the devil delighted more in laying diseases on than in
taking them off; but Gellie Duncan fared no better on that account. The
torture was still applied, until she had named all her accomplices, among
whom were one Cunningham, a reputed wizard, known by the name of Dr.
Fian; a grave and matron-like witch, named Agnes Sampson; Euphemia
Macalzean, the daughter of Lord Cliftonhall, already mentioned, and nearly
forty other persons, some of whom were the wives of respectable
individuals in the city of Edinburgh. Every one of these persons was
arrested, and the whole realm of Scotland thrown into commotion by the
extraordinary nature of the disclosures which were anticipated.
About two years previous to this time, James had suddenly left his
kingdom, and proceeded gallantly to Denmark, to fetch over his bride, the
Princess of Denmark, who had been detained by contrary weather in the
harbour of Upslo. After remaining for some months in Copenhagen, he set
sail with his young bride, and arrived safely in Leith, on the 1st of May
1590, having experienced a most boisterous passage, and been nearly
wrecked. As soon as the arrest of Gellie Duncan and Fian became known in
Scotland, it was reported by every body who pretended to be well-informed,
that these witches and their associates had, by the devil’s means, raised the
storms which had endangered the lives of the king and queen. Gellie, in her
torture, had confessed that such was the fact, and the whole kingdom waited
aghast and open-mouthed for the corroboration about to be furnished by the
trial.
Agnes Sampson, the “grave and matron-like” witch implicated by
Gellie Duncan, was put to the horrible torture of the pilliewinkis. She laid
bare all the secrets of the sisterhood before she had suffered an hour, and
confessed that Gellie Duncan, Dr. Fian, Marian Lincup, Euphemia
Macalzean, herself, and upwards of two hundred witches and warlocks,
used to assemble at midnight in the kirk of North Berwick, where they met
the devil; that they had plotted there to attempt the king’s life; that they
were incited to this by the old fiend himself, who had asserted with a
thundering oath that James was the greatest enemy he ever had, and that
there would be no peace for the devil’s children upon earth until he were
got rid of; that the devil upon these occasions always liked to have a little
music, and that Gellie Duncan used to play a reel before him on a trump or
Jew’s harp, to which all the witches danced.
James was highly flattered at the idea that the devil should have said
that he was the greatest enemy he ever had. He sent for Gellie Duncan to
the palace, and made her play before him the same reel which she had
played at the witches’ dance in the kirk.
TORTURE OF THE BOOTS.
Dr. Fian, or rather Cunningham, a petty schoolmaster of Tranent, was
put to the torture among the rest. He was a man who had led an infamous
life, was a compounder of and dealer in poisons, and a pretender to magic.
Though not guilty of the preposterous crimes laid to his charge, there is no
doubt that he was a sorcerer in will, though not in deed, and that he
deserved all the misery he endured. When put on the rack, he would confess
nothing, and held out so long unmoved, that the severe torture of the boots
was resolved upon. He endured this till exhausted nature could bear no
longer, when insensibility kindly stepped in to his aid. When it was seen
that he was utterly powerless, and that his tongue cleaved to the roof of his
mouth, he was released. Restoratives were administered; and during the
first faint gleam of returning consciousness, he was prevailed upon to sign,
ere he well knew what he was about, a full confession, in strict accordance
with those of Gellie Duncan and Agnes Sampson. He was then remanded to
his prison, from which, after two days, he managed, some how or other, to
escape. He was soon recaptured, and brought before the Court of Justiciary,
James himself being present. Fian now denied all the circumstances of the
written confession which he had signed; whereupon the king, enraged at his
“stubborn wilfulness,” ordered him once more to the torture. His finger
nails were riven out with pincers, and long needles thrust up to the eye into
the quick; but he did not wince. He was then consigned again to the boots,
in which, to quote a pamphlet published at the time,30 he continued “so
long, and abode so many blows in them, that his legs were crushed and
beaten together as small as might be, and the bones and flesh so bruised,
that the blood and marrow spouted forth in great abundance, whereby they
were made unserviceable for ever.”
The astonishing similarity of the confessions of all the persons
implicated in these proceedings has often been remarked. It would appear
that they actually endeavoured to cause the king’s death by their spells and
sorceries. Fian, who was acquainted with all the usual tricks of his
profession, deceived them with pretended apparitions, so that many of them
were really convinced that they had seen the devil. The sum of their
confessions was to the following effect:
Satan, who was, of course, a great foe of the reformed religion, was
alarmed that King James should marry a Protestant princess. To avert the
consequences to the realms of evil, he had determined to put an end to the
king and his bride by raising a storm on their voyage home. Satan, first of
all, sent a thick mist over the waters, in the hope that the king’s vessel might
be stranded on the coast amid the darkness. This failing, Dr. Fian, who,
from his superior scholarship, was advanced to the dignity of the devil’s
secretary, was commanded to summon all the witches to meet their master,
each one sailing on a sieve on the high seas.
On All Hallowmas Eve, they assembled to the number of upwards of
two hundred, including Gellie Duncan, Agnes Sampson, Euphemia
Macalzean, one Barbara Napier, and several warlocks; and each embarking
in a riddle or sieve, they sailed “over the ocean very substantially.” After
cruising about for some time, they met with the fiend, bearing in his claws a
cat, which had been previously drawn nine times through the fire. This he
delivered to one of the warlocks, telling him to cast it into the sea and cry
“Hola!” This was done with all solemnity, and immediately the ocean
became convulsed, the waters hissed loudly, and the waves rose mountains
high,
“Twisting their arms to the dun-coloured heaven.”
The witches sailed gallantly through the tempest they had raised, and
landing on the coast of Scotland, took their sieves in their hands and
marched on in procession to the haunted kirk of North Berwick, where the
devil had resolved to hold a preaching. Gellie Duncan, the musician of the
party, tripped on before, playing on her Jew’s harp and singing,
“Cummer, go ye before, cummer, go ye;
Gif ye will not go before, cummer, let me!”
Arrived at the kirk, they paced around it withershins, that is, in reverse of
the apparent motion of the sun. Dr. Fian then blew into the keyhole of the
door, which opened immediately, and all the witches entered. As it was
pitch dark, Fian blew with his mouth upon the candles, which immediately
lighted, and the devil was seen occupying the pulpit. He was attired in a
black gown and hat, and the witches saluted him by crying “All hail,
master!” His body was hard, like iron; his face terrible; his nose, like the
beak of an eagle; he had great burning eyes; his hands and legs were hairy;
and he had long claws upon his hands and feet, and spake with an
exceedingly gruff voice. Before commencing his sermon he called over the
names of his congregation, demanding whether they had been good
servants, and what success had attended their operations against the life of
the king and his bride.
Gray Meill, a crazy old warlock, who acted as beadle or door-keeper,
was silly enough to answer “that nothing ailed the king yet, God be
thanked;” upon which the devil, in a rage, stepped down from the pulpit and
boxed his ears for him. He then remounted and commenced the preaching,
commanding them to be dutiful servants to him and do all the evil they
could. Euphemia Macalzean and Agnes Sampson, bolder than the rest,
asked him whether he had brought the image or picture of King James, that
they might, by pricking it, cause pains and diseases to fall upon him. “The
father of lies” spoke truth for once, and confessed that he had forgotten it;
upon which Euphemia Macalzean upbraided him loudly for his
carelessness. The devil, however, took it all in good part, although Agnes
Sampson and several other women let loose their tongues at him
immediately. When they had done scolding, he invited them all to a grand
entertainment. A newly buried corpse was dug up and divided among them,
which was all they had in the way of edibles. He was more liberal in the
matter of drink, and gave them so much excellent wine that they soon
became jolly. Gellie Duncan then played the old tune upon her trump, and
the devil himself led off the dance with Euphemia Macalzean. Thus they
kept up the sport till the cock crew.
JAMES THE DEMONOLOGIST.
Agnes Sampson, the wise woman of Keith, as she was called, added
some other particulars in her confession. She stated, that on a previous
occasion, she had raised an awful tempest in the sea by throwing a cat into
it, with four joints of men tied to its feet. She said also, that on their grand
attempt to drown King James, they did not meet with the devil after
cruising about, but that he had accompanied them from the first, and that
she had seen him dimly in the distance, rolling himself before them over the
great waves, in shape and size not unlike a huge haystack. They met with a
foreign ship richly laden with wines and other good things, which they
boarded, and sunk after they had drunk all the wine and made themselves
quite merry.
Some of these disclosures were too much even for the abundant faith of
King James, and he more than once exclaimed, that the witches were like
their master, “extreme lyars.” But they confessed many other things of a
less preposterous nature, and of which they were no doubt really guilty.
Agnes Sampson said she was to have taken the king’s life by anointing his
linen with a strong poison. Gellie Duncan used to threaten her neighbours
by saying she would send the devil after them; and many persons of weaker
minds than usual were frightened into fits by her, and rendered subject to
them for the remainder of their lives. Dr. Fian also made no scruple in
aiding and abetting murder, and would rid any person of an enemy by
means of poison, who could pay him his fee for it. Euphemia Macalzean
also was far from being pure. There is no doubt that she meditated the
king’s death, and used such means to compass it as the superstition of the
age directed. She was a devoted partisan of Bothwell, who was accused by
many of the witches as having consulted them on the period of the king’s
death. They were all found guilty, and sentenced to be hanged and burned.
Barbara Napier, though found guilty upon other counts, was acquitted upon
the charge of having been present at the great witch meeting in Berwick
kirk. The king was highly displeased, and threatened to have the jury
indicted for a wilful error upon an assize. They accordingly reconsidered
their verdict, and threw themselves upon the king’s mercy for the fault they
had committed. James was satisfied, and Barbara Napier was hanged along
with Gellie Duncan, Agnes Sampson, Dr. Fian, and five-and-twenty others.
Euphemia Macalzean met a harder fate. Her connexion with the bold and
obnoxious Bothwell, and her share in poisoning one or two individuals who
had stood in her way, were thought deserving of the severest punishment
the law could inflict. Instead of the ordinary sentence, directing the criminal
to be first strangled and then burned, the wretched woman was doomed “to
be bound to a stake, and burned in ashes, quick to the death.” This cruel
sentence was executed on the 25th of June, 1591.
These trials had the most pernicious consequences all over Scotland.
The lairds and ministers in their districts, armed with due power from the
privy council, tried and condemned old women after the most summary
fashion. Those who still clung to the ancient faith of Rome were the
severest sufferers, as it was thought, after the disclosures of the fierce
enmity borne by the devil towards a Protestant king and his Protestant wife,
that all the Catholics were leagued with the powers of evil to work woe on
the realm of Scotland. Upon a very moderate calculation, it is presumed that
from the passing of the act of Queen Mary till the accession of James to the
throne of England, a period of thirty-nine years, the average number of
executions for witchcraft in Scotland was two hundred annually, or upwards
of seventeen thousand altogether. For the first nine years the number was
not one quarter so great; but towards the years 1590 to 1593, the number
must have been more than four hundred. The case last cited was one of an
extraordinary character. The general aspect of the trials will be better seen
from that of Isabel Gowdie, which, as it would be both wearisome and
disgusting to go through them all, is given as a fair specimen, although it
took place at a date somewhat later than the reign of James. This woman,
wearied of her life by the persecutions of her neighbours, voluntarily gave
herself up to justice, and made a confession, embodying the whole witch-
creed of the period. She was undoubtedly a monomaniac of the most
extraordinary kind. She said that she deserved to be stretched upon an iron
rack, and that her crimes could never be atoned for, even if she were to be
drawn asunder by wild horses. She named a long list of her associates,
including nearly fifty women and a few warlocks. They dug up the graves
of unchristened infants, whose limbs were serviceable in their
enchantments. When they wanted to destroy the crops of an enemy, they
yoked toads to his plough, and on the following night Satan himself
ploughed the land with his team, and blasted it for the season. The witches
had power to assume almost any shape; but they generally chose either that
of a cat or a hare, oftenest the latter. Isabel said, that on one occasion, when
she was in this disguise, she was sore pressed by a pack of hounds, and had
a very narrow escape with her life. She reached her own door at last, feeling
the hot breath of the pursuing dogs at her haunches. She managed, however,
to hide herself behind a chest, and got time to pronounce the magic words
that could alone restore her to her proper shape. They were:
“Hare! hare!
God send thee care!
I am in a hare’s likeness now;
But I shall be a woman e’en now!
Hare! hare!
God send thee care!”
If witches, when in this shape, were bitten by the dogs, they always retained
the marks in their human form; but she had never heard that any witch had
been bitten to death. When the devil appointed any general meeting of the
witches, the custom was that they should proceed through the air mounted
on broomsticks, or on corn or bean-straws, pronouncing as they went:
“Horse and pattock, horse and go,
Horse and pellats, ho! ho! ho!”
They generally left behind them a broom or a three-legged stool, which,
when placed in their beds and duly charmed, assumed the human shape till
their return. This was done that the neighbours might not know when they
were absent.
She added that the devil furnished his favourite witches with servant
imps to attend upon them. These imps were called, “The Roaring Lion,”
“Thief of Hell,” “Wait-upon-Herself,” “Ranting Roarer,” “Care-for-
Naught,” &c., and were known by their liveries, which were generally
yellow, sad-dun, sea-green, pea-green, or grass-green. Satan never called
the witches by the names they had received at baptism; neither were they
allowed, in his presence, so to designate each other. Such a breach of the
infernal etiquette assuredly drew down his most severe displeasure. But as
some designation was necessary, he re-baptised them in their own blood by
the names of “Able-and-Stout,” “Over-the-dike-with-it,” “Raise-the-wind,”
“Pickle-nearest-the-wind,” “Batter-them-down-Maggy,” “Blow-Kale,” and
such like. The devil himself was not very particular what name they called
him, so that it was not “Black John.” If any witch was unthinking enough to
utter these words, he would rush out upon her and beat and buffet her
unmercifully, or tear her flesh with a wool-card. Other names he did not
care about; and once gave instructions to a noted warlock that whenever he
wanted his aid, he was to strike the ground three times and exclaim, “Rise
up, foul thief!”
SIR G. MACKENZIE.
Upon this confession many persons were executed. So strong was the
popular feeling, that no one once accused of witchcraft was acquitted; at
least acquittals did not average one in a hundred trials. Witch-finding, or
witch-pricking, became a trade, and a set of mercenary vagabonds roamed
about the country provided with long pins to run into the flesh of supposed
criminals. It was no unusual thing then, nor is it now, that in aged persons
there should be some spot on the body totally devoid of feeling. It was the
object of the witch-pricker to discover this spot, and the unhappy wight who
did not bleed when pricked upon it was doomed to the death. If not
immediately cast into prison, her life was rendered miserable by the
persecution of her neighbours. It is recorded of many poor women, that the
annoyances they endured in this way were so excessive, that they preferred
death. Sir George Mackenzie, the Lord Advocate, at the time when witch
trials were so frequent, and himself a devout believer in the crime, relates,
in his Criminal Law, first published in 1678, some remarkable instances of
it. He says, “I went, when I was a justice-depute, to examine some women
who had confessed judicially; and one of them, who was a silly creature,
told me, under secrecy, that she had not confessed because she was guilty,
but being a poor creature, who wrought for her meat, and being defamed for
a witch, she knew she should starve, for no person thereafter would either
give her meat or lodging, and that all men would beat her and set dogs at
her, and that, therefore, she desired to be out of the world; whereupon she
wept most bitterly, and upon her knees called God to witness to what she
said.” Sir George, though not wholly elevated above the prejudices of his
age upon this subject, was clear-sighted enough to see the danger to society
of the undue encouragement given to the witch prosecutions. He was
convinced that three-fourths of them were unjust and unfounded. He says,
in the work already quoted, that the persons who were in general accused of
this crime were poor ignorant men and women who did not understand the
nature of the accusation, and who mistook their own superstitious fears for
witchcraft. One poor wretch, a weaver, confessed that he was a warlock,
and, being asked why, he replied, because “he had seen the devil dancing,
like a fly, about the candle!” A simple woman, who, because she was called
a witch, believed that she was, asked the judge upon the bench whether a
person might be a witch and not know it? Sir George adds, that all the
supposed criminals were subjected to severe torture in prison from their
gaolers, who thought they did God good service by vexing and tormenting
them; “and I know,” says this humane and enlightened magistrate, “that this
usage was the ground of all their confession; and albeit, the poor miscreants
cannot prove this usage, the actors in it being the only witnesses; yet the
judge should be jealous of it, as that which did at first elicit the confession,
and for fear of which they dare not retract it.” Another author,31 also a firm
believer in witchcraft, gives a still more lamentable instance of a woman
who preferred execution as a witch to live on under the imputation. This
woman, who knew that three others were to be strangled and burned on an
early day, sent for the minister of the parish, and confessed that she had sold
her soul to Satan. “Whereupon being called before the judges, she was
condemned to die with the rest. Being carried forth to the place of
execution, she remained silent during the first, second, and third prayer, and
then, perceiving that there remained no more but to rise and go to the stake,
she lifted up her body, and, with a loud voice, cried out, ‘Now all you that
see me this day, know that I am now to die as a witch, by my own
confession; and I free all men, especially the ministers and magistrates, of
the guilt of my blood. I take it wholly upon myself. My blood be upon my
own head. And, as I must make answer to the God of heaven presently, I
declare I am as free of witchcraft as any child. But, being delated by a
malicious woman, and put in prison under the name of a witch, disowned
by my husband and friends, and seeing no ground of hope of ever coming
out again, I made up that confession to destroy my own life, being weary of
it, and choosing rather to die than to live.’” As a proof of the singular
obstinacy and blindness of the believers in witches, it may be stated that the
minister who relates this story only saw in the dying speech of the unhappy
woman an additional proof that she was a witch. True, indeed is it, that
“none are so blind as those who will not see.”
It is time, however, to return to James VI., who is fairly entitled to share
with Pope Innocent, Sprenger, Bodinus, and Matthew Hopkins the glory or
the odium of being at the same time a chief enemy and chief encourager of
witchcraft. Towards the close of the sixteenth century, many learned men,
both on the continent and in the isles of Britain, had endeavoured to
disabuse the public mind on this subject. The most celebrated were Wierus,
in Germany; Pietro d’Apone, in Italy; and Reginald Scot, in England. Their
works excited the attention of the zealous James, who, mindful of the
involuntary compliment which his merits had extorted from the devil, was
ambitious to deserve it by still continuing “his greatest enemie.” In the year
1597, he published in Edinburgh his famous treatise on Demonology. Its
design may be gathered from the following passage in the introduction:
“The fearful abounding,” says the king, “at this time and in this country of
these detestable slaves of the devil, the witches or enchanters, hath moved
me, beloved reader, to despatch in post this following treatise of mine, not
in any wise, as I protest, to serve for a show of mine own learning and
ingene [ingenuity], but only (moved of conscience) to press thereby, so far
as I can, to resolve the doubting hearts of many, both that such assaults of
Satan are most certainly practised, and that the instrument thereof merits
most severely to be punished, against the damnable opinions of two,
principally in our age; whereof the one called Scot, an Englishman, is not
ashamed in public print to deny that there can be such thing as witchcraft,
and so maintains the old error of the Sadducees in denying of spirits. The
other, called Wierus, a German physician, sets out a public apology for all
these crafts-folks, whereby procuring for them impunity, he plainly betrays
himself to have been one of that profession.” In other parts of this treatise,
which the author had put into the form of a dialogue, to “make it more
pleasant and facile,” he says: “Witches ought to be put to death, according
to the law of God, the civil and imperial law, and the municipal law of all
Christian nations: yea, to spare the life, and not strike whom God bids strike
and so severely punish in so odious a treason against God, is not only
unlawful, but doubtless as great a sin in the magistrate as was Saul’s sparing
Agag.” He says also that the crime is so abominable, that it may be proved
by evidence which would not be received against any other offenders,—
young children, who knew not the nature of an oath, and persons of an
infamous character, being sufficient witnesses against them; but lest the
innocent should be accused of a crime so difficult to be acquitted of, he
recommends that in all cases the ordeal should be resorted to. He says,
“Two good helps may be used: the one is the finding of their mark, and the
trying the insensibleness thereof; the other is their floating on the water,—
for, as in a secret murther, if the dead carcass be at any time thereafter
handled by the murtherer, it will gush out of blood, as if the blood were
crying to Heaven for revenge of the murtherer (God having appointed that
secret supernatural sign for trial of that secret unnatural crime), so that it
appears that God hath appointed (for a supernatural sign of the monstrous
impiety of witches) that the water shall refuse to receive them in her bosom
that have shaken off them the sacred water of baptism, and wilfully refused
the benefit thereof;—no, not so much as their eyes are able to shed tears
(threaten and torture them as you please), while first they repent (God not
permitting them to dissemble their obstinacy in so horrible a crime); albeit,
the womenkind especially, be able otherwise to shed tears at every light
occasion when they will, yea, although it were dissembling like the
crocodiles.”
PIETRO D’APONE.
When such doctrines as these were openly promulgated by the highest
authority in the realm, and who, in promulgating them, flattered, but did not
force the public opinion, it is not surprising that the sad delusion should
have increased and multiplied until the race of wizards and witches
replenished the earth. The reputation which he lost by being afraid of a
naked sword, he more than regained by his courage in combating the devil.
The Kirk shewed itself a most zealous coadjutor, especially during those
halcyon days when it was not at issue with the king upon other matters of
doctrine and prerogative.
On his accession to the throne of England in 1603, James came amongst
a people who had heard with admiration of his glorious deeds against the
witches. He himself left no part of his ancient prejudices behind him; and
his advent was the signal for the persecution to burst forth in England with
a fury equal to that in Scotland. It had languished a little during the latter
years of the reign of Elizabeth; but the very first parliament of King James
brought forward the subject. James was flattered by their promptitude, and
the act passed in 1604. On the second reading in the House of Lords, the
bill passed into a committee, in which were twelve bishops. By it was
enacted, “That if any person shall use, practise, or exercise any conjuration
of any wicked or evil spirit, or shall consult, covenant with, or feed any
such spirit, the first offence to be imprisonment for a year, and standing in
the pillory once a quarter; the second offence to be death.”
The minor punishment seems but rarely to have been inflicted. Every
record that has been preserved mentions that the witches were hanged and
burned, or burned, without the previous strangling, “alive and quick.”
During the whole of James’s reign, amid the civil wars of his successor, the
sway of the Long Parliament, the usurpation of Cromwell, and the reign of
Charles II., there was no abatement of the persecution. If at any time it
raged with less virulence, it was when Cromwell and the Independents were
masters. Dr. Zachary Grey, the editor of an edition of “Hudibras,” informs
us, in a note to that work, that he himself perused a list of three thousand
witches who were executed in the time of the Long Parliament alone.
During the first eighty years of the seventeenth century, the number
executed has been estimated at five hundred annually, making the frightful
total of forty thousand. Some of these cases deserve to be cited. The great
majority resemble closely those already mentioned; but two or three of
them let in a new light upon the popular superstition.
Every one has heard of the “Lancashire witches,” a phrase now used to
compliment the ladies of that county for their bewitching beauty; but it is
not every one who has heard the story in which it originated. A villanous
boy, named Robinson, was the chief actor in the tragedy. He confessed
many years afterwards that he had been suborned by his father and other
persons to give false evidence against the unhappy witches whom he
brought to the stake. The time of this famous trial was about the year 1634.
This boy Robinson, whose father was a wood-cutter, residing on the borders
of Pendle Forest, in Lancashire, spread abroad many rumours against one
Mother Dickenson, whom he accused of being a witch. These rumours
coming to the ears of the local magistracy, the boy was sent for and strictly
examined. He told the following extraordinary story without hesitation or
prevarication, and apparently in so open and honest a manner, that no one
who heard him doubted the truth of it. He said, that as he was roaming
about in one of the glades of the forest, amusing himself by gathering
blackberries, he saw two greyhounds before him, which he thought at the
time belonged to some gentleman of the neighbourhood. Being fond of
sport, he proposed to have a course; and a hare being started, he incited the
hounds to run. Neither of them would stir. Angry at the beasts, he seized
hold of a switch, with which he was about to punish them, when one of
them suddenly started up in the form of a woman, and the other of a little
boy. He at once recognised the woman to be the witch Mother Dickenson.
She offered him some money to induce him to sell his soul to the devil; but
he refused. Upon this she took a bridle out of her pocket, and shaking it
over the head of the other little boy, he was instantly turned into a horse.
Mother Dickenson then seized him in her arms, sprang upon the horse, and
placing him before her, rode with the swiftness of the wind over forests,
fields, bogs, and rivers, until they came to a large barn. The witch alighted
at the door, and, taking him by the hand, led him inside. There he saw seven
old women pulling at seven halters which hung from the roof. As they
pulled, large pieces of meat, lumps of butter, loaves of bread, basins of
milk, hot puddings, black puddings, and other rural dainties, fell from the
halters on to the floor. While engaged in this charm, they made such ugly
faces, and looked so fiendish, that he was quite frightened. After they had
pulled in this manner enough for an ample feast, they set-to, and shewed,
whatever might be said of the way in which their supper was procured, that
their epicurism was a little more refined than that of the Scottish witches,
who, according to Gellie Duncan’s confession, feasted upon dead men’s
flesh in the old kirk of Berwick. The boy added, that as soon as supper was
ready, many other witches came to partake of it, several of whom he named.
In consequence of this story, many persons were arrested, and the boy
Robinson was led about from church to church, in order that he might point
out to the officers by whom he was accompanied the hags he had seen in
the barn. Altogether, about twenty persons were thrown into prison; eight of
them were condemned to die, including Mother Dickenson, upon this
evidence alone, and executed accordingly. Among the wretches who
concocted this notable story, not one was ever brought to justice for his
perjury; and Robinson, the father, gained considerable sums by threatening
persons who were rich enough to buy off exposure.
Among the ill-weeds which flourished amid the long dissensions of the
civil war, Matthew Hopkins, the witch-finder, stands eminent in his sphere.
This vulgar fellow resided, in the year 1644, at the town of Manningtree, in
Essex, and made himself very conspicuous in discovering the devil’s marks
upon several unhappy witches. The credit he gained by his skill in this
instance seems to have inspired him to renewed exertions. In the course of a
very short time, whenever a witch was spoken of in Essex, Matthew
Hopkins was sure to be present, aiding the judges with his knowledge of
“such cattle,” as he called them. As his reputation increased, he assumed the
title of “Witch-finder General,” and travelled through the counties of
Norfolk, Essex, Huntingdon, and Sussex, for the sole purpose of finding out
witches. In one year he brought sixty poor creatures to the stake. The test he
commonly adopted was that of swimming, so highly recommended by King
James in his Demonologie. The hands and feet of the suspected persons
were tied together crosswise, the thumb of the right hand to the toe of the
left foot, and vice versa. They were then wrapped up in a large sheet or
blanket, and laid upon their backs in a pond or river. If they sank, their
friends and relatives had the poor consolation of knowing they were
innocent; but there was an end of them: if they floated, which, when laid
carefully on the water, was generally the case, there was also an end of
them; for they were deemed guilty of witchcraft, and burned accordingly.
Another test was to make them repeat the Lord’s prayer and creed. It
was affirmed that no witch could do so correctly. If she missed a word, or
even pronounced one incoherently, which in her trepidation it was most
probable she would, she was accounted guilty. It was thought that witches
could not weep more than three tears, and those only from the left eye. Thus
the conscious innocence of many persons, which gave them fortitude to
bear unmerited torture without flinching, was construed by their unmerciful
tormentors into proofs of guilt. In some districts the test resorted to was to
weigh the culprit against the church Bible. If the suspected witch proved
heavier than the Bible, she was set at liberty. This mode was far too humane
for the witch-finders by profession. Hopkins always maintained that the
most legitimate modes were pricking and swimming.
Hopkins used to travel through his counties like a man of consideration,
attended by his two assistants, always putting up at the chief inn of the
place, and always at the cost of the authorities. His charges were twenty
shillings a town, his expenses of living while there, and his carriage thither
and back. This he claimed whether he found witches or not. If he found any,
he claimed twenty shillings a head in addition when they were brought to
execution. For about three years he carried on this infamous trade, success
making him so insolent and rapacious that high and low became his
enemies. The Rev. Mr. Gaul, a clergyman of Houghton, in Huntingdonshire,
wrote a pamphlet impugning his pretensions, and accusing him of being a
common nuisance. Hopkins replied in an angry letter to the functionaries of
Houghton, stating his intention to visit their town; but desiring to know
whether it afforded many such sticklers for witchcraft as Mr. Gaul, and
whether they were willing to receive and entertain him with the customary
hospitality, if he so far honoured them. He added, by way of threat, that in
case he did not receive a satisfactory reply, “he would waive their shire
altogether, and betake himself to such places where he might do and punish,
not only without control, but with thanks and recompense.” The authorities
of Houghton were not much alarmed at this awful threat of letting them
alone. They very wisely took no notice either of him or his letter.
Mr. Gaul describes in his pamphlet one of the modes employed by
Hopkins, which was sure to swell his revenues very considerably. It was a
proof even more atrocious than the swimming. He says, that the “Witch-
finder General” used to take the suspected witch and place her in the middle
of a room, upon a stool or table, cross-legged, or in some other uneasy
posture. If she refused to sit in this manner, she was bound with strong
cords. Hopkins then placed persons to watch her for four-and-twenty hours,
during which time she was to be kept without meat or drink. It was
supposed that one of her imps would come during that interval and suck her
blood. As the imp might come in the shape of a wasp, a moth, a fly, or other
insect, a hole was made in the door or window to let it enter. The watchers
were ordered to keep a sharp look out, and endeavour to kill any insect that
appeared in the room. If any fly escaped, and they could not kill it, the
woman was guilty; the fly was her imp, and she was sentenced to be
burned, and twenty shillings went into the pockets of Master Hopkins. In
this manner he made one old woman confess, because four flies had
appeared in the room, that she was attended by four imps, named
“Ilemazar,” “Pye-wackett,” “Peck-in-the-crown,” and “Grizel-Greedigut.”
MATTHEW HOPKINS.32
It is consoling to think that this impostor perished in his own snare. Mr.
Gaul’s exposure and his own rapacity weakened his influence among the
magistrates; and the populace, who began to find that not even the most
virtuous and innocent were secure from his persecution, looked upon him
with undisguised aversion. He was beset by a mob at a village in Suffolk,
and accused of being himself a wizard. An old reproach was brought against
him, that he had, by means of sorcery, cheated the devil out of a certain
memorandum-book, in which he, Satan, had entered the names of all the
witches in England. “Thus,” said the populace, “you find out witches, not
by God’s aid, but by the devil’s.” In vain he denied his guilt. The populace
longed to put him to his own test. He was speedily stripped, and his thumbs
and toes tied together. He was then placed in a blanket, and cast into a pond.
Some say that he floated, and that he was taken out, tried, and executed
upon no other proof of his guilt. Others assert that he was drowned. This
much is positive, that there was an end of him. As no judicial entry of his
trial and execution is to be found in any register, it appears most probable
that he expired by the hands of the mob. Butler has immortalised this scamp
in the following lines of his Hudibras:
“Hath not this present Parliament
A lieger to the devil sent,
Fully empower’d to treat about
Finding revolted witches out?
And has he not within a year
Hang’d threescore of them in one shire?
Some only for not being drown’d,
And some for sitting above ground
Whole days and nights upon their breeches,
And feeling pain, were hang’d for witches;
And some for putting knavish tricks
Upon green geese or turkey chicks;
Or pigs that suddenly deceased
Of griefs unnatural, as he guessed;
Who proved himself at length a witch,
And made a rod for his own breech.”
In Scotland also witch-finding became a trade. They were known under
the designation of “common prickers,” and, like Hopkins, received a fee for
each witch they discovered. At the trial of Janet Peaston, in 1646, the
magistrates of Dalkeith “caused John Kincaid of Tranent, the common
pricker, to exercise his craft upon her. He found two marks of the devil’s
making; for she could not feel the pin when it was put into either of the said
marks, nor did the marks bleed when the pin was taken out again. When she
was asked where she thought the pins were put in her, she pointed to a part
of her body distant from the real place. They were pins of three inches in
length.”33
These common prickers became at last so numerous that they were
considered nuisances. The judges refused to take their evidence; and in
1678 the privy council of Scotland condescended to hear the complaint of
an honest woman who had been indecently exposed by one of them, and
expressed their opinion that common prickers were common cheats.
But such an opinion was not formed in high places before hundreds of
innocent persons had fallen victims. The parliaments had encouraged the
delusion both in England and Scotland; and by arming these fellows with a
sort of authority, had in a manner forced the magistrates and ministers to
receive their evidence. The fate of one poor old gentleman, who fell a
victim to the arts of Hopkins in 1646, deserves to be recorded. Mr. Louis, a
venerable clergyman, upwards of seventy years of age, and who had been
rector of Framlingham, in Suffolk, for fifty years, excited suspicion that he
was a wizard. Being a violent royalist, he was likely to meet with no
sympathy at that time; and even his own parishioners, whom he had served
so long and so faithfully, turned their backs upon him as soon as he was
accused. Placed under the hands of Hopkins, who knew so well how to
bring the refractory to confession, the old man, the light of whose intellect
had become somewhat dimmed from age, confessed that he was a wizard.
He said he had two imps that continually excited him to do evil; and that
one day, when he was walking on the sea-coast, one of them prompted him
to express a wish that a ship, whose sails were just visible in the distance,
might sink. He consented, and saw the vessel sink before his eyes. He was,
upon this confession, tried and condemned. On his trial, the flame of reason
burned up as brightly as ever. He denied all that had been alleged against
him, and cross-examined Hopkins with great tact and severity. After his
condemnation, he begged that the funeral service of the Church might be
read for him. The request was refused, and he repeated it for himself from
memory as he was led to the scaffold.
A poor woman in Scotland was executed upon evidence even less strong
than this. John Bain, a common pricker, swore that, as he passed her door,
he heard her talking to the devil. She said, in defence, that it was a foolish
practice she had of talking to herself, and several of her neighbours
corroborated her statement; but the evidence of the pricker was received.
He swore that none ever talked to themselves who were not witches. The
devil’s mark being found upon her, the additional testimony of her guilt was
deemed conclusive, and she was “convict and brynt.”
From the year 1652 to 1682, these trials diminished annually in number,
and acquittals were by no means so rare as they had been. To doubt in
witchcraft 
was 
no 
longer 
dangerous. 
Before 
country 
justices,
condemnations on the most absurd evidence still continued; but when the
judges of the land had to charge the jury, they took a more humane and
philosophical view. By degrees, the educated classes (comprised in those
days within very narrow limits) openly expressed their unbelief of modern
witchcraft, although they were not bold enough to deny its existence
altogether. Between them and the believers in the old doctrine fierce
arguments ensued, and the sceptics were designated Sadducees. To
convince them, the learned and Reverend Joseph Glanvil wrote his well-
known work, Sadducismus Triumphatus, and The Collection of Relations;
the first part intended as a philosophical inquiry into witchcraft, and the
power of the devil “to assume a mortal shape:” the latter containing what he
considered a multitude of well-authenticated modern instances.
SIR MATTHEW HALE.
But though progress was made, it was slow. In 1664, the venerable Sir
Matthew Hale condemned two women, named Amy Duny and Rose
Cullender, to the stake at St. Edmondsbury, upon evidence the most
ridiculous. These two old women, whose ugliness gave their neighbours the
first idea that they were witches, went to a shop to purchase herrings, and
were refused. Indignant at the prejudice against them, they were not sparing
of their abuse. Shortly afterward, the daughter of the herring-dealer fell
sick, and a cry was raised that she was bewitched by the old women who
had been refused the herrings. This girl was subject to epileptic fits. To
discover the guilt of Amy Duny and Rose Cullender, the girl’s eyes were
blinded closely with a shawl, and the witches were commanded to touch
her. They did so, and she was immediately seized with a fit. Upon this
evidence they were sent to prison. The girl was afterwards touched by an
indifferent person, and the force of her imagination was so great, that,
thinking it was again the witches, she fell down in a violent fit as before.
This, however, was not received in favour of the accused.
The following extract, from the published reports of the trial, will shew
the sort of evidence which was received:
“Samuel Pacey, of Leystoff (a good, sober man), being sworn, said
that, on Thursday the 10th of October last, his younger daughter,
Deborah, about nine years old, was suddenly taken so lame that she
could not stand on her legs, and so continued till the 17th of the same
month, when the child desired to be carried to a bank on the east side
of the house, looking towards the sea; and, while she was sitting there,
Amy Duny came to this examinant’s house to buy some herrings, but
was denied. Then she came twice more, but, being as often denied, she
went away discontented and grumbling. At this instant of time, the
child was taken with terrible fits, complaining of a pain in her
stomach, as if she was pricked with pins, shrieking out with a voice
like a whelp, and thus continued till the 30th of the same month. This
examinant further saith, that Amy Duny, having long had the
reputation of a witch, and his child having, in the intervals of her fits,
constantly cried out on her as the cause of her disorder, saying, that the
said Amy did appear to her and fright her; he himself did suspect the
said Amy to be a witch, and charged her with being the cause of his
child’s illness, and set her in the stocks. Two days after, his daughter
Elizabeth was taken with such strange fits, that they could not force
open her mouth without a tap; and the younger child being in the same
condition, they used to her the same remedy. Both children grievously
complained that Amy Duny and another woman, whose habit and
looks they described, did appear to them and torment them, and would
cry out, ‘There stands Amy Duny! There stands Rose Cullender!’ the
other person who afflicted them. Their fits were not alike. Sometimes
they were lame on the right side; sometimes on the left; and sometimes
so sore, that they could not bear to be touched. Sometimes they were
perfectly well in other respects, but they could not hear; at other times
they could not see. Sometimes they lost their speech for one, two, and
once for eight days together. At times they had swooning fits, and,
when they could speak, were taken with a fit of coughing, and vomited
phlegm and crooked pins; and once a great twopenny nail, with above
forty pins; which nail he, the examinant, saw vomited up, with many
of the pins. The nail and pins were produced in the court. Thus the
children continued for two months, during which time the examinant
often made them read in the New Testament, and observed, when they
came to the words Lord Jesus, or Christ, they could not pronounce
them, but fell into a fit. When they came to the word Satan, or devil,
they would point, and say, ‘This bites, but makes me speak right well.’
Finding his children thus tormented without hopes of recovery, he sent
them to his sister, Margaret Arnold, at Yarmouth, being willing to try
whether change of air would help them.
“Margaret Arnold was the next witness. Being sworn, she said, that
about the 30th of November, Elizabeth and Deborah Pacey came to her
house, with her brother, who told her what had happened, and that he
thought his children bewitched. She, this examinant, did not much
regard it, supposing the children had played tricks, and put the pins
into their mouths themselves. She therefore took all the pins from their
clothes, sewing them with thread instead of pinning them. But,
notwithstanding, they raised, at times, at least thirty pins in her
presence, and had terrible fits; in which fits they would cry out upon
Amy Duny and Rose Cullender, saying, that they saw them and heard
them threatening, as before; that they saw things like mice running
about the house; and one of them catched one, and threw it into the
fire, which made a noise like a rat. Another time the younger child,
being out of doors, a thing like a bee would have forced itself into her
mouth, at which the child ran screaming into the house, and before this
examinant could come at her, fell into a fit, and vomited a twopenny
nail, with a broad head. After that, this examinant asked the child how
she came by this nail, when she answered, ‘The bee brought the nail,
and forced it into my mouth.’ At other times, the eldest child told this
examinant that she saw flies bring her crooked pins. She would then
fall into a fit, and vomit such pins. One time the said child said she saw
a mouse, and crept under the table to look for it; and afterwards, the
child seemed to put something into her apron, saying, ‘She had caught
it.’ She then ran to the fire, and threw it in, on which there did appear
to this examinant something like a flash of gunpowder, although she
does own she saw nothing in the child’s hand. Once the child, being
speechless, but otherwise very sensible, ran up and down the house,
crying, ‘Hush! hush!’ as if she had seen poultry; but this examinant
saw nothing. At last the child catched at something, and threw it into
the fire. Afterwards, when the child could speak, this examinant asked
her what she saw at the time? She answered that she saw a duck.
Another time the youngest child said, after a fit, that Amy Duny had
been with her, and tempted her to drown herself, or cut her throat, or
otherwise destroy herself. Another time they both cried out upon Amy
Duny and Rose Cullender, saying, ‘Why don’t you come yourselves?
Why do you send your imps to torment us?’”
SIR THOMAS BROWN.
The celebrated Sir Thomas Brown, the author of Vulgar Errors, was
also examined as a witness upon the trial. Being desired to give his opinion
of the three persons in court, he said he was clearly of opinion that they
were bewitched. He said there had lately been a discovery of witches in
Denmark, who used the same way of tormenting persons, by conveying
crooked pins, needles, and nails into their bodies. That he thought, in such
cases, the devil acted upon human bodies by natural means, namely, by
exciting and stirring up the superabundant humours; he did afflict them in a
more surprising manner by the same diseases their bodies were usually
subject to; that these fits might be natural, only raised to a great degree by
the subtlety of the devil, co-operating with the malice of these witches.
The evidence being concluded, Sir Matthew Hale addressed the jury. He
said, he would waive repeating the evidence, to prevent any mistake, and
told the jury there were two things they had to inquire into. First, Whether
or not these children were bewitched; secondly, Whether these women did
bewitch them. He said, he did not in the least doubt there were witches;
first, Because the Scriptures affirmed it; secondly, Because the wisdom of
all nations, particularly our own, had provided laws against witchcraft,
which implied their belief of such a crime. He desired them strictly to
observe the evidence, and begged of God to direct their hearts in the
weighty concern they had in hand, since, to condemn the innocent and let
the guilty go free are both an abomination to the Lord.
The jury then retired, and in about half an hour returned a verdict of
guilty upon all the indictments, being thirteen in number. The next morning
the children came with their father to the lodgings of Sir Matthew Hale,
very well, and quite restored to their usual health. Mr. Pacey, being asked at
what time their health began to improve, replied, that they were quite well
in half an hour after the conviction of the prisoners.
Many attempts were made to induce the unfortunate women to confess
their guilt; but in vain, and they were both hanged.
Eleven trials were instituted before Chief Justice Holt for witchcraft,
between the years 1694 and 1701. The evidence was of the usual character;
but Holt appealed so successfully in each case to the common sense of the
jury, that they were every one acquitted. A general feeling seemed to
pervade the country that blood enough had been shed upon these absurd
charges. Now and then, the flame of persecution burnt up in a remote
district; but these instances were no longer looked upon as mere matters of
course. They appear, on the contrary, to have excited much attention; a sure
proof, if no other were to be obtained, that they were becoming unfrequent.
A case of witchcraft was tried in 1711, before Lord Chief Justice
Powell; in which, however, the jury persisted in a verdict of guilty, though
the evidence was of the usual absurd and contradictory character, and the
enlightened judge did all in his power to bring them to a right conclusion.
The accused person was one Jane Wenham, better known as the Witch of
Walkerne; and the persons who were alleged to have suffered from her
witchcraft were two young women, named Thorne and Street. A witness,
named Mr. Arthur Chauncy, deposed, that he had seen Ann Thorne in
several of her fits, and that she always recovered upon prayers being said,
or if Jane Wenham came to her. He related, that he had pricked the prisoner
several times in the arms, but could never fetch any blood from her; that he
had seen her vomit pins, when there were none in her clothes or within her
reach; and that he had preserved several of them, which he was ready to
produce. The judge, however, told him that was needless, as he supposed
they were crooked pins.
Mr. Francis Bragge, another witness, deposed, that strange “cakes” of
bewitched feathers having been taken from Ann Thorne’s pillow, he was
anxious to see them. He went into a room where some of these feathers
were, and took two of the cakes, and compared them together. They were
both of a circular figure, something larger than a crown piece; and he
observed that the small feathers were placed in a nice and curious order, at
equal distances from each other, making so many radii of the circle, in the
centre of which the quill-ends of the feathers met. He counted the number
of these feathers, and found them to be exactly thirty-two in each cake. He
afterwards endeavoured to pull off two or three of them, and observed that
they were all fastened together by a sort of viscous matter, which would
stretch seven or eight times in a thread before it broke. Having taken off
several of these feathers, he removed the viscous matter with his fingers,
and found under it, in the centre, some short hairs, black and grey, matted
together, which he verily believed to be cat’s hair. He also said, that Jane
Wenham confessed to him that she had bewitched the pillow, and had
practised witchcraft for sixteen years.
The judge interrupted the witness at this stage, and said, he should very
much like to see an enchanted feather, and seemed to wonder when he was
told that none of these strange cakes had been preserved. His lordship asked
the witness why he did not keep one or two of them, and was informed that
they had all been burnt, in order to relieve the bewitched person of the pains
she suffered, which could not be so well effected by any other means.
A man, named Thomas Ireland, deposed, that hearing several times a
great noise of cats crying and screaming about his house, he went out and
frightened them away, and they all ran towards the cottage of Jane Wenham.
One of them he swore positively had a face very like Jane Wenham’s.
Another man, named Burville, gave similar evidence, and swore that he had
often seen a cat with Jane Wenham’s face. Upon one occasion he was in
Ann Thorne’s chamber, when several cats came in, and among them the cat
above stated. This witness would have favoured the court with a much
longer statement, but was stopped by the judge, who said he had heard quite
enough.
The prisoner, in her defence, said nothing, but that “she was a clear
woman.” The learned judge then summed up, leaving it to the jury to
determine whether such evidence as they had heard was sufficient to take
away the prisoner’s life upon the indictment. After a long deliberation they
brought in their verdict, that she was guilty upon the evidence. The judge
then asked them whether they found her guilty upon the indictment of
conversing with the devil in the shape of a cat? The sapient foreman very
gravely answered, “We find her guilty of that.” The learned judge then very
reluctantly proceeded to pass sentence of death; but, by his persevering
exertions, a pardon was at last obtained, and the wretched old woman was
set at liberty.
In the year 1716, a woman and her daughter—the latter only nine years
of age—were hanged at Huntingdon for selling their souls to the devil, and
raising a storm by pulling off their stockings and making a lather of soap.
This appears to have been the last judicial execution in England. From that
time to the year 1736, the populace raised at intervals the old cry, and more
than once endangered the lives of poor women by dragging them through
ponds on suspicion; but the philosophy of those who, from their position,
sooner or later give the tone to the opinions and morals of the poor, was
silently working a cure for the evil. The fear of witches ceased to be
epidemic, and became individual, lingering only in minds fettered by
inveterate prejudice or brutalising superstition. In the year 1736, the penal
statute of James I. was finally blotted from the statute-book, and suffered no
longer to disgrace the advancing intelligence of the country. Pretenders to
witchcraft, fortune-tellers, conjurors, and all their train, were liable only to
the common punishment of rogues and impostors—imprisonment and the
pillory.
In Scotland, the delusion also assumed the same phases, and was
gradually extinguished in the light of civilisation. As in England, the
progress of improvement was slow. Up to the year 1665, little or no
diminution of the mania was perceptible. In 1643, the General Assembly
recommended that the privy council should institute a standing commission,
composed of any “understanding gentlemen or magistrates,” to try the
witches, who were stated to have increased enormously of late years. In
1649, an act was passed, confirmatory of the original statute of Queen
Mary, explaining some points of the latter which were doubtful, and
enacting severe penalties, not only against witches themselves, but against
all who covenanted with them, or sought by their means to pry into the
secrets of futurity, or cause any evil to the life, lands, or limbs of their
neighbours. For the next ten years, the popular madness upon this subject
was perhaps more furious than ever; upwards of four thousand persons
suffered for the crime during that interval. This was the consequence of the
act of parliament and the unparalleled severity of the magistrates; the latter
frequently complained that for two witches they burned one day, there were
ten to burn the next: they never thought that they themselves were the cause
of the increase. In a single circuit, held at Glasgow, Ayr, and Stirling, in
1659, seventeen unhappy creatures were burned by judicial sentence for
trafficking with Satan. In one day (November 7, 1661), the privy council
issued no less than fourteen commissions for trials in the provinces. Next
year, the violence of the persecution seems to have abated. From 1662 to
1668, although “the understanding gentlemen and magistrates” already
mentioned, continued to try and condemn, the High Court of Justiciary had
but one offender of this class to deal with, and she was acquitted. James
Welsh, a common pricker, was ordered to be publicly whipped through the
streets of Edinburgh for falsely accusing a woman of witchcraft; a fact
which alone proves that the superior court sifted the evidence in these cases
with much more care and severity than it had done a few years previously.
The enlightened Sir George Mackenzie, styled by Dryden “the noble wit of
Scotland,” laboured hard to introduce this rule into court, that the
confessions of the witches should be held of little worth, and that the
evidence of the prickers and other interested persons should be received
with distrust and jealousy. This was reversing the old practice, and saved
many innocent lives. Though a firm believer both in ancient and modern
witchcraft, he could not shut his eyes to the atrocities daily committed
under the name of justice. In his work on the Criminal Law of Scotland,
published in 1678, he says, “From the horridness of this crime, I do
conclude that, of all others, it requires the clearest relevancy and most
convincing probature; and I condemn, next to the witches themselves, those
cruel and too forward judges who burn persons by thousands as guilty of
this crime.” In the same year, Sir John Clerk plumply refused to serve as a
commissioner on trials for witchcraft, alleging, by way of excuse, “that he
was not himself good conjuror enough to be duly qualified.” The views
entertained by Sir George Mackenzie were so favourably received by the
Lords of Session, that he was deputed, in 1680, to report to them on the
cases of a number of poor women who were then in prison awaiting their
trial. Sir George stated that there was no evidence against them whatever
but their own confessions, which were absurd and contradictory, and drawn
from them by severe torture. They were immediately discharged.
For the next sixteen years the Lords of Session were unoccupied with
trials for witchcraft. Not one is entered upon the record. But in 1697 a case
occurred which equalled in absurdity any of those that signalised the dark
reign of King James. A girl named Christiana Shaw, eleven years of age, the
daughter of John Shaw of Bargarran, was subject to fits; and being of a
spiteful temper, she accused her maid-servant, with whom she had frequent
quarrels, of bewitching her. Her story unfortunately was believed.
Encouraged to tell all the persecutions of the devil which the maid had sent
to torment her, she in the end concocted a romance that involved twenty-
one persons. There was no other evidence against them but the fancies of
this lying child, and the confessions which pain had extorted from them; but
upon this no less than five women were condemned before Lord Blantyre
and the rest of the commissioners, appointed specially by the privy council
to try this case. They were burned on the Green at Paisley. The warlock of
the party, one John Reed, who was also condemned, hanged himself in
prison. It was the general belief in Paisley that the devil had strangled him
lest he should have revealed in his last moments too many of the unholy
secrets of witchcraft. This trial excited considerable disgust in Scotland.
The Rev. Mr. Bell, a contemporary writer, observed that, in this business,
“persons of more goodness and esteem than most of their calumniators were
defamed for witches.” He adds, that the persons chiefly to blame were
“certain ministers of too much forwardness and absurd credulity, and some
topping professors in and about Glasgow.”34
After this trial, there again occurs a lapse of seven years, when the
subject was painfully forced upon public attention by the brutal cruelty of
the mob at Pittenween. Two women were accused of having bewitched a
strolling beggar who was subject to fits, or who pretended to be so, for the
purpose of exciting commiseration. They were cast into prison, and tortured
until they confessed. One of them, named Janet Cornfoot, contrived to
escape, but was brought back to Pittenween next day by a party of soldiers.
On her approach to the town she was unfortunately met by a furious mob,
composed principally of fishermen and their wives, who seized upon her
with the intention of swimming her. They forced her away to the sea-shore,
and tying a rope around her body, secured the end of it to the mast of a
fishing-boat lying alongside. In this manner they ducked her several times.
When she was half dead, a sailor in the boat cut away the rope, and the mob
dragged her through the sea to the beach. Here, as she lay quite insensible, a
brawny ruffian took down the door of his hut, close by, and placed it on her
back. The mob gathered large stones from the beach and piled them upon
her till the wretched woman was pressed to death. No magistrate made the
slightest attempt to interfere; and the soldiers looked on, delighted
spectators. A great outcry was raised against this culpable remissness, but
no judicial inquiry was set on foot. This happened in 1704.
The next case we hear of is that of Elspeth Rule, found guilty of
witchcraft before Lord Anstruther, at the Dumfries circuit, in 1708. She was
sentenced to be marked in the cheek with a red-hot iron, and banished the
realm of Scotland for life.
Again there is a long interval. In 1718, the remote county of Caithness,
where the delusion remained in all its pristine vigour for years after it had
ceased elsewhere, was startled from its propriety by the cry of witchcraft. A
silly fellow, named William Montgomery, a carpenter, had a mortal
antipathy to cats; and somehow or other these animals generally chose his
back-yard as the scene of their catterwaulings. He puzzled his brains for a
long time to know why he, above all his neighbours, should be so pestered.
At last he came to the sage conclusion that his tormentors were no cats, but
witches. In this opinion he was supported by his maid-servant, who swore a
round oath that she had often heard the aforesaid cats talking together in
human voices. The next time the unlucky tabbies assembled in his back-
yard, the valiant carpenter was on the alert. Arming himself with an axe, a
dirk, and a broadsword, he rushed out among them. One of them he
wounded in the back, a second in the hip, and the leg of a third he maimed
with his axe; but he could not capture any of them. A few days afterwards,
two old women of the parish died; and it was said, that when their bodies
were laid out, there appeared upon the back of one the mark as of a recent
wound, and a similar scar upon the hip of the other. The carpenter and his
maid were convinced that they were the very cats, and the whole county
repeated the same story. Every one was upon the look-out for proofs
corroborative; a very remarkable one was soon discovered. Nanny Gilbert,
a wretched old creature of upwards of seventy years of age, was found in
bed with her leg broken. As she was ugly enough for a witch, it was
asserted that she also was one of the cats that had fared so ill at the hands of
the carpenter. The latter, when informed of the popular suspicion, asserted
that he distinctly remembered to have struck one of the cats a blow with the
back of his broadsword, which ought to have broken her leg. Nanny was
immediately dragged from her bed and thrown into prison. Before she was
put to the torture, she explained in a very natural and intelligible manner
how she had broken her limb; but this account did not give satisfaction. The
professional persuasions of the torturer made her tell a different tale, and
she confessed that she was indeed a witch, and had been wounded by
Montgomery on the night stated; that the two old women recently deceased
were witches also, besides about a score of others whom she named. The
poor creature suffered so much by the removal from her own home, and the
tortures inflicted upon her, that she died the next day in prison. Happily for
the persons she had named in her confession, Dundas of Arniston, at that
time the king’s advocate-general, wrote to the sheriff-depute, one Captain
Ross of Littledean, cautioning him not to proceed to trial, the “thing being
of too great difficulty, and beyond the jurisdiction of an inferior court.”
Dundas himself examined the precognition with great care, and was so
convinced of the utter folly of the whole case, that he quashed all further
proceedings.
We find this same sheriff-depute of Caithness very active four years
afterwards in another trial for witchcraft. In spite of the warning he had
received that all such cases were to be tried in future by the superior courts,
he condemned to death an old woman at Dornoch, upon the charge of
bewitching the cows and pigs of her neighbours. This poor creature was
insane, and actually laughed and clapped her hands at sight of “the bonnie
fire” that was to consume her. She had a daughter who was lame both of her
hands and feet, and one of the charges brought against her was, that she had
used this daughter as a pony in her excursions to join the devil’s sabbath,
and that the devil himself had shod her, and produced lameness.
This was the last execution that took place in Scotland for witchcraft.
The penal statutes were repealed in 1736; and, as in England, whipping, the
pillory, or imprisonment, were declared the future punishments of all
pretenders to magic or witchcraft.
Still for many years after this the superstition lingered both in England
and Scotland, and in some districts is far from being extinct even at this
day. But before we proceed to trace it any further than to its legal extinction,
we have yet to see the frightful havoc it made in continental Europe from
the commencement of the seventeenth to the middle of the eighteenth
century. France, Germany, and Switzerland were the countries which
suffered most from the epidemic. The number of victims in these countries
during the sixteenth century has already been mentioned; but at the early
part of the seventeenth, the numbers are so great, especially in Germany,
that were they not to be found in the official records of the tribunals, it
would be almost impossible to believe that mankind could ever have been
so maddened and deluded. To use the words of the learned and
indefatigable Horst,35 “the world seemed to be like a large madhouse for
witches and devils to play their antics in.” Satan was believed to be at every
body’s call to raise the whirlwind, draw down the lightning, blight the
productions of the earth, or destroy the health and paralyse the limbs of
man. This belief, so insulting to the majesty and beneficence of the Creator,
was shared by the most pious ministers of religion. Those who in their
morning and evening prayers acknowledged the one true God, and praised
him for the blessings of the seed-time and the harvest, were convinced that
frail humanity could enter into a compact with the spirits of hell to subvert
his laws and thwart all his merciful intentions. Successive popes, from
Innocent VIII. downwards, promulgated this degrading doctrine, which
spread so rapidly, that society seemed to be divided into two great factions,
the bewitching and the bewitched.
The commissioners named by Innocent VIII. to prosecute the witch-
trials in Germany were, Jacob Sprenger, so notorious for his work on
demonology, entitled the Malleus Maleficarum, or Hammer to knock down
Witches; Henry Institor, a learned jurisconsult; and the Bishop of
Strasburgh. Bamberg, Trèves, Cologne, Paderborn, and Würzburg, were the
chief seats of the commissioners, who, during their lives alone, condemned
to the stake, on a very moderate calculation, upwards of three thousand
victims. The number of witches so increased, that new commissioners were
continually appointed in Germany, France, and Switzerland. In Spain and
Portugal the Inquisition alone took cognisance of the crime. It is impossible
to search the records of those dark, but now happily non-existing tribunals;
but the mind recoils with affright even to form a guess of the multitudes
who perished.
The mode of trial in the other countries is more easily ascertained.
Sprenger in Germany, and Bodinus and Delrio in France, have left but too
ample a record of the atrocities committed in the much-abused names of
justice and religion. Bodinus, of great repute and authority in the
seventeenth century, says, “The trial of this offence must not be conducted
like other crimes. Whoever adheres to the ordinary course of justice
perverts the spirit of the law, both divine and human. He who is accused of
sorcery should never be acquitted, unless the malice of the prosecutor be
clearer than the sun; for it is so difficult to bring full proof of this secret
crime, that out of a million of witches not one would be convicted if the
usual course were followed!” Henri Boguet, a witch-finder, who styled
himself “The Grand Judge of Witches for the Territory of St. Claude,” drew
up a code for the guidance of all persons engaged in the witch-trials,
consisting of seventy articles, quite as cruel as the code of Bodinus. In this
document he affirms, that a mere suspicion of witchcraft justifies the
immediate arrest and torture of the suspected person. If the prisoner
muttered, looked on the ground, and did not shed any tears, all these were
proofs positive of guilt! In all cases of witchcraft, the evidence of the child
ought to be taken against its parent; and persons of notoriously bad
character, although not to be believed upon their oaths on the ordinary
occasions of dispute that might arise between man and man, were to be
believed, if they swore that any person had bewitched them! Who, when he
hears that this diabolical doctrine was the universally received opinion of
the ecclesiastical and civil authorities, can wonder that thousands upon
thousands of unhappy persons should be brought to the stake? that Cologne
should for many years burn its three hundred witches annually? the district
of Bamberg its four hundred? Nuremberg, Geneva, Paris, Toulouse, Lyons,
and other cities, their two hundred?
A few of these trials may be cited, taking them in the order of priority,
as they occurred in different parts of the Continent. In 1595, an old woman
residing in a village near Constance, angry at not being invited to share the
sports of the country people on a day of public rejoicing, was heard to
mutter something to herself, and was afterwards seen to proceed through
the fields towards a hill, where she was lost sight of. A violent thunder-
storm arose about two hours afterwards, which wet the dancers to the skin,
and did considerable damage to the plantations. This woman, suspected
before of witchcraft, was seized and imprisoned, and accused of having
raised the storm, by filling a hole with wine, and stirring it about with a
stick. She was tortured till she confessed, and was burned alive the next
evening.
CITY OF LYONS.
About the same time two sorcerers in Toulouse were accused of having
dragged a crucifix about the streets at midnight, stopping at times to spit
upon and kick it, and uttering at intervals an exorcism to raise the devil. The
next day a hail-storm did considerable damage to the crops; and a girl, the
daughter of a shoemaker in the town, remembered to have heard in the
night the execrations of the wizards. Her story led to their arrest. The usual
means to produce confession were resorted to. The wizards owned that they
could raise tempests whenever they pleased, and named several persons
who possessed similar powers. They were hanged, and then burned in the
market-place, and seven of the persons they had mentioned shared the same
fate.
Hoppo and Stadlin, two noted wizards of Germany, were executed in
1599. They implicated twenty or thirty witches, who went about causing
women to miscarry, bringing down the lightning of heaven, and making
maidens bring forth toads. To this latter fact several girls were found to
swear most positively! Stadlin confessed that he had killed seven infants in
the womb of one woman.
Bodinus highly praises the exertions of a witch-finder named Nider, in
France, who prosecuted so many that he could not calculate them. Some of
these witches could, by a single word, cause people to fall down dead;
others made women go with child three years instead of nine months; while
others, by certain invocations and ceremonies, could turn the faces of their
enemies upside down, or twist them round to their backs. Although no
witness was ever procured who saw persons in this horrible state, the
witches confessed that they had the power and exercised it. Nothing more
was wanting to ensure the stake.
At Amsterdam a crazy girl confessed that she could cause sterility in
cattle, and bewitch pigs and poultry by merely repeating the magic words
Turius und Shurius Inturius! She was hanged and burned. Another woman
in the same city, named Kornelis van Purmerund, was arrested in
consequence of some disclosures the former had made. A witness came
forward and swore that she one day looked through the window of her hut,
and saw Kornelis sitting before a fire muttering something to the devil. She
was sure it was to the devil, because she heard him answer her. Shortly
afterwards twelve black cats ascended out of the floor, and danced on their
hind legs around the witch for the space of about half an hour. They then
vanished with a horrid noise, and leaving a disagreeable smell behind them.
She also was hanged and burned.
At Bamberg, in Bavaria, the executions from the year 1610 to 1640
were at the rate of about a hundred annually. One woman, suspected of
witchcraft, was seized because, having immoderately praised the beauty of
a child, it had shortly afterwards fallen ill and died. She confessed upon the
rack that the devil had given her the power to work evil upon those she
hated, by speaking words in their praise. If she said with unwonted fervour,
“What a strong man!” “What a lovely woman!” “What a sweet child!” the
devil understood her, and afflicted them with diseases immediately. It is
quite unnecessary to state the end of this poor creature. Many women were
executed for causing strange substances to lodge in the bodies of those who
offended them. Bits of wood, nails, hair, egg-shells, bits of glass, shreds of
linen and woollen cloth, pebbles, and even hot cinders and knives, were the
articles generally chosen. These were believed to remain in the body till the
witches confessed or were executed, when they were voided from the
bowels, or by the mouth, nostrils, or ears. Modern physicians have often
had cases of a similar description under their care, where girls have
swallowed needles, which have been voided on the arms, legs, and other
parts of the body. But the science of that day could not account for these
phenomena otherwise than by the power of the devil; and every needle
swallowed by a servant-maid cost an old woman her life. Nay, if no more
than one suffered in consequence, the district might think itself fortunate.
The commissioners seldom stopped short at one victim. The revelations of
the rack in most cases implicated half a score.
BAMBERG.
Of all the records of the witch-trials preserved for the wonder of
succeeding ages, that of Würzburg, from 1627 to 1629, is the most frightful.
Hauber, who has preserved this list in his Acta et Scripta Magica, says, in a
note at the end, that it is far from complete, and that there were a great
many other burnings too numerous to specify. This record, which relates to
the city only, and not to the province of Würzburg, contains the names of
one hundred and fifty-seven persons who were burned in two years in
twenty-nine burnings, averaging from five to six at a time. The list
comprises three play-actors, four innkeepers, three common councilmen of
Würzburg, fourteen vicars of the cathedral, the burgomaster’s lady, an
apothecary’s wife and daughter, two choristers of the cathedral, Göbel
Babelin, the prettiest girl in the town, and the wife, the two little sons and
the daughter of the councillor Stolzenberg. Rich and poor, young and old,
suffered alike. At the seventh of these recorded burnings, the victims are
described as a wandering boy, twelve years of age, and four strange men
and women found sleeping in the market-place. Thirty-two of the whole
number appear to have been vagrants, of both sexes, who, failing to give a
satisfactory account of themselves, were accused and found guilty of
witchcraft. The number of children on the list is horrible to think upon. The
thirteenth and fourteenth burnings comprised four persons, who are stated
to have been a little maiden nine years of age, a maiden still less, her sister,
their mother, and their aunt, a pretty young woman of twenty-four. At the
eighteenth burning the victims were two boys of twelve, and a girl of
fifteen; at the nineteenth, the young heir of the noble house of Rotenhahn,
aged nine, and two other boys, one aged ten, and the other twelve. Among
other entries appear the names of Baunach, the fattest, and Steinacher, the
richest burgher in Würzburg. What tended to keep up the delusion in this
unhappy city, and, indeed, all over Europe, was the number of
hypochondriac and diseased persons who came voluntarily forward and
made confession of witchcraft. Several of the victims in the foregoing list
had only themselves to blame for their fate. Many again, including the
apothecary’s wife and daughter already mentioned, pretended to sorcery,
and sold poisons, or attempted by means of charms and incantations to raise
the devil. But throughout all this fearful period the delusion of the criminals
was as great as that of the judges. Depraved persons who in ordinary times
would have been thieves or murderers, added the desire of sorcery to their
depravity, sometimes with the hope of acquiring power over their fellows,
and sometimes with the hope of securing impunity in this world by the
protection of Satan. One of the persons executed at the first burning, a
prostitute, was heard repeating the exorcism which was supposed to have
the power of raising the arch enemy in the form of a goat. This precious
specimen of human folly has been preserved by Horst in his
Zauberbibliothek. It ran as follows, and was to be repeated slowly, with
many ceremonies and wavings of the hand:
“Lalle, Bachera, Magotte, Baphia, Dajam,
Vagoth Heneche Ammi Nagaz, Adomator
Raphael Immanuel Christus, Tetragrammaton
Agra Jod Loi. König! König!”
The two last words were uttered quickly, and with a sort of scream, and
were supposed to be highly agreeable to Satan, who loved to be called a
king. If he did not appear immediately, it was necessary to repeat a further
exorcism. The one in greatest repute was as follows, and was to be read
backwards, with the exception of the last two words:
“Anion, Lalle, Sabolos, Sado, Pater, Aziel
Adonai Sado Vagoth Agra, Jod,
Baphra! Komm! Komm!”
When the witch wanted to get rid of the devil, who was sometimes in the
habit of prolonging his visits to an unconscionable length, she had only to
repeat the following, also backwards, when he generally disappeared,
leaving behind him a suffocating smell:
“Zellianelle Heotti Bonus Vagotha
Plisos sother osech unicus Beelzebub
Dax! Komm! Komm!”
This nonsensical jargon soon became known to all the idle and foolish boys
of Germany. Many an unhappy urchin, who in a youthful frolic had
repeated it, paid for his folly the penalty of his life. Three, whose ages
varied from ten to fifteen, were burned alive at Würzburg for no other
offence. Of course every other boy in the city became still more convinced
of the power of the charm. One boy confessed that he would willingly have
sold himself to the devil, if he could have raised him, for a good dinner and
cakes every day of his life, and a pony to ride upon. This luxurious
youngster, instead of being horsewhipped for his folly, was hanged and
burned.
The small district of Lindheim was, if possible, even more notorious
than Würzburg for the number of its witch-burnings. In the year 1633 a
famous witch, named Pomp Anna, who could cause her foes to fall sick by
merely looking at them, was discovered and burned, along with three of her
companions. Every year in this parish, consisting at most of a thousand
persons, the average number of executions was five. Between the years
1660 and 1664, the number consumed was thirty. If the executions all over
Germany had been in this frightful proportion, hardly a family could have
escaped losing one of its members.
In 1627, a ballad entitled the Druten Zeitung, or the Witches’ Gazette,
was very popular in Germany. It detailed, according to the title-page of a
copy printed at Smalcald in 1627, “An account of the remarkable events
which took place in Franconia, Bamberg, and Würzburg, with those
wretches who from avarice or ambition have sold themselves to the devil,
and how they had their reward at last: set to music, and to be sung to the
tune of Dorothea.” The sufferings of the witches at the stake are explained
in it with great minuteness, the poet waxing extremely witty when he
describes the horrible contortions of pain upon their countenances, and the
shrieks that rent the air when any one of more than common guilt was
burned alive. A trick resorted to in order to force one witch to confess, is
told in this doggrel as an excellent joke. As she obstinately refused to own
that she was in league with the powers of evil, the commissioners suggested
that the hangman should dress himself in a bear’s skin, with the horns, tail,
and all the et-ceteras, and in this form penetrate into her dungeon. The
woman, in the darkness of her cell, could not detect the imposture, aided as
it was by her own superstitious fears. She thought she was actually in the
presence of the prince of hell; and when she was told to keep up her
courage, and that she should be relieved from the power of her enemies, she
fell on her knees before the supposed devil, and swore to dedicate herself
hereafter, body and soul, to his service. Germany is, perhaps, the only
country in Europe where the delusion was so great as to have made such
detestable verses as these the favourites of the people:
“Man shickt ein Henkersknecht
Zu ihr in Gefängniss n’unter,
Den man hat kleidet recht,
Mit einer Bärnhaute,
Als wenns der Teufel wär;
Als ihm die Drut anschaute
Meints ihr Buhl kam daher.
Sie sprach zu ihm behende,
Wie lässt du mich so lang
In der Obrigkeit Hände?
Hilf mir aus ihren Zwang,
Wie du mir hast verheissen,
Ich bin ja eben dein,
Thu mich aus der Angst entreissen
O liebster Buhle mein!”36
This rare poet adds, that in making such an appeal to the hangman, the
witch never imagined the roast that was to be made of her, and puts in, by
way of parenthesis, “was not that fine fun!—was das war für ein Spiel!” As
feathers thrown into the air shew how the wind blows, so this trumpery
ballad serves to shew the current of popular feeling at the time of its
composition.
All readers of history are familiar with the celebrated trial of the
Maréchale d’Ancre, who was executed in Paris in the year 1617. Although
witchcraft was one of the accusations brought against her, the real crime for
which she suffered was her ascendency over the mind of Mary of Medicis,
and the consequent influence she exercised indirectly over the unworthy
king, Louis XIII. Her coachman gave evidence that she had sacrificed a
cock at midnight in one of the churches, and others swore they had seen her
go secretly into the house of a noted witch named Isabella. When asked by
what means she had acquired so extraordinary an influence over the mind
of the Queen Mother, she replied boldly that she exercised no other power
over her than that which a strong mind can always exercise over the weak.
She died with great firmness.
In two years afterwards, scenes far more horrible than any that had yet
taken place in France were enacted at Labourt, at the foot of the Pyrenees.
The parliament of Bourdeaux, scandalised at the number of witches who
were said to infest Labourt and its neighbourhood, deputed one of its own
members, the noted Pierre de l’Ancre, and its president, Espaignel, to
inquire into the matter, with full powers to punish the offenders. They
arrived at Labourt in May, 1619. De l’Ancre wrote a book setting forth all
his great deeds in this battle against the powers of evil. It is full of obscenity
and absurdity, but the facts may be relied on as far as they relate to the
number of trials and executions, and the strange confessions which torture
forced from the unhappy criminals.
De l’Ancre states as a reason why so many witches were to be found at
Labourt, that the country was mountainous and sterile! He discovered many
of them from their partiality to smoking tobacco. It may be inferred from
this that he was of the opinion of King James, that tobacco was the “devil’s
weed.” When the commission first sat, the number of persons brought to
trial was about forty a day. The acquittals did not average so many as five
per cent. All the witches confessed that they had been present at the great
Domdaniel, or Sabbath. At these saturnalia the devil sat upon a large gilded
throne, sometimes in the form of a goat; sometimes as a gentleman, dressed
all in black, with boots, spurs, and sword; and very often as a shapeless
mass, resembling the trunk of a blasted tree, seen indistinctly amid the
darkness. They generally proceeded to the Domdaniel, riding on spits,
pitchforks, or broomsticks, and on their arrival indulged with the fiends in
every species of debauchery. Upon one occasion they had had the audacity
to celebrate this festival in the very heart of the city of Bourdeaux. The
throne of the arch fiend was placed in the middle of the Place de Gallienne,
and the whole space was covered with the multitude of witches and wizards
who flocked to it from far and near, some arriving even from distant
Scotland.
After two hundred poor wretches had been hanged and burned, there
seemed no diminution in the number of criminals to be tried. Many of the
latter were asked upon the rack what Satan had said when he found that the
commissioners were proceeding with such severity? The general reply was,
that he did not seem to care much about it. Some of them asserted that they
had boldly reproached him for suffering the execution of their friends,
saying, “Out upon thee, false fiend! thy promise was that they should not
die! Look, how thou hast kept thy word! They have been burned, and are a
heap of ashes!” Upon these occasions he was never offended: he would
give orders that the sports of the Domdaniel should cease, and producing
illusory fires that did not burn, he encouraged them to walk through,
assuring them that the fires lighted by the executioner gave no more pain
than those. They would then ask him, where their friends were, since they
had not suffered; to which the “Father of Lies” invariably replied, that they
were happy in a far country, and could see and hear all that was then
passing; and that, if they called by name those they wished to converse
with, they might hear their voices in reply. Satan then imitated the voices of
the defunct witches so successfully that they were all deceived. Having
answered all objections, the orgies recommenced and lasted till the cock
crew.
De l’Ancre was also very zealous in the trial of unhappy monomaniacs
for the crime of lycanthropy. Several who were arrested confessed, without
being tortured, that they were weir-wolves, and that at night they rushed out
among the flocks and herds killing and devouring. One young man at
Besançon, with the full consciousness of the awful fate that awaited him,
voluntarily gave himself up to the commissioner Espaignel, and confessed
that he was the servant of a strong fiend, who was known by the name of
“Lord of the Forests:” by his power he was transformed into the likeness of
a wolf. The “Lord of the Forests” assumed the same shape; but was much
larger, fiercer, and stronger. They prowled about the pastures together at
midnight, strangling the watch-dogs that defended the folds, and killing
more sheep than they could devour. He felt, he said, a fierce pleasure in
these excursions, and howled in excess of joy as he tore with his fangs the
warm flesh of the sheep asunder. This youth was not alone in this horrid
confession; many others voluntarily owned that they were weir-wolves, and
many more were forced by torture to make the same avowal. Such criminals
were thought to be too atrocious to be hanged first and then burned: they
were generally sentenced to be burned alive, and their ashes to be scattered
to the winds. Grave and learned doctors of divinity openly sustained the
possibility of these transformations, relying mainly upon the history of
Nebuchadnezzar. They could not imagine why, if he had been an ox,
modern men could not become wolves by Divine permission and the power
of the devil. They also contended that, if men should confess, it was
evidence enough, if there had been no other. Delrio mentions that one
gentleman accused of lycanthropy was put to the torture no less than twenty
times; but still he would not confess. An intoxicating draught was then
given him, and under its influence he confessed that he was a weir-wolf.
Delrio cites this to shew the extreme equity of the commissioners. They
never burned any body till he confessed; and if one course of torture would
not suffice, their patience was not exhausted, and they tried him again and
again, even to the twentieth time! Well may we exclaim, when such
atrocities have been committed in the name of religion,
“Quel lion, quel tigre égale en cruauté,
Une injuste fureur qu’arme la piété?”
The trial of the unhappy Urbain Grandier, the curate of Loudun, for
bewitching a number of girls in the convent of the Ursulines in that town,
was, like that of the Maréchale d’Ancre, an accusation resorted to by his
enemies to ruin one against whom no other charge could be brought so
readily. This noted affair, which kept France in commotion for months, and
the true character of which was known even at that time, merits no more
than a passing notice in this place. It did not spring from the epidemic dread
of sorcery then so prevalent, but was carried on by wretched intriguers, who
had sworn to have the life of their foe. Such a charge could not be refuted in
1634: the accused could not, as Bodinus expresses it, “make the malice of
the prosecutors more clear than the sun;” and his own denial, however
intelligible, honest, and straightforward, was held as nothing in refutation of
the testimony of the crazy women who imagined themselves bewitched.
The more absurd and contradictory their assertions, the stronger the
argument employed by his enemies that the devil was in them. He was
burned alive, under circumstances of great cruelty.37
A singular instance of the epidemic fear of witchcraft occurred at Lille,
in 1639. A pious but not very sane lady, named Antoinette Bourignon,
founded a school, or hospice, in that city. One day, on entering the
schoolroom, she imagined that she saw a great number of little black angels
flying about the heads of the children. In great alarm she told her pupils of
what she had seen, warning them to beware of the devil whose imps were
hovering about them. The foolish woman continued daily to repeat the same
story, and Satan and his power became the only subject of conversation, not
only between the girls themselves, but between them and their instructors.
One of them at this time ran away from the school. On being brought back
and interrogated, she said she had not run away, but had been carried away
by the devil; she was a witch, and had been one since the age of seven.
Some other little girls in the school went into fits at this announcement, and,
on their recovery, confessed that they also were witches. At last the whole
of them, to the number of fifty, worked upon each other’s imaginations to
such a degree that they also confessed that they were witches—that they
attended the Domdaniel, or meeting of the fiends—that they could ride
through the air on broom-sticks, feast on infants’ flesh, or creep through a
key-hole.
The citizens of Lille were astounded at these disclosures. The clergy
hastened to investigate the matter; many of them, to their credit, openly
expressed their opinion that the whole affair was an imposture—not so the
majority; they strenuously insisted that the confessions of the children were
valid, and that it was necessary to make an example by burning them all for
witches. The poor parents, alarmed for their offspring, implored the
examining Capuchins with tears in their eyes to save their young lives,
insisting that they were bewitched, and not bewitching. This opinion also
gained ground in the town. Antoinette Bourignon, who had put these absurd
notions into the heads of the children, was accused of witchcraft, and
examined before the council. The circumstances of the case seemed so
unfavourable towards her that she would not stay for a second examination.
Disguising herself as she best could, she hastened out of Lille and escaped
pursuit. If she had remained four hours longer, she would have been burned
by judicial sentence as a witch and a heretic. It is to be hoped that, wherever
she went, she learned the danger of tampering with youthful minds, and was
never again entrusted with the management of children.
The Duke of Brunswick and the Elector of Menz were struck with the
great cruelty exercised in the torture of suspected persons, and convinced, at
the same time, that no righteous judge would consider a confession extorted
by pain, and contradictory in itself, as sufficient evidence to justify the
execution of any accused person. It is related of the Duke of Brunswick that
he invited two learned Jesuits to his house, who were known to entertain
strong opinions upon the subject of witchcraft, with a view of shewing them
the cruelty and absurdity of such practices. A woman lay in the dungeon of
the city accused of witchcraft, and the duke, having given previous
instructions to the officiating torturers, went with the two Jesuits to hear her
confession. By a series of artful leading questions the poor creature, in the
extremity of her anguish, was induced to confess that she had often attended
the sabbath of the fiends upon the Brocken; that she had seen two Jesuits
there, who had made themselves notorious, even among witches, for their
abominations; that she had seen them assume the form of goats, wolves,
and other animals; and that many noted witches had borne them five, six,
and seven children at a birth, who had heads like toads, and legs like
spiders. Being asked if the Jesuits were far from her, she replied that they
were in the room beside her. The Duke of Brunswick led his astounded
friends away, and explained the stratagem. This was convincing proof to
both of them that thousands of persons had suffered unjustly; they knew
their own innocence, and shuddered to think what their fate might have
been if an enemy instead of a friend had put such a confession into the
mouth of a criminal. One of these Jesuits was Frederick Spee, the author of
the Cautio Criminalis, published in 1631. This work, exposing the horrors
of the witch-trials, had a most salutary effect in Germany: Schonbrunn,
Archbishop and Elector of Menz, abolished the torture entirely within his
dominions, and his example was imitated by the Duke of Brunswick and
other potentates. The number of supposed witches immediately diminished,
and the violence of the mania began to subside. The Elector of Brandenburg
issued a rescript, in 1654, with respect to the case of Anna of Ellerbrock, a
supposed witch, forbidding the use of torture, and stigmatising the
swimming of witches as an unjust, cruel, and deceitful test.
This was the beginning of the dawn after the long-protracted darkness.
The tribunals no longer condemned witches to execution by hundreds in a
year. Würzburg, the grand theatre of the burnings, burned but one where,
forty years previously, it had burned three score. From 1660 to 1670 the
electoral chambers, in all parts of Germany, constantly commuted the
sentence of death passed by the provincial tribunals into imprisonment for
life, or burning on the cheek.
ROUEN.
A truer philosophy had gradually disabused the public mind. Learned
men freed themselves from the trammels of a debasing superstition, and
governments, both civil and ecclesiastical, repressed the popular delusion
they had so long encouraged. The parliament of Normandy condemned a
number of women to death, in the year 1670, on the old charge of riding on
broomsticks to the Domdaniel; but Louis XIV. commuted the sentence into
banishment for life. The parliament remonstrated, and sent the king the
following remarkable request. The reader will perhaps be glad to see this
document at length. It is of importance, as the last effort of a legislative
assembly to uphold this great error; and the arguments they used and the
instances they quoted are in the highest degree curious. It reflects honour
upon the memory of Louis XIV. that he was not swayed by it.
“REQUEST OF THE PARLIAMENT OF ROUEN TO THE KING, IN 1670.
“Sire,—Emboldened by the authority which your majesty has
committed into our hands in the province of Normandy, to try and
punish offences, and more particularly those offences of the nature of
witchcraft, which tend to the destruction of religion and the ruin of
nations, we, your parliament, remonstrate humbly with your majesty
upon certain cases of this kind which have been lately brought before
us. We cannot permit the letter addressed by your majesty’s command
to the attorney-general of this district, for the reprieve of certain
persons condemned to death for witchcraft, and for the staying of
proceedings in several other cases, to remain unnoticed, and without
remarking upon the consequences which may ensue. There is also a
letter from your secretary of state, declaring your majesty’s intention to
commute the punishment of these criminals into one of perpetual
banishment, and to submit to the opinion of the procureur-general, and
of the most learned members of the parliament of Paris, whether, in the
matter of witchcraft, the jurisprudence of the parliament of Rouen is to
be followed in preference to that of the parliament of Paris, and of the
other parliaments of the kingdom which judge differently.
“Although by the ordinances of the kings your predecessors,
parliaments have been forbidden to pay any attention to lettres de
cachet; we, nevertheless, from the knowledge which we have, in
common with the whole kingdom, of the care bestowed by your
majesty for the good of your subjects, and from the submission and
obedience to your commandments which we have always manifested,
have stayed all proceedings, in conformity to your orders; hoping that
your majesty, considering the importance of the crime of witchcraft,
and the consequences likely to ensue from its impunity, will be
graciously pleased to grant us once more your permission to continue
the trials, and execute judgment upon those found guilty. And as, since
we received the letter of your secretary of state, we have also been
made acquainted with the determination of your majesty, not only to
commute the sentence of death passed upon these witches into one of
perpetual banishment from the province, but to re-establish them in the
possession of their goods and chattels, and of their good fame and
character, your parliament have thought it their duty, on occasion of
these crimes, the greatest which men can commit, to make you
acquainted with the general and uniform feelings of the people of this
province with regard to them; it being, moreover, a question in which
are concerned the glory of God and the relief of your suffering
subjects, who groan under their fears from the threats and menaces of
this sort of persons, and who feel the effects of them every day in the
mortal and extraordinary maladies which attack them, and the
surprising damage and loss of their possessions.
“Your majesty knows well that there is no crime so opposed to the
commands of God as witchcraft, which destroys the very foundation of
religion, and draws strange abominations after it. It is for this reason,
sire, that the Scriptures pronounce the punishment of death against
offenders, and that the Church and the holy fathers have fulminated
their anathemas, and that canonical decisions have one and all decreed
the most severe punishments, to deter from this crime; and that the
Church of France, animated by the piety of the kings your
predecessors, has expressed so great a horror at it, that, not judging the
punishment of perpetual imprisonment, the highest it has the power to
inflict, sufficiently severe, it has left such criminals to be dealt with by
the secular power.
“It has been the general feeling of all nations that such criminals
ought to be condemned to death, and all the ancients were of the same
opinion. The law of the ‘Twelve Tables,’ which was the principal of the
Roman laws, ordains the same punishment. All juris-consults agreed in
it, as well as the constitutions of the emperors, and more especially
those of Constantine and Theodosius, who, enlightened by the Gospel,
not only renewed the same punishment, but also deprived, expressly,
all persons found guilty of witchcraft of the right of appeal, and
declared them to be unworthy of a prince’s mercy. And Charles VIII.,
sire, inspired by the same sentiments, passed that beautiful and severe
ordinance (cette belle et sévère ordonnance), which enjoined the
judges to punish witches according to the exigencies of the case, under
a penalty of being themselves fined or imprisoned, or dismissed from
their office; and decreed, at the same time, that all persons who refused
to denounce a witch, should be punished as accomplices; and that all,
on the contrary, who gave evidence against one should be rewarded.
“From these considerations, sire, and in the execution of so holy an
ordinance, your parliaments, by their decrees, proportion their
punishments to the guilt of the offenders; and your parliament of
Normandy has never, until the present time, found that its practice was
different from that of other courts; for all the books which treat upon
this matter cite an infinite number of decrees condemning witches to
be burnt, or broken on the wheel, or to other punishments. The
following are examples:—In the time of Chilperic, as may be seen in
Gregory of Tours, b. vi. c. 35 of his History of France; all the decrees
of the parliament of Paris passed according to, and in conformity with,
this ancient jurisprudence of the kingdom, cited by Imbert, in his
Judicial Practice; all those cited by Monstrelet, in 1459, against the
witches of Artois; the decrees of the same parliament, of the 13th of
October 1573, against Mary Le Fief, native of Saumur; of the 21st of
October 1596, against the Sieur de Beaumont, who pleaded, in his
defence, that he had only sought the aid of the devil for the purpose of
unbewitching the afflicted and of curing diseases; of the 4th of July
1606, against Francis du Bose; of the 20th of July 1582, against Abel
de la Rue, native of Coulommiers; of the 2d of October 1593, against
Rousseau and his daughter; of 1608, against another Rousseau and one
Peley, for witchcraft and adoration of the devil at the Sabbath, under
the figure of a he-goat, as confessed by them; the decree of 4th of
February 1615, against Leclerc, who appealed from the sentence of the
parliament of Orleans, and who was condemned for having attended
the Sabbath, and confessed, as well as two of his accomplices, who
died in prison, that he had adored the devil, renounced his baptism and
his faith in God, danced the witches’ dance, and offered up unholy
sacrifices; the decrees of the 6th of May 1616, against a man named
Leger, on a similar accusation; the pardon granted by Charles IX. to
Trois Echelles, upon condition of revealing his accomplices, but
afterwards revoked for renewed sorcery on his part; the decree of the
parliament of Paris, cited by Mornac in 1595; the judgments passed in
consequence of the commission given by Henry IV. to the Sieur de
l’Ancre, councillor of the parliament of Bourdeaux; of the 20th of
March 1619, against Etienne Audibert; those passed by the chamber of
Nerac, on the 26th of June 1620, against several witches; those passed
by the parliament of Toulouse in 1577, as cited by Gregory Tolosanus,
against four hundred persons accused of this crime, and who were all
marked with the sign of the devil. Besides all these, we might recal to
your majesty’s recollection the various decrees of the parliament of
Provence, especially in the case of Gaufrédy in 1611; the decrees of
the parliament of Dijon, and those of the parliament of Rennes,
following the example of the condemnation of the Marshal de Rays,
who was burned in 1441, for the crime of witchcraft, in presence of the
Duke of Brittany;—all these examples, sire, prove that the accusation
of witchcraft has always been punished with death by the parliaments
of your kingdom, and justify the uniformity of their practice.
“These, sire, are the motives upon which your parliament of
Normandy has acted in decreeing the punishment of death against the
persons lately brought before it for this crime. If it has happened that,
on any occasion, these parliaments, and the parliament of Normandy
among the rest, have condemned the guilty to a less punishment than
that of death, it was for the reason that their guilt was not of the
deepest dye; your majesty, and the kings your predecessors, having left
full liberty to the various tribunals to whom they delegated the
administration of justice, to decree such punishment as was warranted
by the evidence brought before them.
“After so many authorities, and punishments ordained by human
and divine laws, we humbly supplicate your majesty to reflect once
more upon the extraordinary results which proceed from the
malevolence of this sort of people; on the deaths from unknown
diseases, which are often the consequences of their menaces, on the
loss of the goods and chattels of your subjects, on the proofs of guilt
continually afforded by the insensibility of the marks upon the
accused, on the sudden transportation of bodies from one place to
another, on the sacrifices and nocturnal assemblies, and other facts,
corroborated by the testimony of ancient and modern authors, and
verified by so many eye-witnesses, composed partly of accomplices,
and partly of people who had no interest in the trials beyond the love
of truth, and confirmed, moreover, by the confessions of the accused
parties themselves; and that, sire, with so much agreement and
conformity between the different cases, that the most ignorant persons
convicted of this crime have spoken to the same circumstances, and in
nearly the same words, as the most celebrated authors who have
written about it, all of which may be easily proved to your majesty’s
satisfaction by the records of various trials before your parliaments.
“These, sire, are truths so intimately bound up with the principles
of our religion, that, extraordinary although they be, no person has
been able to this time to call them in question. If some have cited, in
opposition to these truths, the pretended canon of the Council of
Ancyre, and a passage from St. Augustin, in a treatise upon the Spirit
and the Soul, it has been without foundation; and it would be easy to
convince your majesty that neither the one nor the other ought to be
accounted of any authority; and, besides that, the canon, in this sense,
would be contrary to the opinion of all succeeding councils of the
Church, Cardinal Baronius, and all learned commentators agree that it
is not to be found in any old edition. In effect, in those editions
wherein it is found, it is in another language, and is in direct
contradiction to the twenty-third canon of the same council, which
condemns sorcery, according to all preceding constitutions. Even
supposing that this canon was really promulgated by the Council of
Ancyre, we must observe that it was issued in the second century,
when the principal attention of the Church was directed to the
destruction of paganism. For this reason, it condemns that class of
women who said they could pass through the air, and over immense
regions, with Diana and Herodias, and enjoins all preachers to teach
the falsehood of such an opinion, in order to deter people from the
worship of these false divinities; but it does not question the power of
the devil over the human body, which is, in fact, proved by the holy
Gospel of Jesus Christ himself. And with regard, sire, to the pretended
passage of St. Augustin, everybody knows that it was not written by
him, because the writer, whoever he was, cites Bœtius, who died more
than eighty years after the time of St. Augustin. Besides, there is still
more convincing proof in the fact, that the same father establishes the
truth of witchcraft in all his writings, and more particularly in his City
of God; and in his first volume, question the 25th, wherein he states
that sorcery is a communion between man and the devil, which all
good Christians ought to look upon with horror.
“Taking all these things into consideration, sire, the officers of your
parliament hope, from the justice of your majesty, that you will be
graciously pleased to receive the humble remonstrances they have
taken the liberty to make. They are compelled, for the acquittal of their
own consciences and in discharge of their duty, to make known to your
majesty, that the decrees they passed against the sorcerers and witches
brought before them, were passed after a mature deliberation on the
part of all the judges present, and that nothing has been done therein
which is not conformable to the universal jurisprudence of the
kingdom, and for the general welfare of your majesty’s subjects, of
whom there is not one who can say that he is secure from the
malevolence of such criminals. We therefore supplicate your majesty
to suffer us to carry into effect the sentences we passed, and to proceed
with the trial of the other persons accused of the same crime; and that
the piety of your majesty will not suffer to be introduced during your
reign an opinion contrary to the principles of that holy religion for
which you have always employed so gloriously both your cares and
your arms.”
Louis, as we have already mentioned, paid no attention to this appeal.
The lives of the old women were spared, and prosecutions for mere
witchcraft, unconnected with other offences, were discontinued throughout
France. In 1680 an act was passed for the punishment, not of witches, but of
pretenders to witchcraft, fortune-tellers, divineresses, and poisoners.
Thus the light broke in upon Germany, France, England, and Scotland
about the same time, gradually growing clearer and clearer till the middle of
the eighteenth century, when witchcraft was finally reckoned amongst
exploded doctrines, and the belief in it confined to the uttermost vulgar.
Twice, however, did the madness burst forth again as furious, while it
lasted, as ever it had been. The first time in Sweden, in 1669, and the
second in Germany so late as 1749. Both these instances merit particular
mention. The first is one of the most extraordinary upon record, and for
atrocity and absurdity is unsurpassed in the annals of any nation.
LOUIS XIV.
It having been reported to the king of Sweden that the little village of
Mohra, in the province of Dalecarlia, was troubled exceedingly with
witches, he appointed a commission of clergy and laymen to trace the
rumour to its source, with full powers to punish the guilty. On the 12th of
August 1669, the commissioners arrived in the bewitched village, to the
great joy of the credulous inhabitants. On the following day the whole
population, amounting to three thousand persons, assembled in the church.
A sermon was preached, “declaring the miserable case of those people that
suffered themselves to be deluded by the devil,” and fervent prayer was
offered up that God would remove the scourge from among them.
The whole assembly then adjourned to the rector’s house, filling all the
street before it, when the king’s commission was read, charging every
person who knew any thing of the witchery, to come forward and declare
the truth. A passion of tears seized upon the multitude; men, women, and
children began to weep and sob, and all promised to divulge what they had
heard or knew. In this frame of mind they were dismissed to their homes.
On the following day they were again called together, when the depositions
of several persons were taken publicly before them all. The result was that
seventy persons, including fifteen children, were taken into custody.
Numbers also were arrested in the neighbouring district of Elfdale. Being
put to the torture, they all confessed their guilt. They said they used to go to
a gravel-pit, that lay hard by the cross-way, where they put a vest upon their
heads, and danced “round and round and round about.” They then went to
the cross-way, and called three times upon the devil; the first time in a low
still voice; the second, somewhat louder; and the third, very loudly, with
these words, “Antecessor, come, and carry us to Blockula!” This invocation
never failed to bring him to their view. He generally appeared as a little old
man, in a grey coat, with red and blue stockings, with exceedingly long
garters. He had besides a very high-crowned hat, with bands of many-
coloured linen enfolded about it, and a long red beard that hung down to his
middle.
The first question he put to them was, whether they would serve him
soul and body? On their answering in the affirmative, he told them to make
ready for the journey to Blockula. It was necessary to procure, in the first
place, “some scrapings of altars and filings of church clocks.” Antecessor
then gave them a horn with some salve in it, wherewith they anointed
themselves. These preparations ended, he brought beasts for them to ride
upon,—horses, asses, goats, and monkeys; and giving them a saddle, a
hammer, and a nail, uttered the word of command, and away they went.
Nothing stopped them. They flew over churches, high walls, rocks, and
mountains, until they came to the green meadow where Blockula was
situated. Upon these occasions they carried as many children with them as
they could; for the devil, they said, “did plague and whip them if they did
not procure him children, insomuch that they had no peace or quiet for
him.”
Many parents corroborated a part of this evidence, stating that their
children had repeatedly told them that they had been carried away in the
night to Blockula, where the devil had beaten them black and blue. They
had seen the marks in the morning, but they soon disappeared. One little
girl was examined, who swore positively that she was carried through the
air by the witches, and when at a great height she uttered the holy name of
Jesus. She immediately fell to the ground, and made a great hole in her side.
“The devil, however, picked her up, healed her side, and carried her away to
Blockula.” She added (and her mother confirmed her statement), that she
had till that day “an exceeding great pain in her side.” This was a clencher,
and the nail of conviction was driven home to the hearts of the judges.
The place called Blockula, whither they were carried, was a large house,
with a gate to it, “in a delicate meadow, whereof they could see no end.”
There was a very long table in it, at which the witches sat down; and in
other rooms “there were very lovely and delicate beds for them to sleep
upon.”
After a number of ceremonies had been performed, by which they
bound themselves body and soul to the service of Antecessor, they sat down
to a feast composed of broth, made of colworts and bacon, oatmeal, bread
and butter, milk and cheese. The devil always took the chair, and sometimes
played to them on the harp or the fiddle while they were eating. After dinner
they danced in a ring, sometimes naked, and sometimes in their clothes,
cursing and swearing all the time. Some of the women added particulars too
horrible and too obscene for repetition.
Once the devil pretended to be dead, that he might see whether his
people regretted him. They instantly set up a loud wail, and wept three tears
each for him; at which he was so pleased, that he jumped up among them,
and hugged in his arms those who had been most obstreperous in their
sorrow.
Such were the principal details given by the children, and corroborated
by the confessions of the full-grown witches. Any thing more absurd was
never before stated in a court of justice. Many of the accused contradicted
themselves most palpably; but the commissioners gave no heed to
discrepancies. One of them, the parson of the district, stated in the course of
the inquiry, that on a particular night, which he mentioned, he had been
afflicted with a headache so agonising, that he could not account for it
otherwise than by supposing he was bewitched. In fact, he thought a score
of witches must have been dancing on the crown of his head. This
announcement excited great horror among the pious dames of the auditory,
who loudly expressed their wonder that the devil should have power to hurt
so good a man. One poor witch, who lay in the very jaws of death,
confessed that she knew too well the cause of the minister’s headache. The
devil had sent her with a sledge hammer and a large nail to drive into the
good man’s skull. She had hammered at it for some time, but the skull was
so enormously thick, that she made no impression upon it. Every hand was
held up in astonishment. The pious minister blessed God that his skull was
so solid, and he became renowned for his thick head all the days of his life.
Whether the witch intended a joke does not appear, but she was looked
upon as a criminal more than usually atrocious. Seventy persons were
condemned to death on these so awful, yet so ridiculous confessions.
Twenty-three of them were burned together in one fire in the village of
Mohra, in the presence of thousands of delighted spectators. On the
following day fifteen children were murdered in the same manner, offered
up in sacrifice to the bloody Moloch of superstition. The remaining thirty-
two were executed at the neighbouring town of Fahluna. Besides these,
fifty-six children were found guilty of witchcraft in a minor degree, and
sentenced to various punishments, such as running the gauntlet,
imprisonment, and public whipping once a week for a twelvemonth.
Long after the occurrence of this case, it was cited as one of the most
convincing proofs upon record of the prevalence of witchcraft. When men
wish to construct or support a theory, how they torture facts into their
service! The lying whimsies of a few sick children, encouraged by foolish
parents, and drawn out by superstitious neighbours, were sufficient to set a
country in a flame. If, instead of commissioners as deeply sunk in the
slough of ignorance as the people they were sent amongst, there had been
deputed a few men firm in courage and clear in understanding, how
different would have been the result! Some of the poor children who were
burned would have been sent to an infirmary; others would have been well
flogged; the credulity of the parents would have been laughed at; and the
lives of seventy persons spared. The belief in witchcraft remains in Sweden
to this day; but happily the annals of that country present no more such
instances of lamentable aberration of intellect as the one just cited.
In New England, about the same time, the colonists were scared by
similar stories of the antics of the devil. All at once a fear seized upon the
multitude, and supposed criminals were arrested day after day in such
numbers, that the prisons were found too small to contain them. A girl
named Goodwin, the daughter of a mason, who was hypochondriac and
subject to fits, imagined that an old Irish woman, named Glover, had
bewitched her. Her two brothers, in whose constitutions there was
apparently a predisposition to similar fits, went off in the same way, crying
out that the devil and Dame Glover were tormenting them. At times their
joints were so stiff that they could not be moved; while at others, said the
neighbours, they were so flexible, that the bones appeared softened into
sinews. The supposed witch was seized, and as she could not repeat the
Lord’s Prayer without making a mistake in it, she was condemned and
executed.
But the popular excitement was not allayed. One victim was not
enough; the people waited agape for new disclosures. Suddenly two
hysteric girls in another family fell into fits daily, and the cry of witchcraft
resounded from one end of the colony to the other. The feeling of
suffocation in the throat, so common in cases of hysteria, was said by the
patients to be caused by the devil himself, who had stuck balls in the
windpipe to choke them. They felt the pricking of thorns in every part of the
body, and one of them vomited needles. The case of these girls, who were
the daughter and niece of a Mr. Parvis, the minister of a Calvinist chapel,
excited so much attention, that all the weak women in the colony began to
fancy themselves similarly afflicted. The more they brooded on it, the more
convinced they became. The contagion of this mental disease was as great
as if it had been a pestilence. One after the other the women fainted away,
asserting on their recovery that they had seen the spectres of witches.
Where there were three or four girls in a family, they so worked each upon
the diseased imagination of the other, that they fell into fits five or six times
in a day. Some related that the devil himself appeared to them, bearing in
his hand a parchment-roll, and promising that if they would sign an
agreement, transferring to him their immortal souls, they should be
immediately relieved from fits and all the ills of the flesh. Others asserted
that they saw witches only, who made them similar promises, threatening
that they should never be free from aches and pains till they had agreed to
become the devil’s. When they refused, the witches pinched, or bit, or
pricked them with long pins and needles. More than two hundred persons
named by these mischievous visionaries were thrown into prison. They
were of all ages and conditions of life, and many of them of exemplary
character. No less than nineteen were condemned and executed before
reason returned to the minds of the colonists. The most horrible part of this
lamentable history is, that among the victims there was a little child only
five years old. Some women swore that they had seen it repeatedly in
company with the devil, and that it had bitten them often with its little teeth
for refusing to sign a compact with the evil one. It can hardly increase our
feelings of disgust and abhorrence when we learn that this insane
community actually tried and executed a dog for the same offence!
One man, named Cory, stoutly refused to plead to the preposterous
indictment against him. As was the practice in such cases, he was pressed to
death. It is told of the Sheriff of New England, who superintended the
execution, that when this unhappy man thrust out his tongue in his mortal
agony, he seized hold of a cane, and crammed it back again into the mouth.
If ever there were a fiend in human form, it was this sheriff: a man who, if
the truth were known, perhaps plumed himself upon his piety—thought he
was doing God good service, and
“Hoped to merit heaven by making earth a hell!”
Arguing still in the firm belief of witchcraft, the bereaved people began to
inquire, when they saw their dearest friends snatched away from them by
these wide-spreading accusations, whether the whole proceedings were not
carried on by the agency of the devil. Might not the great enemy have put
false testimony into the mouths of the witnesses, or might not the witnesses
be witches themselves? Every man who was in danger of losing his wife,
his child, or his sister, embraced this doctrine with avidity. The revulsion
was as sudden as the first frenzy. All at once, the colonists were convinced
of their error. The judges put a stop to the prosecutions, even of those who
had confessed their guilt. The latter were no sooner at liberty than they
retracted all they had said, and the greater number hardly remembered the
avowals which agony had extorted from them. Eight persons, who had been
tried and condemned, were set free; and gradually girls ceased to have fits
and to talk of the persecutions of the devil. The judge who had condemned
the first criminal executed on this charge, was so smitten with sorrow and
humiliation at his folly, that he set apart the anniversary of that day as one
of solemn penitence and fasting. He still clung to the belief in witchcraft; no
new light had broken in upon him on that subject, but, happily for the
community, the delusion had taken a merciful turn. The whole colony
shared the feeling; the jurors on the different trials openly expressed their
penitence in the churches; and those who had suffered were regarded as the
victims, and not as the accomplices of Satan.
It is related that the Indian tribes in New England were sorely puzzled at
the infatuation of the settlers, and thought them either a race inferior to, or
more sinful than the French colonists in the vicinity, amongst whom, as
they remarked, “the Great Spirit sent no witches.”
Returning again to the continent of Europe, we find that, after the year
1680, men became still wiser upon this subject. For twenty years the
populace were left to their belief, but governments in general gave it no
aliment in the shape of executions. The edict of Louis XIV. gave a blow to
the superstition, from which it never recovered. The last execution in the
Protestant cantons of Switzerland was at Geneva, in 1652. The various
potentates of Germany, although they could not stay the trials, invariably
commuted the sentence into imprisonment, in all cases where the pretended
witch was accused of pure witchcraft, unconnected with any other crime. In
the year 1701, Thomasius, the learned professor at the University of Halle,
delivered his inaugural thesis, De Crimine Magiæ which struck another
blow at the falling monster of popular error. But a faith so strong as that in
witchcraft was not to be eradicated at once: the arguments of learned men
did not penetrate to the villages and hamlets; but still they achieved great
things; they rendered the belief an unworking faith, and prevented the
supply of victims, on which for so many ages it had battened and grown
strong.
Once more the delusion broke out; like a wild beast wounded to the
death, it collected all its remaining energies for the final convulsion, which
was to shew how mighty it had once been. Germany, which had nursed the
frightful error in its cradle, tended it on its death-bed, and Würzburg, the
scene of so many murders on the same pretext, was destined to be the scene
of the last. That it might lose no portion of its bad renown, the last murder
was as atrocious as the first. This case offers a great resemblance to that of
the witches of Mohra and New England, except in the number of its
victims. It happened so late as the year 1749, to the astonishment and
disgust of the rest of Europe.
VIEW IN WÜRZBURG.
A number of young women in a convent at Würzburg fancied
themselves bewitched; they felt, like all hysteric subjects, a sense of
suffocation in the throat. They went into fits repeatedly; and one of them,
who had swallowed needles, evacuated them at abscesses, which formed in
different parts of the body. The cry of sorcery was raised, and a young
woman, named Maria Renata Sänger, was arrested on the charge of having
leagued with the devil, to bewitch five of the young ladies. It was sworn on
the trial that Maria had been frequently seen to clamber over the convent
walls in the shape of a pig—that, proceeding to the cellar, she used to drink
the best wine till she was intoxicated; and then start suddenly up in her own
form. Other girls asserted that she used to prowl about the roof like a cat,
and often penetrate into their chamber, and frighten them by her dreadful
howlings. It was also said that she had been seen in the shape of a hare,
milking the cows dry in the meadows belonging to the convent; that she
used to perform as an actress on the boards of Drury Lane theatre in
London, and, on the very same night, return upon a broomstick to
Würzburg, and afflict the young ladies with pains in all their limbs. Upon
this evidence she was condemned, and burned alive in the market-place of
Würzburg.
Here ends this frightful catalogue of murder and superstition. Since that
day, the belief in witchcraft has fled from the populous abodes of men, and
taken refuge in remote villages and districts too wild, rugged, and
inhospitable to afford a resting-place for the foot of civilisation. Rude
fishers and uneducated labourers still attribute every phenomenon of nature
which they cannot account for, to the devil and witches. Catalepsy, that
wondrous disease, is still thought by ignorant gossips to be the work of
Satan; and hypochondriacs, uninformed by science of the nature of their
malady, devoutly believe in the reality of their visions. The reader would
hardly credit the extent of the delusion upon this subject in the very heart of
England at this day. Many an old woman leads a life of misery from the
unfeeling insults of her neighbours, who raise the scornful finger and
hooting voice at her, because in her decrepitude she is ugly, spiteful,
perhaps insane, and realises in her personal appearance the description
preserved by tradition of the witches of yore. Even in the neighbourhood of
great towns the taint remains of this once widely-spread contagion. If no
victims fall beneath it, the enlightenment of the law is all that prevents a
recurrence of scenes as horrid as those of the seventeenth century. Hundreds
upon hundreds of witnesses could be found to swear to absurdities as great
as those asserted by the infamous Matthew Hopkins.
In the Annual Register for 1760, an instance of the belief in witchcraft is
related, which shews how superstition lingers. A dispute arose in the little
village of Glen, in Leicestershire, between two old women, each of whom
vehemently accused the other of witchcraft. The quarrel at last ran so high
that a challenge ensued, and they both agreed to be tried by the ordeal of
swimming. They accordingly stripped to their shifts—procured some men,
who tied their thumbs and great toes together, cross-wise, and then, with a
cart-rope about their middle, suffered themselves to be thrown into a pool
of water. One of them sank immediately, but the other continued struggling
a short time upon the surface of the water, which the mob deeming an
infallible sign of her guilt, pulled her out, and insisted that she should
immediately impeach all her accomplices in the craft. She accordingly told
them that, in the neighbouring village of Burton, there were several old
women as “much witches as she was.” Happily for her, this negative
information was deemed sufficient, and a student in astrology, or “white-
witch,” coming up at the time, the mob, by his direction, proceeded
forthwith to Burton in search of all the delinquents. After a little
consultation on their arrival, they went to the old woman’s house on whom
they had fixed the strongest suspicion. The poor old creature on their
approach locked the outer door, and from the window of an upstairs room
asked what they wanted. They informed her that she was charged with
being guilty of witchcraft, and that they were come to duck her;
remonstrating with her at the same time upon the necessity of submission to
the ordeal, that, if she were innocent, all the world might know it. Upon her
persisting in a positive refusal to come down, they broke open the door and
carried her out by force, to a deep gravel-pit full of water. They tied her
thumbs and toes together and threw her into the water, where they kept her
for several minutes, drawing her out and in two or three times by the rope
round her middle. Not being able to satisfy themselves whether she were a
witch or no, they at last let her go, or, more properly speaking, they left her
on the bank to walk home by herself, if she ever recovered. Next day, they
tried the same experiment upon another woman, and afterwards upon a
third; but, fortunately, neither of the victims lost her life from this brutality.
Many of the ringleaders in the outrage were apprehended during the week,
and tried before the justices at quarter-sessions. Two of them were
sentenced to stand in the pillory and to be imprisoned for a month; and as
many as twenty more were fined in small sums for the assault, and bound
over to keep the peace for a twelvemonth.
“So late as the year 1785,” says Arnot, in his collection and abridgment
of Criminal Trials in Scotland, “it was the custom among the sect of
Seceders to read from the pulpit an annual confession of sins, national and
personal; amongst the former of which was particularly mentioned the
‘Repeal by parliament of the penal statute against witches, contrary to the
express laws of God.’”
LADY HATTON’S HOUSE, CROSS STREET, HATTON GARDEN.
Many houses are still to be found in England with the horse-shoe (the
grand preservative against witchcraft) nailed against the threshold. If any
over-wise philosopher should attempt to remove them, the chances are that
he would have more broken bones than thanks for his interference. Let any
man walk into Cross Street, Hatton Garden, and from thence into Bleeding-
heart Yard, and learn the tales still told and believed of one house in that
neighbourhood, and he will ask himself in astonishment if such things can
be in the nineteenth century. The witchcraft of Lady Hatton, the wife of the
famous Sir Christopher, so renowned for his elegant dancing in the days of
Elizabeth, is as devoutly believed as the Gospels. The room is to be seen
where the devil seized her after the expiration of the contract he had made
with her, and bore her away bodily to the pit of Tophet: the pump against
which he dashed her is still pointed out, and the spot where her heart was
found, after he had torn it out of her bosom with his iron claws, has
received the name of Bleeding-heart Yard, in confirmation of the story.
Whether the horse-shoe still remains upon the door of the haunted house, to
keep away other witches, is uncertain. A former inmate relates that, “about
twenty years ago, more than one old woman begged for admittance
repeatedly, to satisfy themselves that it was in its proper place. One poor
creature, apparently insane, and clothed in rags, came to the door with a
tremendous double-knock, as loud as that of a fashionable footman, and
walked straight along the passage to the horse-shoe. Great was the
wonderment of the inmates, especially when the woman spat upon the
horse-shoe, and expressed her sorrow that she could do no harm while it
remained there. After spitting upon, and kicking it again and again, she
coolly turned round and left the house, without saying a word to any body.
This poor creature perhaps intended a joke, but the probability is that she
imagined herself a witch. In Saffron Hill, where she resided, her ignorant
neighbours gave her that character, and looked upon her with no little fear
and aversion.”
More than one example of the popular belief in witchcraft occurred in
the neighbourhood of Hastings so lately as the year 1830. An aged woman,
who resided in the Rope-walk of that town, was so repulsive in her
appearance, that she was invariably accused of being a witch by all the
ignorant people who knew her. She was bent completely double; and
though very old, her eye was unusually bright and malignant. She wore a
red cloak, and supported herself on a crutch: she was, to all outward
appearance, the very beau ideal of a witch. So dear is power to the human
heart, that this old woman actually encouraged the popular superstition; she
took no pains to remove the ill impression, but seemed to delight that she,
old and miserable as she was, could keep in awe so many happier and
stronger fellow-creatures. Timid girls crouched with fear when they met
her, and many would go a mile out of their way to avoid her. Like the
witches of the olden time, she was not sparing of her curses against those
who offended her. The child of a woman who resided within two doors of
her was afflicted with lameness, and the mother constantly asserted that the
old woman had bewitched her. All the neighbours credited the tale. It was
believed, too, that she could assume the form of a cat. Many a harmless
puss has been hunted almost to the death by mobs of men and boys, upon
the supposition that the animal would start up before them in the true shape
of Mother ——.
In the same town there resided a fisherman, who was the object of
unceasing persecution, because it was said that he had sold himself to the
devil. It was currently reported that he could creep through a keyhole, and
that he had made a witch of his daughter, in order that he might have the
more power over his fellows. It was also believed that he could sit on the
points of pins and needles and feel no pain. His brother fishermen put him
to this test whenever they had an opportunity. In the alehouses which he
frequented, they often placed long needles in the cushions of the chairs in
such a manner that he could not fail to pierce himself when he sat down.
The result of these experiments tended to confirm their faith in his
supernatural powers. It was asserted that he never flinched. Such was the
popular feeling in the fashionable town of Hastings a few years ago; very
probably it is the same now.
In the north of England, the superstition lingers to an almost
inconceivable extent. Lancashire abounds with witch-doctors, a set of
quacks who pretend to cure diseases inflicted by the devil. The practices of
these worthies may be judged of by the following case, reported in the
Hertford Reformer of the 23d of June 1838. The witch-doctor alluded to is
better known by the name of the cunning man, and has a large practice in
the counties of Lincoln and Nottingham. According to the writer in the
Reformer, the dupe, whose name is not mentioned, had been for about two
years afflicted with a painful abscess, and had been prescribed for without
relief by more than one medical gentleman. He was urged by some of his
friends, not only in his own village but in neighbouring ones, to consult the
witch-doctor, as they were convinced he was under some evil influence. He
agreed, and sent his wife to the cunning man, who lived in New St.
Swithin’s, in Lincoln. She was informed by this ignorant impostor that her
husband’s disorder was an infliction of the devil, occasioned by his next-
door neighbours, who had made use of certain charms for that purpose.
From the description he gave of the process, it appears to be the same as
that employed by Dr. Fian and Gellie Duncan to work woe upon King
James. He stated that the neighbours, instigated by a witch, whom he
pointed out, took some wax and moulded it before the fire into the form of
her husband, as near as they could represent him; they then pierced the
image with pins on all sides, repeated the Lord’s Prayer backwards, and
offered prayers to the devil that he would fix his stings into the person
whom that figure represented, in like manner as they pierced it with pins.
To counteract the effects of this diabolical process, the witch-doctor
prescribed a certain medicine, and a charm to be worn next the body, on that
part where the disease principally lay. The patient was to repeat the 109th
and 119th Psalms every day, or the cure would not be effectual. The fee
which he claimed for this advice was a guinea.
So efficacious is faith in the cure of any malady, that the patient actually
felt much better after a three weeks’ course of this prescription. The notable
charm which the quack had given was afterwards opened, and found to be a
piece of parchment covered with some cabalistic characters and signs of the
planets.
The next-door neighbours were in great alarm that the witch-doctor
would, on the solicitation of the recovering patient, employ some means to
punish them for their pretended witchcraft. To escape the infliction, they
feed another cunning man, in Nottinghamshire, who told them of a similar
charm, which would preserve them from all the malice of their enemies.
The writer concludes by saying, that “the doctor, not long after he had been
thus consulted, wrote to say, that he had discovered that his patient was not
afflicted by Satan, as he had imagined, but by God, and would continue
more or less in the same state till his life’s end.”
An impostor carried on a similar trade in the neighbourhood of
Tunbridge Wells about the year 1830. He had been in practice for several
years, and charged enormous fees for his advice. This fellow pretended to
be the seventh son of a seventh son, and to be endowed in consequence with
miraculous powers for the cure of all diseases, but especially of those
resulting from witchcraft. It was not only the poor who employed him, but
ladies who rode in their carriages. He was often sent for from a distance of
sixty or seventy miles by these people, who paid all his expenses to and fro,
besides rewarding him handsomely. He was about eighty years of age, and
his extremely venerable appearance aided his imposition in no slight
degree. His name was Okey or Oakley.
In France, the superstition at this day is even more prevalent than it is in
England. Garinet, in his history of Magic and Sorcery in that country, cites
upwards of twenty instances which occurred between the years 1805 and
1818. In the latter year no less than three tribunals were occupied with trials
originating in this humiliating belief: we shall cite only one of them. Julian
Desbourdes, aged fifty-three, a mason, and inhabitant of the village of
Thilouze, near Bourdeaux, was taken suddenly ill, in the month of January
1818. As he did not know how to account for his malady, he suspected at
last that he was bewitched. He communicated this suspicion to his son-in-
law Bridier, and they both went to consult a sort of idiot, named Baudouin,
who passed for a conjuror or white-witch. This man told them that
Desbourdes was certainly bewitched, and offered to accompany them to the
house of an old man named Renard, who, he said, was undoubtedly the
criminal. On the night of the 23d of January all three proceeded stealthily to
the dwelling of Renard, and accused him of afflicting persons with diseases
by the aid of the devil. Desbourdes fell on his knees and earnestly entreated
to be restored to his former health, promising that he would take no
measures against him for the evil he had done. The old man denied in the
strongest terms that he was a wizard; and when Desbourdes still pressed
him to remove the spell from him, he said he knew nothing about the spell,
and refused to remove it. The idiot Baudouin, the white-witch, now
interfered, and told his companions that no relief for the malady could ever
be procured until the old man confessed his guilt. To force him to
confession they lighted some sticks of sulphur which they had brought with
them for the purpose, and placed them under the old man’s nose. In a few
moments he fell down suffocated and apparently lifeless. They were all
greatly alarmed; and thinking that they had killed the man, they carried him
out and threw him into a neighbouring pond, hoping to make it appear that
he had fallen in accidentally. The pond, however, was not very deep, and
the coolness of the water reviving the old man, he opened his eyes and sat
up. Desbourdes and Bridier, who were still waiting on the bank, were now
more alarmed than before, lest he should recover and inform against them.
They therefore waded into the pond, seized their victim by the hair of the
head, beat him severely, and then held him under water till he was drowned.
They were all three apprehended on the charge of murder a few days
afterwards. Desbourdes and Bridier were found guilty of aggravated
manslaughter only, and sentenced to be burnt on the back, and to work in
the galleys for life. The white-witch Baudouin was acquitted on the ground
of insanity.
M. Garinet further informs us that France, at the time he wrote (1818),
was overrun by a race of fellows who made a trade of casting out devils and
finding out witches. He adds also, that many of the priests in the rural
districts encouraged the superstition of their parishioners by resorting
frequently to exorcisms whenever any foolish persons took it into their
heads that a spell had been thrown over them. He recommended, as a
remedy for the evil, that all these exorcists, whether lay or clerical, should
be sent to the galleys, and felt assured that the number of witches would
then very sensibly diminish.
Many other instances of this lingering belief might be cited both in
France and Great Britain, and indeed in every other country in Europe. So
deeply rooted are some errors, that ages cannot remove them. The
poisonous tree that once overshadowed the land may be cut down by the
sturdy efforts of sages and philosophers; the sun may shine clearly upon
spots where venomous things once nestled in security and shade; but still
the entangled roots are stretched beneath the surface, and may be found by
those who dig. Another king like James I. might make them vegetate again;
and, more mischievous still, another pope like Innocent VIII. might raise
the decaying roots to strength and verdure. Still it is consoling to think that
the delirium has passed away; that the raging madness has given place to a
milder folly; and that we may now count by units the votaries of a
superstition which in former ages numbered its victims by tens of
thousands, and its votaries by millions.
FLOATING A WITCH.
PLACE DE GREVE.
The Slow Poisoners
Table of Contents
Pescara. The like was never read of.
Stephano. In my judgment,
To all that shall but hear it, ’twill appear
A most impossible fable.
Pescara. Troth, I’ll tell you,
And briefly as I can, by what degrees
They fell into this madness.—Duke of Milan.
The atrocious system of poisoning by poisons so slow in their operation as
to make the victim appear, to ordinary observers, as if dying from a gradual
decay of nature, has been practised in all ages. Those who are curious in the
matter may refer to Beckmann on secret poisons, in his History of
Inventions, in which he has collected several instances of it from the Greek
and Roman writers. Early in the sixteenth century the crime seems to have
gradually increased, till in the seventeenth it spread over Europe like a
pestilence. It was often exercised by pretended witches and sorcerers, and
finally became a branch of education amongst all who laid any claim to
magical and supernatural arts. In the twenty-first year of Henry VIII. an act
was passed rendering it high treason. Those found guilty of it were to be
boiled to death.
One of the first in point of date, and hardly second to any in point of
atrocity, is the murder by this means of Sir Thomas Overbury; which
disgraced the court of James I. in the year 1613. A slight sketch of it will be
a fitting introduction to the history of the poisoning mania, which was so
prevalent in France and Italy fifty years later.
Robert Kerr, a Scottish youth, was early taken notice of by James I., and
loaded with honours, for no other reason that the world could ever discover
than the beauty of his person. James, even in his own day, was suspected of
being addicted to the most abominable of all offences; and the more we
examine his history now, the stronger the suspicion becomes. However that
may be, the handsome Kerr, lending his smooth cheek even in public to the
disgusting kisses of his royal master, rose rapidly in favour. In the year
1613, he was made Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, and created an
English peer by the style and title of Viscount Rochester. Still further
honours were in store for him.
In this rapid promotion he had not been without a friend. Sir Thomas
Overbury, the king’s secretary—who appears, from some threats in his own
letters, to have been no better than a pander to the vices of the king, and
privy to his dangerous secrets—exerted all his backstair influence to
forward the promotion of Kerr, by whom he was doubtless repaid in some
way or other. Overbury did not confine his friendship to this—if friendship
ever could exist between two such men—but acted the part of an
entremetteur, and assisted Rochester to carry on an adulterous intrigue with
the Lady Frances Howard, the wife of the Earl of Essex. This woman was a
person of violent passions, and lost to all sense of shame. Her husband was
in her way, and to be freed from him she instituted proceedings for a
divorce, on grounds which a woman of any modesty or delicacy of feeling
would die rather than avow. Her scandalous suit was successful, and was no
sooner decided than preparations on a scale of the greatest magnificence
were made for her marriage with Lord Rochester.
Sir Thomas Overbury, who had willingly assisted his patron to intrigue
with the Countess of Essex, seems to have imagined that his marriage with
so vile a woman might retard his advancement. He accordingly employed
all his influence to dissuade him from it; but Rochester was bent on the
match, and his passions were as violent as those of the countess. On one
occasion, when Overbury and the viscount were walking in the gallery of
Whitehall, Overbury was overheard to say, “Well, my lord, if you do marry
that base woman, you will utterly ruin your honour and yourself. You shall
never do it with my advice or consent; and if you do, you had best look to
stand fast.” Rochester flung from him in a rage, exclaiming with an oath, “I
will be even with you for this.” These words were the death-warrant of the
unfortunate Overbury. He had mortally wounded the pride of Rochester in
insinuating that by his (Overbury’s) means he might be lowered in the
king’s favour; and he had endeavoured to curb the burning passions of a
heartless, dissolute, and reckless man.
Overbury’s imprudent remonstrances were reported to the countess; and
from that moment she also vowed the most deadly vengeance against him.
With a fiendish hypocrisy, however, they both concealed their intentions;
and Overbury, at the solicitation of Rochester, was appointed ambassador to
the court of Russia. This apparent favour was but the first step in a deep and
deadly plot. Rochester, pretending to be warmly attached to the interests of
Overbury, advised him to refuse the embassy, which he said was but a trick
to get him out of the way. He promised, at the same time, to stand between
him and any evil consequences which might result from his refusal.
Overbury fell into the snare, and declined the embassy. James, offended,
immediately ordered his committal to the Tower.
He was now in safe custody, and his enemies had opportunity to
commence the work of vengeance. The first thing Rochester did was to
procure, by his influence at court, the dismissal of the Lieutenant of the
Tower, and the appointment of Sir Jervis Elwes, one of his creatures, to the
vacant post. This man was but one instrument; and another being necessary,
was found in Richard Weston, a fellow who had formerly been shopman to
a druggist. He was installed in the office of under-keeper, and as such had
the direct custody of Overbury. So far all was favourable to the designs of
the conspirators.
In the mean time the insidious Rochester wrote the most friendly letters
to Overbury, requesting him to bear his ill-fortune patiently, and promising
that his imprisonment should not be of long duration; for that his friends
were exerting themselves to soften the king’s displeasure. Still pretending
the extreme of sympathy for him, he followed up the letters by presents of
pastry and other delicacies, which could not be procured in the Tower.
These articles were all poisoned. Occasionally, presents of a similar
description were sent to Sir Jervis Elwes, with the understanding that these
articles were not poisoned, when they were unaccompanied by letters: of
these the unfortunate prisoner never tasted. A woman named Turner, who
had formerly kept a house of ill-fame, and who had more than once lent it
to further the guilty intercourse of Rochester and Lady Essex, was the agent
employed to procure the poisons. They were prepared by Dr. Forman, a
pretended fortune-teller of Lambeth, assisted by an apothecary named
Franklin. Both these persons knew for what purposes the poisons were
needed, and employed their skill in mixing them in the pastry and other
edibles, in such small quantities as gradually to wear out the constitution of
their victim. Mrs. Turner regularly furnished the poisoned articles to the
under-keeper, who placed them before Overbury. Not only his food but his
drink was poisoned. Arsenic was mixed with the salt he ate, and cantharides
with the pepper. All this time his health declined sensibly. Daily he grew
weaker and weaker; and with a sickly appetite craved for sweets and jellies.
Rochester continued to condole with him, and anticipated all his wants in
this respect, sending him abundance of pastry, and occasionally partridges
and other game, and young pigs. With the sauce for the game, Mrs. Turner
mixed a quantity of cantharides, and poisoned the pork with lunar-caustic.
As stated on the trial, Overbury took in this manner poison enough to have
poisoned twenty men; but his constitution was strong, and he still lingered.
Franklin, the apothecary, confessed that he prepared with Dr. Forman seven
different sorts of poisons, viz. aquafortis, arsenic, mercury, powder of
diamonds, lunar caustic, great spiders, and cantharides. Overbury held out
so long that Rochester became impatient, and in a letter to Lady Essex,
expressed his wonder that things were not sooner despatched. Orders were
immediately sent by Lady Essex to the keeper to finish with the victim at
once. Overbury had not been all this time without suspicion of treachery,
although he appears to have had no idea of poison. He merely suspected
that it was intended to confine him for life, and to set the king still more
bitterly against him. In one of his letters he threatened Rochester that unless
he were speedily liberated, he would expose his villany to the world. He
says, “You and I, ere it be long, will come to a public trial of another
nature.” * * * “Drive me not to extremities, lest I should say something that
both you and I should repent.” * * * “Whether I live or die, your shame
shall never die, but ever remain to the world, to make you the most odious
man living.” * * * “I wonder much you should neglect him to whom such
secrets of all kinds have passed.” * * * “Be these the fruits of common
secrets, common dangers?”
SIR THOMAS OVERBURY.
All these remonstrances, and hints as to the dangerous secrets in his
keeping, were ill calculated to serve him with a man so reckless as Lord
Rochester: they were more likely to cause him to be sacrificed than to be
saved. Rochester appears to have acted as if he thought so. He doubtless
employed the murderer’s reasoning, that “dead men tell no tales,” when,
after receiving letters of this description, he complained to his paramour of
the delay. Weston was spurred on to consummate the atrocity; and the
patience of all parties being exhausted, a dose of corrosive sublimate was
administered to him in October 1613, which put an end to his sufferings,
after he had been for six months in their hands. On the very day of his
death, and before his body was cold, he was wrapped up carelessly in a
sheet, and buried without any funeral ceremony in a pit within the precincts
of the Tower.
Sir Anthony Weldon, in his Court and Character of James I., gives a
somewhat different account of the closing scene of this tragedy. He says,
“Franklin and Weston came into Overbury’s chamber, and found him in
infinite torment, with contention between the strength of nature and the
working of the poison; and it being very like that nature had gotten the
better in this contention, by the thrusting out of boils, blotches, and blains,
they, fearing it might come to light by the judgment of physicians, the foul
play that had been offered him, consented to stifle him with the bedclothes,
which accordingly was performed; and so ended his miserable life, with the
assurance of the conspirators that he died by the poison; none thinking
otherwise than these two murderers.”
The sudden death, the indecent haste of the funeral, and the non-holding
of an inquest upon the body, strengthened the suspicions that were afloat.
Rumour, instead of whispering, began to speak out; and the relatives of the
deceased openly expressed their belief that their kinsman had been
murdered. But Rochester was still all powerful at court, and no one dared to
utter a word to his discredit. Shortly afterwards, his marriage with the
Countess of Essex was celebrated with the utmost splendour, the king
himself being present at the ceremony.
It would seem that Overbury’s knowledge of James’s character was
deeper than Rochester had given him credit for, and that he had been a true
prophet when he predicted that his marriage would eventually estrange
James from his minion. At this time, however, Rochester stood higher than
ever in the royal favour; but it did not last long—conscience, that busy
monitor, was at work. The tongue of rumour was never still; and Rochester,
who had long been a guilty, became at last a wretched man. His cheeks lost
their colour—his eyes grew dim; and he became moody, careless, and
melancholy. The king, seeing him thus, took at length no pleasure in his
society, and began to look about for another favourite. George Villiers,
Duke of Buckingham, was the man to his mind: quick-witted, handsome,
and unscrupulous. The two latter qualities alone were sufficient to
recommend him to James I. In proportion as the influence of Rochester
declined, that of Buckingham increased. A falling favourite has no friends;
and rumour wagged her tongue against Rochester louder and more
pertinaciously than ever. A new favourite, too, generally endeavours to
hasten by a kick the fall of the old one; and Buckingham, anxious to work
the complete ruin of his forerunner in the king’s good graces, encouraged
the relatives of Sir Thomas Overbury to prosecute their inquiries into the
strange death of their kinsman.
James was rigorous enough in the punishment of offences when he was
not himself involved. He piqued himself, moreover, on his dexterity in
unravelling mysteries. The affair of Sir Thomas Overbury found him
congenial occupation. He set to work by ordering the arrest of Sir Jervis
Elwes. James, at this early stage of the proceedings, does not seem to have
been aware that Rochester was so deeply implicated. Struck with horror at
the atrocious system of slow poisoning, the king sent for all the judges.
According to Sir Anthony Weldon, he knelt down in the midst of them, and
said, “My lords the judges, it is lately come to my hearing that you have
now in examination a business of poisoning. Lord! in what a miserable
condition shall this kingdom be (the only famous nation for hospitality in
the world) if our tables should become such a snare, as that none could eat
without danger of life, and that Italian custom should be introduced among
us! Therefore, my lords, I charge you, as you will answer it at that great and
dreadful day of judgment, that you examine it strictly, without favour,
affection, or partiality. And if you shall spare any guilty of this crime, God’s
curse light on you and your posterity! and if I spare any that are guilty,
God’s curse light on me and my posterity for ever!”
DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.
The imprecation fell but too surely upon the devoted house of Stuart.
The solemn oath was broken, and God’s curse did light upon him and his
posterity!
The next person arrested after Sir Jervis Elwes, was Weston, the under-
keeper; then Franklin and Mrs. Turner; and lastly, the Earl and Countess of
Somerset, to which dignity Rochester had been advanced since the death of
Overbury.
Weston was first brought to trial. Public curiosity was on the stretch.
Nothing else was talked of, and the court on the day of trial was crowded to
suffocation. The State Trials report, that Lord Chief Justice Coke “laid open
to the jury the baseness and cowardliness of poisoners, who attempt that
secretly against which there is no means of preservation or defence for a
man’s life; and how rare it was to hear of any poisoning in England, so
detestable it was to our nation. But the devil had taught divers to be cunning
in it, so that they can poison in what distance of space they please, by
consuming the nativum calidum, or humidum radicale, in one month, two
or three, or more, as they list, which they four manner of ways do execute,
viz. haustu, gustu, odore, and contactu.”
LORD COKE.
When the indictment was read over, Weston made no other reply than
“Lord have mercy upon me! Lord have mercy upon me!” On being asked
how he would be tried, he refused to throw himself upon a jury of his
country, and declared that he would be tried by God alone. In this he
persisted for some time. The fear of the dreadful punishment for
contumacy38 induced him at length to plead “Not guilty,” and take his trial
in due course of law.
All the circumstances against him were fully proved, and he was found
guilty and executed at Tyburn. Mrs. Turner, Franklin, and Sir Jervis Elwes
were also brought to trial, found guilty, and executed between the 19th of
October and the 4th of December 1615; but the grand trial of the Earl and
Countess of Somerset did not take place till the month of May following.
On the trial of Sir Jervis Elwes, circumstances had transpired, shewing a
guilty knowledge of the poisoning on the part of the Earl of Northampton,
the uncle of Lady Somerset, and the chief falconer Sir Thomas Monson.
The former was dead; but Sir Thomas Monson was arrested and brought to
trial. It appeared, however, that he was too dangerous a man to be brought
to the scaffold. He knew too many of the odious secrets of James I., and his
dying speech might contain disclosures which would compromise the king.
To conceal old guilt it was necessary to incur new: the trial of Sir Thomas
Monson was brought to an abrupt conclusion, and himself set at liberty.
THE EARL OF SOMERSET.
Already James had broken his oath. He now began to fear that he had
been rash in engaging so zealously to bring the poisoners to punishment.
That Somerset would be declared guilty there was no doubt, and that he
looked for pardon and impunity was equally evident to the king. Somerset,
while in the Tower, asserted confidently that James would not dare to bring
him to trial. In this he was mistaken; but James was in an agony. What the
secret was between them will now never be known with certainty; but it
may be surmised. Some have imagined it to be the vice to which the king
was addicted; while others have asserted that it related to the death of
Prince Henry, a virtuous young man, who had held Somerset in especial
abhorrence. This prince died early, unlamented by his father, and, as public
opinion whispered at the time, poisoned by Somerset. Probably some crime
or other lay heavy upon the soul of the king; and Somerset, his accomplice,
could not be brought to public execution with safety. Hence the dreadful
tortures of James when he discovered that his favourite was so deeply
implicated in the murder of Overbury. Every means was taken by the
agonised king to bring the prisoner into what was called a safe frame of
mind. He was secretly advised to plead guilty, and trust to the clemency of
the king. The same advice was conveyed to the countess. Bacon was
instructed by the king to draw up a paper of all the points of “mercy and
favour” to Somerset which might result from the evidence; and Somerset
was again recommended to plead guilty, and promised that no evil should
ensue to him.
The countess was first tried. She trembled and shed tears during the
reading of the indictment, and, in a low voice, pleaded guilty. On being
asked why sentence of death should not be passed against her, she replied
meekly, “I can much aggravate, but nothing extenuate my fault. I desire
mercy, and that the lords will intercede for me with the king.” Sentence of
death was passed upon her.
Next day the earl was brought to trial. He appears to have mistrusted the
promises of James, and he pleaded not guilty. With a self-possession and
confidence which he felt, probably, from his knowledge of the king’s
character, he rigorously cross-examined the witnesses, and made a stubborn
defence. After a trial which lasted eleven hours he was found guilty, and
condemned to the felon’s death.
THE COUNTESS OF SOMERSET.
Whatever may have been the secrets between the criminal and the king,
the latter, notwithstanding his terrific oath, was afraid to sign the death-
warrant. It might, perchance, have been his own. The earl and countess
were committed to the Tower, where they remained for nearly five years. At
the end of this period, to the surprise and scandal of the community, and the
disgrace of its chief magistrate, they both received the royal pardon, but
were ordered to reside at a distance from the court. Having been found
guilty of felony, the estates of the earl had become forfeited; but James
granted him out of their revenues an income of 4000l. per annum!
Shamelessness could go no further.
Of the after-life of these criminals nothing is known, except that the
love they had formerly borne each other was changed into aversion, and
that they lived under the same roof for months together without the
interchange of a word.
The exposure of their atrocities did not put a stop to the practice of
poisoning. On the contrary, as we shall see hereafter, it engendered that
insane imitation which is so strange a feature of the human character. James
himself is supposed, with great probability, to have fallen a victim to it. In
the notes to Harris’s Life and Writings of James I., there is a good deal of
information on the subject. The guilt of Buckingham, although not fully
established, rests upon circumstances of suspicion stronger than have been
sufficient to lead hundreds to the scaffold. His motives for committing the
crime are stated to have been a desire of revenge for the coldness with
which the king, in the latter years of his reign, began to regard him; his fear
that James intended to degrade him; and his hope that the great influence he
possessed over the mind of the heir-apparent would last through a new
reign, if the old one were brought to a close.
In the second volume of the Harleian Miscellany, there is a tract,
entitled the Forerunner of Revenge, written by George Eglisham, doctor of
medicine, and one of the physicians to King James. Harris, in quoting it,
says that it is full of rancour and prejudice. It is evidently exaggerated, but
forms nevertheless a link in the chain of evidence. Eglisham says, “The
king being sick of an ague, the duke took this opportunity, when all the
king’s doctors of physic were at dinner, and offered to him a white powder
to take, the which he a long time refused; but, overcome with his flattering
importunity, he took it in wine, and immediately became worse and worse,
falling into many swoonings and pains, and violent fluxes of the belly, so
tormented, that his majesty cried out aloud of this white powder, ‘Would to
God I had never taken it!’” He then tells us “of the Countess of
Buckingham (the duke’s mother) applying the plaister to the king’s heart
and breast, whereupon he grew faint and short-breathed, and in agony; that
the physicians exclaimed that the king was poisoned; that Buckingham
commanded them out of the room, and committed one of them close
prisoner to his own chamber, and another to be removed from court; and
that, after his majesty’s death, his body and head swelled above measure;
his hair, with the skin of his head, stuck to his pillow, and his nails became
loose on his fingers and toes.” Clarendon, who, by the way, was a partisan
of the duke’s, gives a totally different account of James’s death. He says, “It
was occasioned by an ague (after a short indisposition by the gout), which,
meeting many humours in a fat unwieldy body of fifty-eight years old, in
four or five fits carried him out of the world,—after whose death many
scandalous and libellous discourses were raised, without the least colour or
ground, as appeared upon the strictest and most malicious examination that
could be made, long after, in a time of license, when nobody was afraid of
offending majesty, and when prosecuting the highest reproaches and
contumelies against the royal family was held very meritorious.”
Notwithstanding this confident declaration, the world will hardly be
persuaded that there was not some truth in the rumours that were abroad.
The inquiries which were instituted were not strict, as he asserts, and all the
unconstitutional influence of the powerful favourite was exerted to defeat
them. In the celebrated accusations brought against Buckingham by the Earl
of Bristol, the poisoning of King James was placed last on the list; and the
pages of history bear evidence of the summary mode in which they were,
for the time, got rid of.
The man from whom Buckingham is said to have procured his poisons
was one Dr. Lamb, a conjuror and empiric, who, besides dealing in poisons,
pretended to be a fortune-teller. The popular fury, which broke with
comparative harmlessness against his patron, was directed against this man,
until he could not appear with safety in the streets of London. His fate was
melancholy. Walking one day in Cheapside, disguised, as he thought, from
all observers, he was recognised by some idle boys, who began to hoot and
pelt him with stones, calling out, “The poisoner! the poisoner! Down with
the wizard! down with him!” A mob very soon collected, and the doctor
took to his heels and ran for his life. He was pursued and seized in Wood
Street, and from thence dragged by the hair through the mire to St. Paul’s
Cross; the mob beating him with sticks and stones, and calling out, “Kill the
wizard! kill the poisoner!”
PAUL’S CROSS; SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.
Charles I., on hearing of the riot, rode from Whitehall to quell it; but he
arrived too late to save the victim. Every bone in his body was broken, and
he was quite dead. Charles was excessively indignant, and fined the city six
hundred pounds for its inability to deliver up the ring-leaders to justice.
But it was in Italy that poisoning was most prevalent. From a very early
period, it seems to have been looked upon in that country as a perfectly
justifiable means of getting rid of an enemy. The Italians of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries poisoned their opponents with as little
compunction as an Englishman of the present day brings an action at law
against any one who has done him an injury. The writings of contemporary
authors inform us that, when La Spara and La Tophania carried on their
infernal trade, ladies put poison-bottles on their dressing-tables as openly,
and used them with as little scruple upon others, as modern dames use Eau
de Cologne or lavender-water upon themselves. So powerful is the
influence of fashion, it can even cause murder to be regarded as a venial
peccadillo.
In the memoirs of the last Duke of Guise, who made a Quixotic attempt,
in 1648, to seize upon the government of Naples, we find some curious
particulars relative to the popular feeling with regard to poisoning. A man
named Gennaro Annese, who, after the short and extraordinary career of
Masaniello the fisherman, had established himself as a sort of captain-
general of the populace, rendered himself so obnoxious to the Duke of
Guise, that the adherents of the latter determined to murder him. The
captain of the guard, as the duke himself very coolly informs us, was
requested to undertake this office. It was suggested to him that the poniard
would be the most effectual instrument, but the man turned up his eyes with
pious horror at the proposition. He was ready to poison Gennaro Annese
whenever he might be called upon to do so; but to poniard him, he said,
would be disgraceful, and unbecoming an officer of the guards! At last,
poison was agreed upon, and Augustino Molla, an attorney in the duke’s
confidence, brought the bottle containing the liquid to shew it to his master.
The following is the Duke’s own account:
“Augustino came to me at night, and told me: ‘I have brought you
something which will free you from Gennaro. He deserves death, and
it is no great matter after what fashion justice is done upon him. Look
at this vial, full of clear and beautiful water: in four days’ time, it will
punish all his treasons. The captain of the guard has undertaken to give
it him; and as it has no taste at all, Gennaro will suspect nothing.’”
The duke further informs us that the dose was duly administered; but
that Gennaro, fortunately for himself, ate nothing for dinner that day but
cabbage dressed with oil, which acting as an antidote, caused him to vomit
profusely, and saved his life. He was exceedingly ill for five days, but never
suspected that he had been poisoned.
In process of time, poison-vending became a profitable trade. Eleven
years after this period, it was carried on at Rome to such an extent, that the
sluggish government was roused to interference. Beckmann, in his History
of Inventions, and Lebret, in his Magazin zum Gebrauche der Staaten
Kirche Geschichte, or Magazine of Materials for a History of a State
Church, relates that, in the year 1659, it was made known to Pope
Alexander VII. that great numbers of young women had avowed in the
confessional that they had poisoned their husbands with slow poisons. The
Catholic clergy, who in general hold the secrets of the confessional so
sacred, were shocked and alarmed at the extraordinary prevalence of the
crime. Although they refrained from revealing the names of the penitents,
they conceived themselves bound to apprise the head of the Church of the
enormities that were practised. It was also the subject of general
conversation in Rome that young widows were unusually abundant. It was
remarked, too, that if any couple lived unhappily together, the husband soon
took ill and died. The papal authorities, when once they began to inquire,
soon learned that a society of young wives had been formed, and met
nightly, for some mysterious purpose, at the house of an old woman named
Hieronyma Spara. This hag was a reputed witch and fortune-teller, and
acted as president of the young viragos, several of whom, it was afterwards
ascertained, belonged to the first families of Rome.
In order to have positive evidence of the practices of this female
conclave, a lady was employed by the government to seek an interview with
them. She dressed herself out in the most magnificent style; and having
been amply provided with money, she found but little difficulty, when she
had stated her object, of procuring an audience of La Spara and her
sisterhood. She pretended to be in extreme distress of mind on account of
the infidelities and ill-treatment of her husband, and implored La Spara to
furnish her with a few drops of the wonderful elixir, the efficacy of which in
sending cruel husbands to “their last long sleep” was so much vaunted by
the ladies of Rome. La Spara fell into the snare, and sold her some of her
“drops” at a price commensurate with the supposed wealth of the purchaser.
The liquor thus obtained was subjected to an analysis, and found to be,
as was suspected, a slow poison; clear, tasteless, and limpid, like that
spoken of by the Duke of Guise. Upon this evidence, the house was
surrounded by the police, and La Spara and her companions taken into
custody. La Spara, who is described as having been a little ugly old woman,
was put to the torture, but obstinately refused to confess her guilt. Another
of the women, named La Gratiosa, had less firmness, and laid bare all the
secrets of the infernal sisterhood. Taking a confession extorted by anguish
on the rack at its true value (nothing at all), there is still sufficient evidence
to warrant posterity in the belief of their guilt. They were found guilty, and
condemned, according to their degrees of culpability, to various
punishments. La Spara, Gratiosa, and three young women, who had
poisoned their husbands, were hanged together at Rome. Upwards of thirty
women were whipped publicly through the streets; and several, whose high
rank screened them from more degrading punishment, were banished from
the country, and mulcted in heavy fines. In a few months afterwards, nine
women more were hanged for poisoning; and another bevy, including many
young and beautiful girls, were whipped half naked through the streets of
Rome.
This severity did not put a stop to the practice, and jealous women and
avaricious men, anxious to step into the inheritance of fathers, uncles, or
brothers, resorted to poison. As it was quite free from taste, colour, and
smell, it was administered without exciting suspicion. The skilful vendors
compounded it of different degrees of strength, so that the poisoners had
only to say whether they wanted their victims to die in a week, a month, or
six months, and they were suited with corresponding doses. The vendors
were chiefly women, of whom the most celebrated was a hag named
Tophania, who was in this way accessory to the death of upwards of six
hundred persons. This woman appears to have been a dealer in poisons
from her girlhood, and resided first at Palermo and then at Naples. That
entertaining traveller, Father Lebat, has given, in his letters from Italy, many
curious particulars relating to her. When he was at Civita Vecchia, in 1719,
the Viceroy of Naples discovered that poison was extensively sold in the
latter city, and that it went by the name of aqueta, or little-water. On making
further inquiry, he ascertained that Tophania (who was by this time near
seventy years of age, and who seems to have begun her evil courses very
soon after the execution of La Spara,) sent large quantities of it to all parts
of Italy in small vials, with the inscription, “Manna of St. Nicholas of
Barri.”
The tomb of St. Nicholas of Barri was celebrated throughout Italy. A
miraculous oil was said to ooze from it, which cured nearly all the maladies
that flesh is heir to, provided the recipient made use of it with the due
degree of faith. La Tophania artfully gave this name to her poison to elude
the vigilance of the custom-house officers, who, in common with every
body else, had a pious respect for St. Nicholas de Barri and his wonderful
oil.
The poison was similar to that manufactured by La Spara. Hahnemann
the physician, and father of the homœopathic doctrine, writing upon this
subject, says it was compounded of arsenical neutral salts, occasioning in
the victim a gradual loss of appetite, faintness, gnawing pains in the
stomach, loss of strength, and wasting of the lungs. The Abbé Gagliardi
says, that a few drops of it were generally poured into tea, chocolate, or
soup, and its effects were slow, and almost imperceptible. Garelli, physician
to the Emperor of Austria, in a letter to Hoffmann, says it was crystallised
arsenic, dissolved in a large quantity of water by decoction, with the
addition (for some unexplained purpose) of the herb cymbalaria. The
Neapolitans called it Aqua Toffnina; and it became notorious all over
Europe under the name of Aqua Tophania.
Although this woman carried on her infamous traffic so extensively, it
was extremely difficult to meet with her. She lived in continual dread of
discovery. She constantly changed her name and residence; and pretending
to be a person of great godliness, resided in monasteries for months
together. Whenever she was more than usually apprehensive of detection
she sought ecclesiastical protection. She was soon apprised of the search
made for her by the Viceroy of Naples, and, according to her practice, took
refuge in a monastery. Either the search after her was not very rigid, or her
measures were exceedingly well taken; for she contrived to elude the
vigilance of the authorities for several years. What is still more
extraordinary, as shewing the ramifications of her system, her trade was still
carried on to as great an extent as before. Lebat informs us that she had so
great a sympathy for poor wives who hated their husbands and wanted to
get rid of them, but could not afford to buy her wonderful aqua, that she
made them presents of it.
She was not allowed, however, to play at this game for ever; she was at
length discovered in a nunnery, and her retreat cut off. The viceroy made
several representations to the superior to deliver her up, but without effect.
The abbess, supported by the archbishop of the diocese, constantly refused.
The public curiosity was in consequence so much excited at the additional
importance thus thrust upon the criminal, that thousands of persons visited
the nunnery in order to catch a glimpse of her.
The patience of the viceroy appears to have been exhausted by these
delays. Being a man of sense, and not a very zealous Catholic, he
determined that even the Church should not shield a criminal so atrocious.
Setting the privileges of the nunnery at defiance, he sent a troop of soldiers,
who broke over the walls, and carried her away vi et armis. The archbishop,
Cardinal Pignatelli, was highly indignant, and threatened to excommunicate
and lay the whole city under interdict. All the inferior clergy, animated by
the esprit du corps, took up the question, and so worked upon the
superstitious and bigoted people, that they were ready to rise in a mass to
storm the palace of the viceroy and rescue the prisoner.
These were serious difficulties; but the viceroy was not a man to be
daunted. Indeed, he seems to have acted throughout with a rare union of
astuteness, coolness, and energy. To avoid the evil consequences of the
threatened excommunication, he placed a guard round the palace of the
archbishop, judging that the latter would not be so foolish as to launch out
an anathema which would cause the city to be starved, and himself in it.
The market-people would not have dared to come to the city with
provisions so long as it remained under the ban. There would have been too
much inconvenience to himself and his ghostly brethren in such a measure;
and, as the viceroy anticipated, the good cardinal reserved his thunders for
some other occasion.
Still there was the populace. To quiet their clamour and avert the
impending insurrection, the agents of the government adroitly mingled with
the people, and spread abroad a report that Tophania had poisoned all the
wells and fountains of the city. This was enough. The popular feeling was
turned against her immediately. Those who, but a moment before, had
looked upon her as a saint, now reviled her as a devil, and were as eager for
her punishment as they had before been for her escape. Tophania was then
put to the torture. She confessed the long catalogue of her crimes, and
named all the persons who had employed her. She was shortly afterwards
strangled, and her corpse thrown over the wall into the garden of the
convent from whence she had been taken. This appears to have been done
to conciliate the clergy, by allowing them, at least, the burial of one who
had taken refuge within their precincts.
After her death the mania for poisoning seems to have abated; but we
have yet to see what hold it took upon the French people at a somewhat
earlier period. So rooted had it become in France between the years 1670
and 1680, that Madame de Sevigné, in one of her letters, expresses her fear
that Frenchman and poisoner would become synonymous terms.
As in Italy, the first notice the government received of the prevalence of
this crime was given by the clergy, to whom females of high rank, and some
among the middle and lower classes, had avowed in the confessional that
they had poisoned their husbands. In consequence of these disclosures, two
Italians, named Exili and Glaser, were arrested, and thrown into the Bastille,
on the charge of compounding and selling the drugs used for these murders.
Glaser died in prison, but Exili remained without trial for several months;
and there, shortly afterwards, he made the acquaintance of another prisoner,
named Sainte Croix, by whose example the crime was still further
disseminated among the French people.
The most notorious of the poisoners that derived their pernicious
knowledge from this man was Madame de Brinvilliers, a young woman
connected both by birth and marriage with some of the noblest families of
France. She seems, from her very earliest years, to have been heartless and
depraved; and, if we may believe her own confession, was steeped in
wickedness ere she had well entered her teens. She was, however, beautiful
and accomplished; and, in the eye of the world, seemed exemplary and
kind. Guyot de Pitaval, in the Causes Célèbres, and Madame de Sevigné, in
her letters, represent her as mild and agreeable in her manners, and offering
no traces on her countenance of the evil soul within. She was married in
1651 to the Marquis de Brinvilliers, with whom she lived unhappily for
some years. He was a loose, dissipated character, and was the means of
introducing Sainte Croix to his wife, a man who cast a blight upon her life,
and dragged her on from crime to crime, till her offences became so great
that the mind shudders to dwell upon them. For this man she conceived a
guilty passion, to gratify which she plunged at once into the gulf of sin. She
was drawn to its most loathsome depths ere retribution overtook her.
She had as yet shewn a fair outside to the world, and found but little
difficulty in effecting a legal separation from her husband, who had not the
art to conceal his vices. The proceeding gave great offence to her family.
She appears, after this, to have thrown off the mask completely, and carried
on her intrigues so openly with her lover, Sainte Croix, that her father, M.
D’Aubray, scandalised at her conduct, procured a lettre de cachet, and had
him imprisoned in the Bastille for a twelvemonth.
THE BASTILLE.
Sainte Croix, who had been in Italy, was a dabbler in poisons. He knew
something of the secrets of the detestable La Spara, and improved himself
in them from the instructions of Exili, with whom he speedily contracted a
sort of friendship. By him he was shewn how to prepare, not only the liquid
poisons employed in Italy, but that known as succession powder, which
afterwards became so celebrated in France. Like his mistress, he appeared
amiable, witty, and intelligent, and shewed no signs to the world of the two
fierce passions, revenge and avarice, which were gnawing at his heart. Both
these passions were to be sated on the unfortunate family of D’Aubray; his
revenge, because they had imprisoned him; and his avarice, because they
were rich. Reckless and extravagant, he was always in want of money, and
he had no one to supply him but Madame de Brinvilliers, whose own
portion was far from sufficient to satisfy his need. Groaning to think that
any impediment should stand between him and wealth, he conceived the
horrid idea of poisoning M. D’Aubray her father, and her two brothers, that
she might inherit the property. Three murders were nothing to such a villain.
He communicated his plan to Madame de Brinvilliers; and she, without the
slightest scruple, agreed to aid him: he undertook to compound the poisons,
and she to administer them. The zeal and alacrity with which she set to
work seem hardly credible. Sainte Croix found her an apt scholar; and she
soon became as expert as himself in the manufacture of poisons. To try the
strength of the first doses, she used to administer them to dogs, rabbits, and
pigeons. Afterwards, wishing to be more certain of their effects, she went
round to the hospitals, and administered them to the sick poor in the soups
which she brought in apparent charity.39 None of the poisons were intended
to kill at the first dose; so that she could try them once upon an individual
without fear of murder. She tried the same atrocious experiment upon the
guests at her father’s table, by poisoning a pigeon-pie! To be more certain
still, she next poisoned herself! When convinced by this desperate essay of
the potency of the draught, she procured an antidote from Sainte Croix, and
all doubts being removed, commenced operations upon her grey-headed
father. She administered the first dose with her own hands, in his chocolate.
The poison worked well. The old man was taken ill, and his daughter,
apparently full of tenderness and anxiety, watched by his bedside. The next
day she gave him some broth, which she recommended as highly
nourishing. This also was poisoned. In this manner she gradually wore out
his frame, and in less than ten days he was a corpse! His death seemed so
much the result of disease, that no suspicions were excited.
When the two brothers arrived from the provinces to render the last sad
duties to their sire, they found their sister as grieved, to all outward
appearance, as even filial affection could desire: but the young men only
came to perish. They stood between Sainte Croix and the already half-
clutched gold, and their doom was sealed. A man, named La Chaussée, was
hired by Sainte Croix to aid in administering the poisons; and, in less than
six weeks time, they had both gone to their long home.
Suspicion was now excited; but so cautiously had all been done, that it
found no one upon whom to attach itself. The marquise had a sister, and she
was entitled, by the death of her relatives, to half the property. Less than the
whole would not satisfy Sainte Croix, and he determined that she should die
the same death as her father and brothers. She was too distrustful, however;
and, by quitting Paris, she escaped the destruction that was lurking for her.
The marquise had undertaken these murders to please her lover. She
was now anxious to perpetrate another on her own account. She wished to
marry Sainte Croix; but, though separated from her husband, she was not
divorced. She thought it would be easier to poison him than to apply to the
tribunals for a divorce, which might, perhaps, be refused. But Sainte Croix
had no longer any love for his guilty instrument. Bad men do not admire
others who are as bad as themselves. Though a villain himself, he had no
desire to marry one, and was not at all anxious for the death of the marquis.
He seemed, however, to enter into the plot, and supplied her with poison for
her husband; but he took care to provide a remedy. La Brinvilliers poisoned
him one day, and Sainte Croix gave him an antidote the next. In this manner
he was buffeted about between them for some time, and finally escaped,
with a ruined constitution and a broken heart.
But the day of retribution was at hand, and a terrible mischance brought
the murders to light. The nature of the poisons compounded by Sainte Croix
was so deadly, that, when working in his laboratory, he was obliged to wear
a mask, to preserve himself from suffocation. One day, the mask slipped
off, and the miserable wretch perished in his crimes. His corpse was found,
on the following morning, in the obscure lodging where he had fitted up his
laboratory. As he appeared to be without friends or relatives, the police took
possession of his effects. Among other things, was found a small box, to
which was affixed the following singular document:
“I humbly beg, that those into whose hands this box may fall, will do
me the favour to deliver it into the hands only of the Marchioness de
Brinvilliers, who resides in the Rue Neuve St. Paul, as every thing it
contains concerns her, and belongs to her alone; and as, besides, there
is nothing in it that can be of use to any person but her. In case she
shall be dead before me, it is my wish that it be burned, with every
thing it contains, without opening or altering any thing. In order that
no one may plead ignorance, I swear by the God that I adore, and by
all that is held most sacred, that I assert nothing but the truth: and if
my intentions, just and reasonable as they are, be thwarted in this point
by any persons, I charge their consciences with it, both in this world
and that which is to come, in order that I may unload mine. I protest
that this is my last will. Done at Paris, May 25, 1672. 
(Signed)
Sainte Croix.”
This earnest solicitation, instead of insuring respect, as was intended,
excited curiosity. The box was opened, and found to contain some papers,
and several vials and powders. The latter were handed to a chemist for
analysis, and the documents were retained by the police, and opened.
Among them was found a promissory note of the Marchioness de
Brinvilliers, for thirty thousand francs, to the order of Sainte Croix. The
other papers were of greater importance, as they implicated both her and her
servant, La Chaussée, in the recent murders. As soon as she was informed
of the death of Sainte Croix, she made an attempt to gain possession of his
papers and the box; but, being refused, she saw that there was no time to be
lost, and immediately quitted. Next morning the police were on her trail;
but she succeeded in escaping to England. La Chaussée was not so
fortunate. Altogether ignorant of the fatal mischance which had brought his
villanies to light, he did not dream of danger. He was arrested and brought
to trial: being put to the torture, he confessed that he had administered
poison to the Messieurs d’Aubray, and that he had received a hundred
pistoles, and the promise of an annuity for life, from Sainte Croix and
Madame de Brinvilliers, for the job. He was condemned to be broken alive
on the wheel, and the marchioness was, by default, sentenced to be
beheaded. He was executed accordingly, in March 1673, on the Place de
Grève, in Paris.
La Brinvilliers appears to have resided for nearly three years in
England. Early in 1676, thinking that the rigour of pursuit was over, and
that she might venture to return to the Continent, she proceeded secretly to
Liège. Notwithstanding her care, the French authorities were soon apprised
of her return; and arrangements were promptly made with the municipality
of that city to permit the agents of the French police to arrest her within the
limits of their jurisdiction. Desgrais, an officer of the maréchaussée,
accordingly left Paris for that purpose. On his arrival in Liège, he found that
she had sought shelter within the walls of a convent. Here the arm of the
law, long as it is said to be, could not reach her: but Desgrais was not a man
to be baffled, and he resorted to stratagem to accomplish what force could
not. Having disguised himself as a priest, he sought admission to the
convent, and obtained an interview with La Brinvilliers. He said, that being
a Frenchman, and passing through Liège, he could not leave that city
without paying a visit to a lady whose beauty and misfortunes were so
celebrated. Her vanity was flattered by the compliment. Desgrais saw, to
use a vulgar but forcible expression, “that he had got on the blind side of
her;” and he adroitly continued to pour out the language of love and
admiration till the deluded marchioness was thrown completely off her
guard. She agreed, without much solicitation, to meet him outside the walls
of the convent, where their amorous intrigue might be carried on more
conveniently than within. Faithful to her appointment with her supposed
new lover, she came, and found herself, not in the embrace of a gallant, but
in the custody of a policeman.
Her trial was not long delayed. The proofs against her were abundant.
The dying declaration of La Chaussée would have been alone enough to
convict her; but besides that, there were the mysterious document attached
to the box of St. Croix, her flight from France, and, stronger and more
damning proof than all, a paper, in her own handwriting, found among the
effects of St. Croix, in which she detailed to him the misdeeds of her life,
and spoke of the murder of her father and brothers in terms that left no
doubt of her guilt. During the trial, all Paris was in commotion. La
Brinvilliers was the only subject of conversation. All the details of her
crimes were published, and greedily devoured; and the idea of secret
poisoning first put into the heads of hundreds, who afterwards became
guilty of it.
On the 16th of July, 1676, the Superior Criminal Court of Paris
pronounced a verdict of guilty against her, for the murder of her father and
brothers, and the attempt upon the life of her sister. She was condemned to
be drawn on a hurdle, with her feet bare, a rope about her neck, and a
burning torch in her hand, to the great entrance of the cathedral of Notre
Dame, where she was to make the amende honorable in sight of all the
people; to be taken from thence to the Place de Grève, and there to be
beheaded. Her body was afterwards to be burned, and her ashes scattered to
the winds.
After her sentence, she made a full confession of her guilt. She seems to
have looked upon death without fear; but it was recklessness, not courage,
that supported her. Madame de Sevigné says, that when on the hurdle, on
her way to the scaffold, she entreated her confessor to exert his influence
with the executioner to place himself next to her, that his body might hide
from her view “that scoundrel Desgrais, who had entrapped her.” She also
asked the ladies, who had been drawn to their windows to witness the
procession, what they were looking at? adding, “a pretty sight you have
come to see, truly!” She laughed when on the scaffold, dying as she had
lived, impenitent and heartless. On the morrow, the populace came in
crowds to collect her ashes to preserve them as relics. She was regarded as a
martyred saint, and her ashes were supposed to be endowed, by divine
grace, with the power of curing all diseases. Popular folly has often
canonised persons whose pretensions to sanctity were extremely equivocal;
but the disgusting folly of the multitude, in this instance, has never been
surpassed.
Before her death, proceedings were instituted against M. de Penautier,
treasurer of the province of Languedoc, and receiver-general for the clergy,
who was accused by a lady, named St. Laurent, of having poisoned her
husband, the late receiver-general, in order to obtain his appointment. The
circumstances of this case were never divulged, and the greatest influence
was exerted to prevent it from going to trial. He was known to have been
intimate with Sainte Croix and Madame de Brinvilliers, and was thought to
have procured his poisons from them. The latter, however, refused to say
any thing which might implicate him. The inquiry was eventually stifled,
after Penautier had been several months in the Bastille.
The Cardinal de Bonzy was accused by the gossips of the day of being
an accomplice of Penautier. The cardinal’s estates were burdened with the
payment of several heavy annuities; but, about the time that poisoning
became so fashionable, all the annuitants died off, one after the other. The
cardinal, in talking of these annuitants, afterwards used to say, “Thanks to
my star, I have outlived them all!” A wit, seeing him and Penautier riding in
the same carriage, cried out, in allusion to this expression, “There go the
Cardinal de Bonzy and his star!”
It was now that the mania for poisoning began to take hold of the
popular mind. From this time until the year 1682, the prisons of France
teemed with persons accused of this crime; and it is very singular that other
offences decreased in a similar proportion. We have already seen the extent
to which it was carried in Italy. It was, if possible, surpassed in France. The
diabolical ease with which these murders could be effected, by means of
these scentless and tasteless poisons, enticed the evil-minded. Jealousy,
revenge, avarice, even petty spite, alike resorted to them. Those who would
have been deterred, by fear of detection, from using the pistol or the dagger,
or even strong doses of poison, which kill at once, employed slow poisons
without dread. The corrupt government of the day, although it could wink at
the atrocities of a wealthy and influential courtier like Penautier, was
scandalised to see the crime spreading among the people. Disgrace was, in
fact, entailed, in the eyes of Europe, upon the name of Frenchman. Louis
XIV., to put a stop to the evil, instituted what was called the Chambre
Ardente, or Burning Chamber, with extensive powers for the trial and
punishment of the prisoners.
Two women, especially, made themselves notorious at this time, and
were instrumental to the deaths of hundreds of individuals. They both
resided in Paris, and were named Lavoisin and Lavigoreux. Like Spara and
Tophania, of whom they were imitators, they chiefly sold their poisons to
women who wanted to get rid of their husbands; and, in some few
instances, to husbands who wanted to get rid of their wives. Their ostensible
occupation was that of midwives. They also pretended to be fortune-tellers,
and were visited by persons of every class of society. The rich and poor
thronged alike to their mansardes to learn the secrets of the future. Their
prophecies were principally of death. They foretold to women the
approaching dissolution of husbands, and to needy heirs the end of rich
relatives, who had made them, as Byron expresses it, “wait too, too long
already.” They generally took care to be instrumental in fulfilling their own
predictions. They used to tell their wretched employers that some sign of
the approaching death would take place in the house, such as the breaking
of glass or china; and they paid servants considerable fees to cause a
breakage, as if by accident, exactly at the appointed time. Their occupation
as midwives made them acquainted with the secrets of many families,
which they afterwards turned to dreadful account.
It is not known how long they had carried on this awful trade before
they were discovered. Detection finally overtook them at the close of the
year 1679. They were both tried, found guilty, and burned alive on the Place
de Grève, on the 22d of February, 1680, after their hands had been bored
through with a red-hot iron, and then cut off. Their numerous accomplices
in Paris and in the provinces were also discovered and brought to trial.
According to some authors, thirty, and to others, fifty of them, chiefly
women, were hanged in the principal cities.
Lavoisin kept a list of the visitors who came to her house to purchase
poisons. This paper was seized by the police on her arrest, and examined by
the tribunals. Among the names were found those of the Marshal de
Luxembourg, the Countess de Soissons, and the Duchess de Bouillon. The
marshal seems only to have been guilty of a piece of discreditable folly in
visiting a woman of this description, but the popular voice at the time
imputed to him something more than folly. The author of the Memoirs of
the Affairs of Europe since the Peace of Utrecht, says, “The miserable gang
who dealt in poison and prophecy alleged that he had sold himself to the
devil, and that a young girl of the name of Dupin had been poisoned by his
means. Among other stories, they said he had made a contract with the
devil, in order to marry his son to the daughter of the Marquis of Louvois.
To this atrocious and absurd accusation the marshal, who had surrendered
himself at the Bastille on the first accusation against him, replied with the
mingled sentiment of pride and innocence, ‘When Mathieu de
Montmorenci, my ancestor, married the widow of Louis le Gros, he did not
have recourse to the devil, but to the states-general, in order to obtain for
the minor king the support of the house of Montmorenci.’ This brave man
was imprisoned in a cell six feet and a half long, and his trial, which was
interrupted for several weeks, lasted altogether fourteen months. No
judgment was pronounced upon him.”
The Countess of Soissons fled to Brussels, rather than undergo the risk
of a trial; and was never able to clear herself from the stigma that attached
to her, of having made an attempt to poison the Queen of Spain by doses of
succession-powder. The Duchess of Bouillon was arrested, and tried by the
Chambre Ardente. It would appear, however, that she had nothing to do
with the slow poisons, but had merely endeavoured to pry into the secrets of
futurity, and gratify her curiosity with a sight of the devil. One of the
presidents of the Chambre, La Reynie, an ugly little old man, very seriously
asked her whether she had really seen the devil; to which the lady replied,
looking him full in the face, “Oh, yes! I see him now. He is in the form of a
little ugly old man, exceedingly illnatured, and is dressed in the robes of a
Counsellor of State.” M. la Reynie prudently refrained from asking any
more questions of a lady with so sharp and ready a tongue. The duchess was
imprisoned for several months in the Bastille; and nothing being proved
against her, she was released at the intercession of her powerful friends. The
severe punishment of criminals of this note might have helped to abate the
fever of imitation among the vulgar;—their comparative impunity had a
contrary tendency. The escape of Penautier, and the wealthy Cardinal de
Bonzy his employer, had the most pernicious effect. For two years longer
the crime continued to rage, and was not finally suppressed till the stake
had blazed, or the noose dangled, for upwards of a hundred individuals.40
PALACE OF WOODSTOCK.
Haunted Houses
Table of Contents
Here’s a knocking indeed!… Knock! knock! knock!…
Who’s there, i’ the name o’ Beelzebub?… Who’s there,
i’ the devil’s name? Knock! knock! knock!—Never at
quiet?—Macbeth.
Who has not either seen or heard of some house, shut up and uninhabitable,
fallen into decay, and looking dusty and dreary, from which, at midnight,
strange sounds have been heard to issue—aerial knockings—the rattling of
chains, and the groaning of perturbed spirits?—a house that people have
thought it unsafe to pass after dark, and which has remained for years
without a tenant, and which no tenant would occupy, even were he paid to
do so? There are hundreds of such houses in England at the present day;
hundreds in France, Germany, and almost every country of Europe, which
are marked with the mark of fear—places for the timid to avoid, and the
pious to bless themselves at, and ask protection from, as they pass—the
abodes of ghosts and evil spirits. There are many such houses in London;
and if any vain boaster of the march of intellect would but take the trouble
to find them out and count them, he would be convinced that intellect must
yet make some enormous strides before such old superstitions can be
eradicated.
The idea that such houses exist is a remnant of the witch creed, which
merits separate notice from its comparative harmlessness, and from its
being not so much a madness as a folly of the people. Unlike other notions
that sprang from the belief in witchcraft, and which we have already dwelt
upon at sufficient length, it has sent no wretches to the stake or the gibbet,
and but a few to the pillory only.
Many houses have been condemned as haunted, and avoided by the
weak and credulous, from circumstances the most trifling in themselves,
and which only wanted a vigorous mind to clear up, at once, and dissipate
all alarm. A house in Aix-la-Chapelle, a large desolate-looking building,
remained uninhabited for five years, on account of the mysterious
knockings that there were heard within it at all hours of the day and night.
Nobody could account for the noises; and the fear became at last so
excessive, that the persons who inhabited the houses on either side
relinquished their tenancy, and went to reside in other quarters of the town,
where there was less chance of interruption from evil spirits. From being so
long without an inhabitant, the house at last grew so ruinous, so dingy, and
so miserable in its outward appearance, and so like the place that ghosts
might be supposed to haunt, that few persons cared to go past it after sunset.
The knocking that was heard in one of the upper rooms was not very loud,
but it was very regular. The gossips of the neighbourhood asserted that they
often heard groans from the cellars, and saw lights moved about from one
window to another immediately after the midnight bell had tolled. Spectres
in white habiliments were reported to have gibed and chattered from the
windows; but all these stories could bear no investigation. The knocking,
however, was a fact which no one could dispute, and several ineffectual
attempts were made by the proprietor to discover the cause. The rooms
were sprinkled with holy water; the evil spirits were commanded in due
form, by a priest, to depart thence to the Red Sea; but the knockings still
continued, in spite of all that could be done in that way. Accident at last
discovered the cause, and restored tranquillity to the neighbourhood. The
proprietor, who suffered not only in his mind but in his pocket, had sold the
building at a ruinously small price, to get rid of all future annoyance. The
new proprietor was standing in a room on the first floor when he heard the
door driven to at the bottom with a considerable noise, and then fly open
immediately, about two inches and no more. He stood still a minute and
watched, and the same thing occurred a second and a third time. He
examined the door attentively, and all the mystery was unravelled. The latch
of the door was broken, so that it could not be fastened, and it swung
chiefly upon the bottom hinge. Immediately opposite was a window, in
which one pane of glass was broken; and when the wind was in a certain
quarter, the draught of air was so strong that it blew the door to with some
violence. There being no latch, it swung open again; and when there was a
fresh gust, was again blown to. The new proprietor lost no time in sending
for a glazier, and the mysterious noises ceased for ever. The house was
replastered and repainted, and once more regained its lost good name. It
was not before two or three years, however, that it was thoroughly
established in popular favour; and many persons, even then, would always
avoid passing it, if they could reach their destination by any other street.
A similar story is narrated by Sir Walter Scott, in his Letters on
Demonology and Witchcraft, the hero of which was a gentleman of birth
and distinction, well known in the political world. Shortly after he
succeeded to his title and estates, there was a rumour among the servants
concerning a strange noise that used to be heard at night in the family
mansion, and the cause of which no one could ascertain. The gentleman
resolved to discover it himself, and to watch for that purpose with a
domestic who had grown old in the family, and who, like the rest, had
whispered strange things about the knocking having begun immediately
upon the death of his old master. These two watched until the noise was
heard, and at last traced it to a small store-room, used as a place for keeping
provisions of various kinds for the family, and of which the old butler had
the key. They entered this place, and remained for some time without
hearing the noises which they had traced thither. At length the sound was
heard, but much lower than it seemed to be while they were farther off, and
their imaginations were more excited. They then discovered the cause
without difficulty. A rat, caught in an old-fashioned trap, had occasioned the
noise by its efforts to escape, in which it was able to raise the trap-door of
its prison to a certain height, but was then obliged to drop it. The noise of
the fall resounding through the house had occasioned the mysterious
rumours, which, but for the investigation of the proprietor, would, in all
probability, have acquired so bad a name for the dwelling that no servants
would have inhabited it. The circumstance was told to Sir Walter Scott by
the gentleman to whom it happened.
SAINT LOUIS.
But, in general, houses that have acquired this character have been more
indebted for it to the roguery of living men than to accidents like these. Six
monks played off a clever trick of the kind upon that worthy king, Louis,
whose piety has procured him in the annals of his own country the
designation of “the Saint.” Having heard his confessor speak in terms of
warm eulogy of the goodness and learning of the monks of the order of St.
Bruno, he expressed his wish to establish a community of them near Paris.
Bernard de la Tour, the superior, sent six of the brethren, and the king gave
them a handsome house to live in in the village of Chantilly. It so happened
that from their windows they had a very fine view of the ancient palace of
Vauvert, which had been built for a royal residence by King Robert, but
deserted for many years. The worthy monks thought the palace would just
suit them; but their modesty was so excessive that they were ashamed to ask
the king for a grant of it in due form. This difficulty was not to be
overcome, and the monks set their ingenuity to work to discover another
plan. The palace of Vauvert had never laboured under any imputation upon
its character until they became its neighbours; but, somehow or other, it
almost immediately afterwards began to acquire a bad name. Frightful
shrieks were heard to proceed from it at night; blue, red, and green lights
were suddenly seen to glimmer from the windows, and as suddenly to
disappear; the clanking of chains was heard, and the howling as of persons
in great pain. These disturbances continued for several months, to the great
terror of all the country round, and even of the pious King Louis, to whom,
at Paris, all the rumours were regularly carried with whole heaps of
additions that accumulated on the way. At last a great spectre, clothed all in
pea-green, with a long white beard and a serpent’s tail, took his station
regularly at midnight in the principal window of the palace, and howled
fearfully, and shook his fists at the passengers. The six monks at Chantilly,
to whom all these things were duly narrated, were exceedingly wrath that
the devil should play such antics right opposite their dwelling, and hinted to
the commissioners sent down by Saint Louis to investigate the matter, that
if they were allowed to inhabit the palace, they would very soon make a
clearance of the evil spirits. The king was quite charmed with their piety,
and expressed to them how grateful he felt for their disinterestedness. A
deed was forthwith drawn up, the royal sign-manual was affixed to it, and
the palace of Vauvert became the property of the monks of St. Bruno. The
deed is dated 1259. The disturbances ceased immediately, the lights
disappeared, and the green ghost (so said the monks) was laid at rest for
ever under the waves of the Red Sea.41
In the year 1580, one Gilles Blacre had taken the lease of a house in the
suburbs of Tours, but repenting him of his bargain with the landlord, Peter
Piquet, he endeavoured to prevail upon him to cancel the agreement. Peter,
however, was satisfied with his tenant and his terms, and would listen to no
compromise. Very shortly afterwards, the rumour was spread all over Tours
that the house of Gilles Blacre was haunted. Gilles himself asserted that he
verily believed his house to be the general rendezvous of all the witches and
evil spirits of France. The noise they made was awful, and quite prevented
him from sleeping. They knocked against the wall, howled in the chimneys,
broke his window-glass, scattered his pots and pans all over his kitchen, and
set his chairs and tables a dancing the whole night through. Crowds of
persons assembled round the house to hear the mysterious noises: and the
bricks were observed to detach themselves from the wall, and fall into the
streets upon the heads of those who had not said their paternoster before
coming out in the morning. These things having continued for some time,
Gilles Blacre made his complaint to the Civil Court of Tours, and Peter
Piquet was summoned to shew cause why the lease should not be annulled.
Poor Peter could make no defence, and the court unanimously agreed that
no lease could hold good under such circumstances, and annulled it
accordingly, condemning the unlucky owner to all the expenses of the suit.
Peter appealed to the parliament of Paris; and after a long examination, the
parliament confirmed the lease. “Not,” said the judge, “because it has not
been fully and satisfactorily proved that the house is troubled by evil spirits,
but that there was an informality in the proceedings before the Civil Court
of Tours, that rendered its decision null and of no effect.”
A similar cause was tried before the Parliament of Bourdeaux, in the
year 1595, relative to a house in that city which was sorely troubled by evil
spirits. The parliament appointed certain ecclesiastics to examine and report
to them, and on their report in the affirmative that the house was haunted,
the lease was annulled, and the tenant absolved from all payment of rent
and taxes.42
One of the best stories of a haunted house is that of the royal palace of
Woodstock, in the year 1649, when the commissioners sent from London by
the Long Parliament to take possession of it, and efface all the emblems of
royalty about it, were fairly driven out by their fear of the devil, and the
annoyances they suffered from a roguish cavalier, who played the imp to
admiration. The commissioners, dreading at that time no devil, arrived at
Woodstock on the 13th of October, 1649. They took up their lodgings in the
late king’s apartments—turned the beautiful bedrooms and withdrawing-
rooms into kitchens and sculleries—the council-hall into a brew-house, and
made the dining-room a place to keep firewood in. They pulled down all the
insignia of royal state, and treated with the utmost indignity every thing that
recalled to their memory the name or the majesty of Charles Stuart. One
Giles Sharp accompanied them in the capacity of clerk, and seconded their
efforts, apparently with the greatest zeal. He aided them to uproot a noble
old tree, merely because it was called the King’s Oak, and tossed the
fragments into the dining-room to make cheerful fires for the
commissioners. During the first two days, they heard some strange noises
about the house, but they paid no great attention to them. On the third,
however, they began to suspect they had got into bad company; for they
heard, as they thought, a supernatural dog under their bed, which gnawed
their bed-clothes. On the next day, the chairs and tables began to dance,
apparently of their own accord. On the fifth day, something came into the
bedchamber and walked up and down; and fetching the warming-pan out of
the withdrawing-room, made so much noise with it that they thought five
church-bells were ringing in their ears. On the sixth day, the plates and
dishes were thrown up and down the dining-room. On the seventh, they
penetrated into the bedroom in company with several logs of wood, and
usurped the soft pillows intended for the commissioners. On the eighth and
ninth nights, there was a cessation of hostilities; but on the tenth, the bricks
in the chimneys became locomotive, and rattled and danced about the
floors, and round the heads of the commissioners, all the night long. On the
eleventh, the demon ran away with their breeches; and on the twelfth filled
their beds so full of pewter platters that they could not get into them. On the
thirteenth night, the glass became unaccountably seized with a fit of
cracking, and fell into shivers in all parts of the house. On the fourteenth,
there was a noise as if forty pieces of artillery had been fired off, and a
shower of pebble-stones, which so alarmed the commissioners that, “struck
with great horror, they cried out to one another for help.”
They first of all tried the efficacy of prayers to drive away the evil
spirits; but these proving unavailing, they began seriously to reflect whether
it would not be much better to leave the place altogether to the devils that
inhabited it. They ultimately resolved, however, to try it a little longer; and
having craved forgiveness of all their sins, betook themselves to bed. That
night they slept in tolerable comfort, but it was merely a trick of their
tormentor to lull them into false security. When, on the succeeding night,
they heard no noises, they began to flatter themselves that the devil was
driven out, and prepared accordingly to take up their quarters for the whole
winter in the palace. These symptoms on their part became the signal for
renewed uproar among the fiends. On the 1st of November, they heard
something walking with a slow and solemn pace up and down the
withdrawing-room, and immediately afterwards a shower of stones, bricks,
mortar, and broken glass pelted about their ears. On the 2d the steps were
again heard in the withdrawing-room, sounding to their fancy very much
like the treading of an enormous bear, which continued for about a quarter
of an hour. This noise having ceased, a large warming-pan was thrown
violently upon the table, followed by a number of stones and the jawbone of
a horse. Some of the boldest walked valiantly into the withdrawing-room,
armed with swords and pistols; but could discover nothing. They were
afraid that night to go to sleep, and sat up, making fires in every room, and
burning candles and lamps in great abundance; thinking that, as the fiends
loved darkness, they would not disturb a company surrounded with so much
light. They were deceived, however: buckets of water came down the
chimneys and extinguished the fires; and the candles were blown out, they
knew not how. Some of the servants who had betaken themselves to bed
were drenched with putrid ditch-water as they lay, and arose in great fright,
muttering incoherent prayers, and exposing to the wondering eyes of the
commissioners their linen all dripping with green moisture, and their
knuckles red with the blows they had at the same time received from some
invisible tormentors. While they were still speaking, there was a noise like
the loudest thunder, or the firing of a whole park of artillery, upon which
they all fell down upon their knees and implored the protection of the
Almighty. One of the commissioners then arose, the others still kneeling,
and asked in a courageous voice, and in the name of God, who was there,
and what they had done that they should be troubled in that manner. No
answer was returned, and the noises ceased for a while. At length, however,
as the commissioners said, “the devil came again, and brought with it seven
devils worse than itself.” Being again in darkness, they lighted a candle and
placed it in the doorway, that it might throw a light upon the two chambers
at once; but it was suddenly blown out, and one commissioner said that he
had “seen the similitude of a horse’s hoof striking the candle and
candlestick into the middle of the chamber, and afterwards making three
scrapes on the snuff to put it out.” Upon this, the same person was so bold
as to draw his sword; but he asserted positively that he had hardly
withdrawn it from the scabbard before an invisible hand seized hold of it
and tugged with him for it, and prevailing, struck him so violent a blow
with the pommel that he was quite stunned. Then the noises began again;
upon which, with one accord, they all retired into the presence-chamber,
where they passed the night, praying and singing psalms.
They were by this time convinced that it was useless to struggle any
longer with the powers of evil that seemed determined to make Woodstock
their own. These things happened on the Saturday night; and being repeated
on the Sunday, they determined to leave the place immediately, and return
to London. By Tuesday morning early, all their preparations were
completed; and, shaking the dust off their feet, and devoting Woodstock and
all its inhabitants to the infernal gods, they finally took their departure.43
Many years elapsed before the true cause of these disturbances was
discovered. It was ascertained at the Restoration, that the whole was the
work of Giles Sharp, the trusty clerk of the commissioners. This man,
whose real name was Joseph Collins, was a concealed royalist, and had
passed his early life within the bowers of Woodstock; so that he knew every
hole and corner of the place, and the numerous trap-doors and secret
passages that abounded in the building. The commissioners, never
suspecting the true state of his opinions, but believing him to be
revolutionary to the back-bone, placed the utmost reliance upon him; a
confidence which he abused in the manner above detailed, to his own great
amusement and that of the few cavaliers whom he let into the secret.
Quite as extraordinary and as cleverly managed was the trick played off
at Tedworth, in 1661, at the house of Mr. Mompesson, and which is so
circumstantially narrated by the Rev. Joseph Glanvil, under the title of The
Demon of Tedworth, and appended, among other proofs of witchcraft, to his
noted work called Sadducismus Triumphatus. About the middle of April, in
the year above mentioned, Mr. Mompesson, having returned to his house at
Tedworth from a journey he had taken to London, was informed by his
wife, that during his absence they had been troubled with the most
extraordinary noises. Three nights afterwards he heard the noise himself;
and it appeared to him to be that of “a great knocking at his doors, and on
the outside of his walls.” He immediately arose, dressed himself, took down
a pair of pistols, and walked valiantly forth to discover the disturber, under
the impression that it must be a robber; but, as he went, the noise seemed to
travel before or behind him; and when he arrived at the door from which he
thought it proceeded, he saw nothing, but still heard “a strange hollow
sound.” He puzzled his brains for a long time, and searched every corner of
the house; but discovering nothing, he went to bed again. He was no sooner
snug under the clothes than the noise began again more furiously than ever,
sounding very much like a “thumping and drumming on the top of his
house, and then by degrees going off into the air.”
These things continued for several nights, when it came to the
recollection of Mr. Mompesson that some time before he had given orders
for the arrest and imprisonment of a wandering drummer, who went about
the country with a large drum, disturbing quiet people and soliciting alms,
and that he had detained the man’s drum, and that probably the drummer
was a wizard, and had sent evil spirits to haunt his house to be revenged of
him. He became strengthened in his opinion every day, especially when the
noises assumed, to his fancy, a resemblance to the beating of a drum, “like
that at the breaking up of a guard.” Mrs. Mompesson being brought to bed,
the devil, or the drummer, very kindly and considerately refrained from
making the usual riot; but, as soon as she recovered strength, began again
“in a ruder manner than before, following and vexing the young children,
and beating their bedsteads with so much violence that every one expected
they would fall in pieces.” For an hour together, as the worthy Mr.
Mompesson repeated to his wondering neighbours, this infernal drummer
“would beat ‘Roundheads and Cuckolds,’ the ‘Tat-too,’ and several other
points of war, as cleverly as any soldier.” When this had lasted long enough,
he changed his tactics, and scratched with his iron talons under the
children’s bed. “On the 5th of November,” says the Rev. Joseph Glanvil, “it
made a mighty noise; and a servant observing two boards in the children’s
room seeming to move, he bid it give him one of them. Upon which the
board came (nothing moving it that he saw) within a yard of him. The man
added, ‘Nay, let me have it in my hand;’ upon which the spirit, devil, or
drummer pushed it towards him so close that he might touch it.” “This,”
continues Glanvil, “was in the day-time, and was seen by a whole room full
of people. That morning it left a sulphureous smell behind it, which was
very offensive. At night the minister, one Mr. Cragg, and several of the
neighbours came to the house on a visit. Mr. Cragg went to prayers with
them, kneeling at the children’s bedside, where it then became very
troublesome and loud. During prayer-time, the spirit withdrew into the
cock-loft, but returned as soon as prayers were done; and then, in sight of
the company, the chairs walked about the room of themselves, the
children’s shoes were hurled over their heads, and every loose thing moved
about the chamber. At the same time, a bed-staff was thrown at the minister,
which hit him on the leg, but so favourably, that a lock of wool could not
have fallen more softly.” On another occasion, the blacksmith of the village,
a fellow who cared neither for ghost nor devil, slept with John the footman,
that he also might hear the disturbances and be cured of his incredulity,
when there “came a noise in the room as if one had been shoeing a horse,
and somewhat came, as it were, with a pair of pincers,” snipping and
snapping at the poor blacksmith’s nose the greater part of the night. Next
day it came panting like a dog out of breath; upon which some woman
present took a bed-staff to knock at it, “which was caught suddenly out of
her hand and thrown away; and company coming up, the room was
presently filled with a bloomy noisome smell, and was very hot, though
without fire, in a very sharp and severe winter. It continued in the bed,
panting and scratching for an hour and a half, and then went into the next
room, where it knocked a little, and seemed to rattle a chain.”
The rumour of these wonderful occurrences soon spread all over the
country, and people from far and near flocked to the haunted house of
Tedworth, to believe or doubt as their natures led them, but all filled with
intense curiosity. It appears, too, that the fame of these events reached the
royal ear, and that some gentlemen were sent by the king to investigate the
circumstances, and draw up a report of what they saw or heard. Whether the
royal commissioners were more sensible men than the neighbours of Mr.
Mompesson, and required more clear and positive evidence than they, or
whether the powers with which they were armed to punish any body who
might be found carrying on this deception frightened the evil-doers, is not
certain; but Glanvil himself reluctantly confesses that all the time they were
in the house the noises ceased, and nothing was heard or seen. “However,”
says he, “as to the quiet of the house when the courtiers were there, the
intermission may have been accidental, or perhaps the demon was not
willing to give so public a testimony of those transactions which might
possibly convince those who he had rather should continue in unbelief of
his existence.”
As soon as the royal commissioners took their departure, the infernal
drummer recommenced his antics, and hundreds of persons were daily
present to hear and wonder. Mr. Mompesson’s servant was so fortunate as
not only to hear, but to see this pertinacious demon, for it came and stood at
the foot of his bed. “The exact shape and proportion of it he could not
discover; but he saw a great body, with two red and glaring eyes, which, for
some time, were fixed steadily on him, and at length disappeared.”
Innumerable were the antics it played. Once it purred like a cat; beat the
children’s legs black and blue; put a long spike into Mr. Mompesson’s bed,
and a knife into his mother’s; filled the porringers with ashes; hid a Bible
under the grate; and turned the money black in people’s pockets. “One
night,” said Mr. Mompesson, in a letter to Mr. Glanvil, “there were seven or
eight of these devils in the shape of men, who, as soon as a gun was fired,
would shuffle away into an arbour;” a circumstance which might have
convinced Mr. Mompesson of the mortal nature of his persecutors, if he had
not been of the number of those worse than blind, who shut their eyes and
refuse to see.
In the mean time the drummer, the supposed cause of all the mischief,
passed his time in Gloucester gaol, whither he had been committed as a
rogue and a vagabond. Being visited one day by some person from the
neighbourhood of Tedworth, he asked what was the news in Wiltshire, and
whether people did not talk a great deal about a drumming in a gentleman’s
house there? The visitor replied that he heard of nothing else; upon which
the drummer observed, “I have done it; I have thus plagued him; and he
shall never be quiet until he hath made me satisfaction for taking away my
drum.” No doubt the fellow, who seems to have been a gipsy, spoke the
truth, and that the gang of which he was a member knew more about the
noises at Mr. Mompesson’s house than any body else. Upon these words,
however, he was brought to trial at Salisbury for witchcraft; and, being
found guilty, was sentenced to transportation; a sentence which, for its
leniency, excited no little wonder in that age, when such an accusation,
whether proved or not, generally insured the stake or the gibbet. Glanvil
says that the noises ceased immediately the drummer was sent beyond the
seas; but that, somehow or other, he managed to return from transportation;
“by raising storms and affrighting the seamen, it was said;” when the
disturbances were forthwith renewed, and continued at intervals for several
years. Certainly, if the confederates of this roving gipsy were so
pertinacious in tormenting poor weak Mr. Mompesson, their pertinacity is a
most extraordinary instance of what revenge is capable of. It was believed
by many, at the time, that Mr. Mompesson himself was privy to the whole
matter, and permitted and encouraged these tricks in his house for the sake
of notoriety; but it seems more probable that the gipsies were the real
delinquents, and that Mr. Mompesson was as much alarmed and bewildered
as his credulous neighbours, whose excited imaginations conjured up no
small portion of these stories,
“Which rolled, and as they rolled grew larger visibly.”
Many instances of a similar kind, during the seventeenth century, might
be gleaned from Glanvil and other writers of that period; but they do not
differ sufficiently from these to justify a detail of them. The most famous of
all haunted houses acquired its notoriety much nearer our own time; and the
circumstances connected with it are so curious, and afford so fair a
specimen of the easy credulity even of well-informed and sensible people,
as to merit a little notice in this chapter. The Cock-Lane Ghost, as it was
called, kept London in commotion for a considerable time, and was the
theme of conversation among the learned and the illiterate, and in every
circle, from that of the prince to that of the peasant.
THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN COCK LANE.
At the commencement of the year 1760, there resided in Cock Lane,
near West Smithfield, in the house of one Parsons, the parish clerk of St.
Sepulchre’s, a stockbroker, named Kent. The wife of this gentleman had
died in child-bed during the previous year, and his sister-in-law, Miss
Fanny, had arrived from Norfolk to keep his house for him. They soon
conceived a mutual affection, and each of them made a will in the other’s
favour. They lived some months in the house of Parsons, who, being a
needy man, borrowed money of his lodger. Some difference arose betwixt
them, and Mr. Kent left the house, and instituted legal proceedings against
the parish-clerk for the recovery of his money.
While this matter was yet pending, Miss Fanny was suddenly taken ill
of the small-pox; and, notwithstanding every care and attention, she died in
a few days, and was buried in a vault under Clerkenwell church. Parsons
now began to hint that the poor lady had come unfairly by her death, and
that Mr. Kent was accessory to it, from his too great eagerness to enter into
possession of the property she had bequeathed him. Nothing further was
said for nearly two years; but it would appear that Parsons was of so
revengeful a character, that he had never forgotten or forgiven his
differences with Mr. Kent, and the indignity of having been sued for the
borrowed money. The strong passions of pride and avarice were silently at
work during all that interval, hatching schemes of revenge, but dismissing
them one after the other as impracticable, until, at last, a notable one
suggested itself. About the beginning of the year 1762, the alarm was
spread over all the neighbourhood of Cock Lane, that the house of Parsons
was haunted by the ghost of poor Fanny, and that the daughter of Parsons, a
girl about twelve years of age, had several times seen and conversed with
the spirit, who had, moreover, informed her, that she had not died of the
small-pox, as was currently reported, but of poison, administered by Mr.
Kent. Parsons, who originated, took good care to countenance these reports;
and, in answer to numerous inquiries, said his house was every night, and
had been for two years, in fact, ever since the death of Fanny, troubled by a
loud knocking at the doors and in the walls. Having thus prepared the
ignorant and credulous neighbours to believe or exaggerate for themselves
what he had told them, he sent for a gentleman of a higher class in life, to
come and witness these extraordinary occurrences. The gentleman came
accordingly, and found the daughter of Parsons, to whom the spirit alone
appeared, and whom alone it answered, in bed, trembling violently, having
just seen the ghost, and been again informed that she had died from poison.
A loud knocking was also heard from every part of the chamber, which so
mystified the not very clear understanding of the visitor, that he departed,
afraid to doubt and ashamed to believe, but with a promise to bring the
clergyman of the parish and several other gentlemen on the following day,
to report upon the mystery.
On the following night he returned, bringing with him three clergymen,
and about twenty other persons, including two negroes, when, upon a
consultation with Parsons, they resolved to sit up the whole night, and await
the ghost’s arrival. It was then explained by Parsons, that although the ghost
would never render itself visible to any body but his daughter, it had no
objection to answer the questions that might be put to it, by any person
present, and that it expressed an affirmation by one knock, a negative by
two, and its displeasure by a kind of scratching. The child was then put into
bed along with her sister, and the clergymen examined the bed and bed-
clothes to satisfy themselves that no trick was played, by knocking upon
any substance concealed among the clothes. As on the previous night, the
bed was observed to shake violently.
ROOM IN THE HAUNTED HOUSE IN COCK LANE.44
After some hours, during which they all waited with exemplary
patience, the mysterious knocking was heard in the wall, and the child
declared that she saw the ghost of poor Fanny. The following questions
were then gravely put by the clergyman, through the medium of one Mary
Frazer, the servant of Parsons, and to whom it was said the deceased lady
had been much attached. The answers were in the usual fashion, by a knock
or knocks:
“Do you make this disturbance on account of the ill-usage you
received from Mr. Kent?”—“Yes.”
“Were you brought to an untimely end by poison?”—“Yes.”
“How was the poison administered, in beer or purl?”—“In purl.”
“How long was that before your death?”—“About three hours.”
“Can your former servant, Carrots, give any information about the
poison?”—“Yes.”
“Are you Kent’s wife’s sister?”—“Yes.”
“Were you married to Kent after your sister’s death?”—“No.”
“Was any body else, besides Kent, concerned in your
murder?”—“No.”
“Can you, if you like, appear visibly to any one?”—“Yes.”
“Will you do so?”—“Yes.”
“Can you go out of this house?”—“Yes.”
“Is it your intention to follow this child about every
where?”—“Yes.”
“Are you pleased in being asked these questions?”—“Yes.”
“Does it ease your troubled soul?”—“Yes.”
[Here there was heard a mysterious noise, which some wiseacre
present compared to the fluttering of wings.]
“How long before your death did you tell your servant, Carrots,
that you were poisoned? An hour?”—“Yes.”
[Carrots, who was present, was appealed to; but she stated
positively that such was not the fact, as the deceased was quite
speechless an hour before her death. This shook the faith of some of
the spectators, but the examination was allowed to continue.]
“How long did Carrots live with you?”—“Three or four days.”
[Carrots was again appealed to, and said that this was true.]
“If Mr. Kent is arrested for this murder, will he confess?”—“Yes.”
“Would your soul be at rest if he were hanged for it?”—“Yes.”
“Will he be hanged for it?”—“Yes.”
“How long a time first?”—“Three years.”
“How many clergymen are there in this room?”—“Three.”
“How many negroes?”—“Two.”
“Is this watch (held up by one of the clergymen) white?”—“No.”
“Is it yellow?”—“No.”
“Is it blue?”—“No.”
“Is it black?”—“Yes.”
[The watch was in a black shagreen case.]
“At what time this morning will you take your departure?”
The answer to this question was four knocks, very distinctly heard by
every person present; and accordingly, at four o’clock precisely the ghost
took its departure to the Wheatsheaf public-house close by, where it
frightened mine host and his lady almost out of their wits, by knocking in
the ceiling right above their bed.
The rumour of these occurrences very soon spread over London, and
every day Cock Lane was rendered impassable by the crowds of people
who assembled around the house of the parish clerk, in expectation of either
seeing the ghost or of hearing the mysterious knocks. It was at last found
necessary, so clamorous were they for admission within the haunted
precincts, to admit those only who would pay a certain fee, an arrangement
which was very convenient to the needy and money-loving Mr. Parsons.
Indeed, things had taken a turn greatly to his satisfaction; he not only had
his revenge, but he made a profit out of it. The ghost, in consequence,
played its antics every night, to the great amusement of many hundreds of
people and the great perplexity of a still greater number.
Unhappily, however, for the parish clerk, the ghost was induced to make
some promises which were the means of utterly destroying its reputation. It
promised, in answer to the questions of the Rev. Mr. Aldritch of
Clerkenwell, that it would not only follow the little Miss Parsons wherever
she went, but would also attend him, or any other gentleman, into the vault
under St. John’s Church, where the body of the murdered woman was
deposited, and would there give notice of its presence by a distinct knock
upon the coffin. As a preliminary, the girl was conveyed to the house of Mr.
Aldritch near the church, where a large party of ladies and gentlemen,
eminent for their acquirements, their rank, or their wealth, had assembled.
About ten o’clock on the night of the first of February, the girl having been
brought from Cock Lane in a coach, was put to bed by several ladies in the
house of Mr. Aldritch; a strict examination having been previously made
that nothing was hidden in the bed-clothes. While the gentlemen in an
adjoining chamber were deliberating whether they should proceed in a body
to the vault, they were summoned into the bedroom by the ladies, who
affirmed, in great alarm, that the ghost was come, and that they heard the
knocks and scratches. The gentlemen entered accordingly, with a
determination to suffer no deception. The little girl, on being asked whether
she saw the ghost, replied, “No; but she felt it on her back like a mouse.”
She was then required to put her hands out of bed, and they being held by
some of the ladies, the spirit was summoned in the usual manner to answer,
if it were in the room. The question was several times put with great
solemnity; but the customary knock was not heard in reply in the walls,
neither was there any scratching. The ghost was then asked to render itself
visible, but it did not choose to grant the request. It was next solicited to
give some token of its presence by a sound of any sort, or by touching the
hand or cheek of any lady or gentleman in the room; but even with this
request the ghost would not comply.
There was now a considerable pause, and one of the clergymen went
down stairs to interrogate the father of the girl, who was waiting the result
of the experiment. He positively denied that there was any deception, and
even went so far as to say that he himself, upon one occasion, had seen and
conversed with the awful ghost. This having been communicated to the
company, it was unanimously resolved to give the ghost another trial; and
the clergyman called out in a loud voice to the supposed spirit, that the
gentleman to whom it had promised to appear in the vault was about to
repair to that place, where he claimed the fulfilment of its promise. At one
hour after midnight they all proceeded to the church, and the gentleman in
question, with another, entered the vault alone, and took up their position
alongside of the coffin of poor Fanny. The ghost was then summoned to
appear, but it appeared not; it was summoned to knock, but it knocked not;
it was summoned to scratch, but it scratched not; and the two retired from
the vault, with a firm belief that the whole business was a deception
practised by Parsons and his daughter. There were others, however, who did
not wish to jump so hastily to a conclusion, and who suggested that they
were perhaps trifling with this awful and supernatural being, which, being
offended with them for their presumption, would not condescend to answer
them. Again, after serious consultation, it was agreed on all hands that if the
ghost answered any body at all, it would answer Mr. Kent, the supposed
murderer; and he was accordingly requested to go down into the vault. He
went with several others, and summoned the ghost to answer whether he
had indeed poisoned her. There being no answer, the question was put by
Mr. Aldritch, who conjured it, if it were indeed a spirit, to end their doubts,
make a sign of its presence, and point out the guilty person. There being
still no answer for the space of half an hour, during which time all these
boobies waited with the most praiseworthy perseverance, they returned to
the house of Mr. Aldritch, and ordered the girl to get up and dress herself.
She was strictly examined, but persisted in her statement that she used no
deception, and that the ghost had really appeared to her.
So many persons had, by their openly expressed belief of the reality of
the visitation, identified themselves with it, that Parsons and his family
were far from being the only persons interested in the continuance of the
delusion. The result of the experiment convinced most people; but these
were not to be convinced by any evidence, however positive, and they
therefore spread abroad the rumour, that the ghost had not appeared in the
vault because Mr. Kent had taken care beforehand to have the coffin
removed. That gentleman, whose position was a very painful one,
immediately procured competent witnesses, in whose presence the vault
was entered, and the coffin of poor Fanny opened. Their depositions were
then published; and Mr. Kent indicted Parsons and his wife, his daughter,
Mary Frazer the servant, the Rev. Mr. Moor, and a tradesman, two of the
most prominent patrons of the deception, for a conspiracy. The trial came
on in the Court of King’s Bench, on the 10th of July, before Lord Chief-
Justice Mansfield, when, after an investigation which lasted twelve hours,
the whole of the conspirators were found guilty. The Rev. Mr. Moor and his
friend were severely reprimanded in open court, and recommended to make
some pecuniary compensation to the prosecutor for the aspersions they had
been instrumental in throwing upon his character. Parsons was sentenced to
stand three times in the pillory, and to be imprisoned for two years; his wife
to one year’s, and his servant to six months’ imprisonment in the Bridewell.
A printer, who had been employed by them to publish an account of the
proceedings for their profit, was also fined fifty pounds, and discharged.
The precise manner in which the deception was carried on has never
been explained. The knocking in the wall appears to have been the work of
Parsons’ wife, while the scratching part of the business was left to the little
girl. That any contrivance so clumsy could have deceived any body cannot
fail to excite our wonder. But thus it always is. If two or three persons can
only be found to take the lead in any absurdity, however great, there is sure
to be plenty of imitators. Like sheep in a field, if one clears the stile, the rest
will follow.
About ten years afterwards, London was again alarmed by the story of a
haunted house. Stockwell, near Vauxhall, the scene of the antics of this new
ghost, became almost as celebrated in the annals of superstition as Cock
Lane. Mrs. Golding, an elderly lady, who resided alone with her servant,
Anne Robinson, was sorely surprised on the evening of Twelfth-Day, 1772,
to observe a most extraordinary commotion among her crockery. Cups and
saucers rattled down the chimney—pots and pans were whirled down stairs,
or through the windows; and hams, cheeses, and loaves of bread disported
themselves upon the floor as if the devil were in them. This, at least, was
the conclusion that Mrs. Golding came to; and being greatly alarmed, she
invited some of her neighbours to stay with her, and protect her from the
evil one. Their presence, however, did not put a stop to the insurrection of
china, and every room in the house was in a short time strewed with the
fragments. The chairs and tables joined, at last, in the tumult, and things
looked altogether so serious and inexplicable, that the neighbours, dreading
that the house itself would next be seized with a fit of motion, and tumble
about their ears, left poor Mrs. Golding to bear the brunt of it by herself.
The ghost in this case was solemnly remonstrated with, and urged to take its
departure; but the demolition continuing as great as before, Mrs. Golding
finally made up her mind to quit the house altogether. She took refuge with
Anne Robinson in the house of a neighbour; but his glass and crockery
being immediately subjected to the same persecution, he was reluctantly
compelled to give her notice to quit. The old lady thus forced back to her
own house, endured the disturbance for some days longer, when suspecting
that Anne Robinson was the cause of all the mischief, she dismissed her
from her service. The extraordinary appearances immediately ceased, and
were never afterwards renewed; a fact which is of itself sufficient to point
out the real disturber. A long time afterwards, Anne Robinson confessed the
whole matter to the Reverend Mr. Brayfield. This gentleman confided the
story to Mr. Hone, who has published an explanation of the mystery. Anne,
it appears, was anxious to have a clear house, to carry on an intrigue with
her lover, and resorted to this trick to effect her purpose. She placed the
china on the shelves in such a manner that it fell on the slightest motion,
and attached horse-hairs to other articles, so that she could jerk them down
from an adjoining room without being perceived by any one. She was
exceedingly dexterous at this sort of work, and would have proved a
formidable rival to many a juggler by profession. A full explanation of the
whole affair may be found in the Every-day Book.
The latest instance of the popular panic occasioned by a house supposed
to be haunted, occurred in Scotland, in the winter of the year 1838. On the
5th of December, the inmates of the farm-house of Baldarroch, in the
district of Banchory, Aberdeenshire, were alarmed by observing a great
number of sticks, pebble-stones, and clods of earth flying about their yard
and premises. They endeavoured, but in vain, to discover who was the
delinquent; and the shower of stones continuing for five days in succession,
they came at last to the conclusion that the devil and his imps were alone
the cause of it. The rumour soon spread over all that part of the country, and
hundreds of persons came from far and near to witness the antics of the
devils of Baldarroch. After the fifth day, the shower of clods and stones
ceased on the outside of the premises, and the scene shifted to the interior.
Spoons, knives, plates, mustard-pots, rolling-pins, and flat-irons appeared
suddenly endued with the power of self-motion, and were whirled from
room to room, and rattled down the chimneys in a manner which nobody
could account for. The lid of a mustard-pot was put into a cupboard by the
servant-girl in the presence of scores of people, and in a few minutes
afterwards came bouncing down the chimney, to the consternation of every
body. There was also a tremendous knocking at the doors and on the roof,
and pieces of stick and pebble-stones rattled against the windows and broke
them. The whole neighbourhood was a scene of alarm; and not only the
vulgar, but persons of education, respectable farmers, within a circle of
twenty miles, expressed their belief in the supernatural character of these
events, and offered up devout prayers to be preserved from the
machinations of the Evil One. The note of fear being once sounded, the
visitors, as is generally the case in all tales of wonder, strove with each
other who should witness the most extraordinary occurrences; and within a
week, it was generally believed in the parishes of Banchory-Ternan,
Drumoak, Durris, Kincardine-O’Neil, and all the circumjacent districts of
Mearns and Aberdeenshire, that the devil had been seen in the act of
hammering upon the house-top of Baldarroch. One old man asserted
positively that, one night, after having been to see the strange gambols of
the knives and mustard-pots, he met the phantom of a great black man,
“who wheeled round his head with a whizzing noise, making a wind about
his ears that almost blew his bonnet off,” and that he was haunted by him in
this manner for three miles. It was also affirmed and believed, that all
horses and dogs that approached this enchanted ground were immediately
affected; that a gentleman, slow of faith, had been cured of his incredulity
by meeting the butter-churn jumping in at the door as he himself was going
out; that the roofs of houses had been torn off, and that several ricks in the
corn-yard had danced a quadrille together, to the sound of the devil’s
bagpipes re-echoing from the mountain-tops. The women in the family of
the persecuted farmer of Baldarroch also kept their tongues in perpetual
motion; swelling with their strange stories the tide of popular wonder. The
goodwife herself, and all her servants, said that, whenever they went to bed,
they were attacked with stones and other missiles, some of which came
below the blankets and gently tapped their toes. One evening, a shoe
suddenly darted across a garret where some labourers were sitting, and one
of the men, who attempted to catch it, swore positively that it was so hot
and heavy he was unable to hold it. It was also said that the bearbeater (a
sort of mortar used to bruise barley in)—an object of such weight that it
requires several men to move it—spontaneously left the barn and flew over
the house-top, alighting at the feet of one of the servant-maids, and hitting
her, but without hurting her in the least, or even causing her any alarm; it
being a fact well known to her, that all objects thus thrown about by the
devil lost their specific gravity, and could harm nobody, even though they
fell upon a person’s head.
Among the persons drawn to Baldarroch by these occurrences were the
heritor, the minister, and all the elders of the Kirk, under whose
superintendence an investigation was immediately commenced. Their
proceedings were not promulgated for some days; and, in the mean time,
rumour continued to travel through all the Highlands, magnifying each
mysterious incident the farther it got from home. It was said, that when the
goodwife put her potato-pot on the fire, each potato, as the water boiled,
changed into a demon, and grinned horribly at her as she lifted the lid; that
not only chairs and tables, but carrots and turnips, skipped along the floor in
the merriest manner imaginable; that shoes and boots went through all the
evolutions of the Highland fling without any visible wearers directing their
motions; and that a piece of meat detached itself from the hook on which it
hung in the pantry, and placed itself before the fire, whence all the efforts of
the people of the house were unable to remove it until it was thoroughly
roasted; and that it then flew up the chimney with a tremendous bang. At
Baldarroch itself the belief was not quite so extravagant; but the farmer was
so convinced that the devil and his imps were alone the cause of all the
disturbance, that he travelled a distance of forty miles to an old conjuror,
named Willie Foreman, to induce him, for a handsome fee, to remove the
enchantment from his property. There were, of course, some sensible and
educated people, who, after stripping the stories circulated of their
exaggeration, attributed all the rest to one or other of two causes; first, that
some gipsies, or strolling mendicants, hidden in the neighbouring
plantation, were amusing themselves by working on the credulity of the
country people; or, secondly, that the inmates of Baldarroch carried on this
deception themselves, for some reason or other, which was not very clear to
any body. The last opinion gained but few believers, as the farmer and his
family were much respected; and so many persons had, in the most open
manner, expressed their belief in the supernatural agency, that they did not
like to stultify themselves by confessing that they had been deceived.
At last, after a fortnight’s continuance of the noises, the whole trick was
discovered. The two servant lasses were strictly examined, and then
committed to prison. It appeared that they were alone at the bottom of the
whole affair, and that the extraordinary alarm and credulity of their master
and mistress, in the first instance, and of the neighbours and country people
afterwards, made their task comparatively easy. A little common dexterity
was all they had used; and, being themselves unsuspected, they swelled the
alarm by the wonderful stories they invented. It was they who loosened the
bricks in the chimneys, and placed the dishes in such a manner on the
shelves, that they fell on the slightest motion. In short, they played the same
tricks as those used by the servant girl at Stockwell, with the same results,
and for the same purpose—the gratification of a love of mischief. They
were no sooner secured in the county gaol than the noises ceased, and most
people were convinced that human agency alone had worked all the
wonder. Some few of the most devoutly superstitious still held out in their
first belief, and refused to listen to any explanation.
These tales of haunted houses, especially those of the last and present
century, however they may make us blush for popular folly, are yet
gratifying in their results; for they shew that society has made a vast
improvement. Had Parsons and his wife, and the other contrivers of the
Cock Lane deception, lived two hundred years earlier, they would not
perhaps have found a greater number of dupes, but they would have been
hanged as witches, instead of being imprisoned as vagabonds. The
ingenious Anne Robinson and the sly lasses of Baldarroch would doubtless
have met a similar fate. Thus it is pleasant to reflect, that though there may
be as much folly and credulity in the world as ever in one class of society,
there is more wisdom and mercy in another than ever were known before.
Lawgivers, by blotting from the statute-book the absurd or sanguinary
enactments of their predecessors, have made one step towards teaching the
people. It is to be hoped that the day is not far distant when lawgivers will
teach the people by some more direct means, and prevent the recurrence of
delusions like these, and many worse, which might be cited, by securing to
every child born within their dominions an education in accordance with the
advancing state of civilisation. If ghosts and witches are not yet altogether
exploded, it is the fault, not so much of the ignorant people, as of the law
and the government that have neglected to enlighten them.
Popular Follies of Great Cities
Table of Contents
La faridondaine—la faridondon,
Vive la faridondaine!—Beranger.
The popular humours of a great city are a never-failing source of
amusement to the man whose sympathies are hospitable enough to embrace
all his kind, and who, refined though he may be himself, will not sneer at
the humble wit or grotesque peculiarities of the boozing mechanic, the
squalid beggar, the vicious urchin, and all the motley group of the idle, the
reckless, and the imitative that swarm in the alleys and broadways of a
metropolis. He who walks through a great city to find subjects for weeping,
may find plenty at every corner to wring his heart; but let such a man walk
on his course, and enjoy his grief alone—we are not of those who would
accompany him. The miseries of us poor earth-dwellers gain no alleviation
from the sympathy of those who merely hunt them out to be pathetic over
them. The weeping philosopher too often impairs his eyesight by his woe,
and becomes unable from his tears to see the remedies for the evils which
he deplores. Thus it will often be found that the man of no tears is the truest
philanthropist, as he is the best physician who wears a cheerful face, even in
the worst of cases.
So many pens have been employed to point out the miseries, and so
many to condemn the crimes and vices, and more serious follies of the
multitude, that ours shall not increase the number, at least in this chapter.
Our present task shall be less ungracious, and wandering through the busy
haunts of great cities, we shall seek only for amusement, and note as we
pass a few of the harmless follies and whimsies of the poor.
And, first of all, walk where we will, we cannot help hearing from every
side a phrase repeated with delight, and received with laughter, by men with
hard hands and dirty faces, by saucy butcher lads and errand-boys, by loose
women, by hackney coachmen, cabriolet-drivers, and idle fellows who
loiter at the corners of streets. Not one utters this phrase without producing
a laugh from all within hearing. It seems applicable to every circumstance,
and is the universal answer to every question; in short, it is the favourite
slang phrase of the day, a phrase that, while its brief season of popularity
lasts, throws a dash of fun and frolicsomeness over the existence of squalid
poverty and ill-requited labour, and gives them reason to laugh as well as
their more fortunate fellows in a higher stage of society.
London is peculiarly fertile in this sort of phrases, which spring up
suddenly, no one knows exactly in what spot, and pervade the whole
population in a few hours, no one knows how. Many years ago the favourite
phrase (for, though but a monosyllable, it was a phrase in itself) was Quoz.
This odd word took the fancy of the multitude in an extraordinary degree,
and very soon acquired an almost boundless meaning. When vulgar wit
wished to mark its incredulity, and raise a laugh at the same time, there was
no resource so sure as this popular piece of slang. When a man was asked a
favour which he did not choose to grant, he marked his sense of the suitor’s
unparalleled presumption by exclaiming Quoz! When a mischievous urchin
wished to annoy a passenger, and create mirth for his comrades, he looked
him in the face, and cried out Quoz! and the exclamation never failed in its
object. When a disputant was desirous of throwing a doubt upon the
veracity of his opponent, and getting summarily rid of an argument which
he could not overturn, he uttered the word Quoz, with a contemptuous curl
of his lip, and an impatient shrug of his shoulders. The universal
monosyllable conveyed all his meaning, and not only told his opponent that
he lied, but that he erred egregiously if he thought that any one was such a
nincompoop as to believe him. Every alehouse resounded with Quoz; every
street-corner was noisy with it, and every wall for miles around was chalked
with it.
But, like all other earthly things, Quoz had its season, and passed away
as suddenly as it arose, never again to be the pet and the idol of the
populace. A new claimant drove it from its place, and held undisputed sway
till, in its turn, it was hurled from its pre-eminence, and a successor
appointed in its stead.
“What a shocking bad hat!” was the phrase that was next in vogue. No
sooner had it become universal, than thousands of idle but sharp eyes were
on the watch for the passenger whose hat shewed any signs, however slight,
of ancient service. Immediately the cry arose, and, like the war-whoop of
the Indians, was repeated by a hundred discordant throats. He was a wise
man who, finding himself under these circumstances “the observed of all
observers,” bore his honours meekly. He who shewed symptoms of ill-
feeling at the imputations cast upon his hat, only brought upon himself
redoubled notice. The mob soon perceive whether a man is irritable, and, if
of their own class, they love to make sport of him. When such a man, and
with such a hat, passed in those days through a crowded neighbourhood, he
might think himself fortunate if his annoyances were confined to the shouts
and cries of the populace. The obnoxious hat was often snatched from his
head and thrown into the gutter by some practical joker, and then raised,
covered with mud, upon the end of a stick, for the admiration of the
spectators, who held their sides with laughter, and exclaimed, in the pauses
of their mirth, “Oh, what a shocking bad hat!” “What a shocking bad hat!”
Many a nervous poor man, whose purse could but ill spare the outlay,
doubtless purchased a new hat before the time, in order to avoid exposure in
this manner.
The origin of this singular saying, which made fun for the metropolis
for months, is not involved in the same obscurity as that which shrouds the
origin of Quoz and some others. There had been a hotly contested election
for the borough of Southwark, and one of the candidates was an eminent
hatter. This gentleman, in canvassing the electors, adopted a somewhat
professional mode of conciliating their good-will, and of bribing them
without letting them perceive that they were bribed. Whenever he called
upon or met a voter whose hat was not of the best material, or, being so, had
seen its best days, he invariably said, “What a shocking bad hat you have
got; call at my warehouse, and you shall have a new one!” Upon the day of
election this circumstance was remembered, and his opponents made the
most of it, by inciting the crowd to keep up an incessant cry of “What a
shocking bad hat!” all the time the honourable candidate was addressing
them. From Southwark the phrase spread over all London, and reigned for a
time the supreme slang of the season.
Hookey Walker, derived from the chorus of a popular ballad, was also
high in favour at one time, and served, like its predecessor Quoz, to answer
all questions. In the course of time, the latter word alone became the
favourite, and was uttered with a peculiar drawl upon the first syllable, and
a sharp turn upon the last. If a lively servant girl was importuned for a kiss
by a fellow she did not care about, she cocked her little nose, and cried
“Walker!” If a dustman asked his friend for the loan of a shilling, and his
friend was either unable or unwilling to accommodate him, the probable
answer he would receive was, “Walker!” If a drunken man was reeling
about the streets, and a boy pulled his coat-tails, or a man knocked his hat
over his eyes to make fun of him, the joke was always accompanied by the
same exclamation. This lasted for two or three months, and “Walker!”
walked off the stage, never more to be revived for the entertainment of that
or any future generation.
The next phrase was a most preposterous one. Who invented it, how it
arose, or where it was first heard, are alike unknown. Nothing about it is
certain, but that for months it was the slang par excellence of the
Londoners, and afforded them a vast gratification. “There he goes with his
eye out!” or “There she goes with her eye out!” as the sex of the party
alluded to might be, was in the mouth of every body who knew the town.
The sober part of the community were as much puzzled by this
unaccountable saying as the vulgar were delighted with it. The wise thought
it very foolish, but the many thought it very funny, and the idle amused
themselves by chalking it upon walls, or scribbling it upon monuments. But
“all that’s bright must fade,” even in slang. The people grew tired of their
hobby, and “There he goes with his eye out!” was heard no more in its
accustomed haunts.
Another very odd phrase came into repute in a brief space afterwards, in
the form of the impertinent and not universally apposite query, “Has your
mother sold her mangle?” But its popularity was not of that boisterous and
cordial kind which ensures a long continuance of favour. What tended to
impede its progress was, that it could not be well applied to the older
portions of society. It consequently ran but a brief career, and then sank into
oblivion. Its successor enjoyed a more extended fame, and laid its
foundations so deep, that years and changing fashions have not sufficed to
eradicate it. This phrase was “Flare up!” and it is, even now, a
colloquialism in common use. It took its rise in the time of the Reform riots,
when Bristol was nearly half burned by the infuriated populace. The flames
were said to have flared up in the devoted city. Whether there was any thing
peculiarly captivating in the sound, or in the idea of these words, is hard to
say; but whatever was the reason, it tickled the mob-fancy mightily, and
drove all other slang out of the field before it. Nothing was to be heard all
over London but “flare up!” It answered all questions, settled all disputes,
was applied to all persons, all things, and all circumstances, and became
suddenly the most comprehensive phrase in the English language. The man
who had overstepped the bounds of decorum in his speech was said to have
flared up; he who had paid visits too repeated to the gin-shop, and got
damaged in consequence, had flared up. To put one’s self into a passion; to
stroll out on a nocturnal frolic, and alarm a neighbourhood, or to create a
disturbance in any shape, was to flare up. A lovers’ quarrel was a flare up;
so was a boxing-match between two blackguards in the streets; and the
preachers of sedition and revolution recommended the English nation to
flare up, like the French. So great a favourite was the word, that people
loved to repeat it for its very sound. They delighted apparently in hearing
their own organs articulate it; and labouring men, when none who could
respond to the call were within hearing, would often startle the aristocratic
echoes of the West by the well-known slang phrase of the East. Even in the
dead hours of the night, the ears of those who watched late, or who could
not sleep, were saluted with the same sound. The drunkard reeling home
shewed that he was still a man and a citizen, by calling “flare up!” in the
pauses of his hiccough. Drink had deprived him of the power of arranging
all other ideas; his intellect was sunk to the level of the brute’s; but he clung
to humanity by the one last link of the popular cry. While he could
vociferate that sound, he had rights as an Englishman, and would not sleep
in a gutter, like a dog! Onwards he went, disturbing quiet streets and
comfortable people by his whoop, till exhausted nature could support him
no more, and he rolled powerless into the road. When, in due time
afterwards, the policeman stumbled upon him as he lay, that guardian of the
peace turned the full light of his lantern on his face, and exclaimed, “Here’s
a poor devil who has been flaring up!” Then came the stretcher, on which
the victim of deep potations was carried to the watch-house, and pitched
into a dirty cell, among a score of wretches about as far gone as himself,
who saluted their new comrade by a loud, long shout of flare up!
So universal was this phrase, and so enduring seemed its popularity, that
a speculator, who knew not the evanescence of slang, established a weekly
newspaper under its name. But he was like the man who built his house
upon the sand; his foundation gave way under him, and the phrase and the
newspaper were washed into the mighty sea of the things that were. The
people grew at last weary of the monotony, and “flare up” became vulgar
even among them. Gradually it was left to little boys who did not know the
world, and in process of time sank altogether into neglect. It is now heard
no more as a piece of popular slang; but the words are still used to signify
any sudden outburst either of fire, disturbance, or ill-nature.
The next phrase that enjoyed the favour of the million was less concise,
and seems to have been originally aimed against precocious youths who
gave themselves the airs of manhood before their time. “Does your mother
know you’re out?” was the provoking query addressed to young men of
more than reasonable swagger, who smoked cigars in the streets, and wore
false whiskers to look irresistible. We have seen many a conceited fellow
who could not suffer a woman to pass him without staring her out of
countenance, reduced at once into his natural insignificance by the mere
utterance of this phrase. Apprentice lads and shopmen in their Sunday
clothes held the words in abhorrence, and looked fierce when they were
applied to them. Altogether the phrase had a very salutary effect, and in a
thousand instances shewed young Vanity that it was not half so pretty and
engaging as it thought itself. What rendered it so provoking was the doubt it
implied as to the capability of self-guidance possessed by the individual to
whom it was addressed. “Does your mother know you’re out?” was a query
of mock concern and solicitude, implying regret and concern that one so
young and inexperienced in the ways of a great city should be allowed to
wander abroad without the guidance of a parent. Hence the great wrath of
those who verged on manhood, but had not reached it, whenever they were
made the subject of it. Even older heads did not like it; and the heir of a
ducal house, and inheritor of a warrior’s name, to whom they were applied
by a cabriolet-driver who was ignorant of his rank, was so indignant at the
affront, that he summoned the offender before the magisterial bench. The
fellow had wished to impose upon his lordship by asking double the fare he
was entitled to; and when his lordship resisted the demand, he was
insultingly asked “if his mother knew he was out?” All the drivers on the
stand joined in the query, and his lordship was fain to escape their laughter
by walking away with as much haste as his dignity would allow. The man
pleaded ignorance that his customer was a lord, but offended justice fined
him for his mistake.
When this phrase had numbered its appointed days, it died away like its
predecessors, and “Who are you?” reigned in its stead. This new favourite,
like a mushroom, seems to have sprung up in a night, or, like a frog in
Cheapside, to have come down in a sudden shower. One day it was
unheard, unknown, uninvented; the next it pervaded London. Every alley
resounded with it; every highway was musical with it,
“And street to street, and lane to lane flung back
The one unvarying cry.”
The phrase was uttered quickly, and with a sharp sound upon the first and
last words, leaving the middle one little more than an aspiration. Like all its
compeers which had been extensively popular, it was applicable to almost
every variety of circumstance. The lovers of a plain answer to a plain
question did not like it at all. Insolence made use of it to give offence;
ignorance to avoid exposing itself; and waggery to create laughter. Every
new comer into an alehouse tap-room was asked unceremoniously, “Who
are you?” and if he looked foolish, scratched his head, and did not know
what to reply, shouts of boisterous merriment resounded on every side. An
authoritative disputant was not unfrequently put down, and presumption of
every kind checked by the same query. When its popularity was at its
height, a gentleman, feeling the hand of a thief in his pocket, turned
suddenly round and caught him in the act, exclaiming, “Who are you?” The
mob which gathered round applauded to the very echo, and thought it the
most capital joke they had ever heard, the very acmé of wit, the very
essence of humour. Another circumstance of a similar kind gave an
additional fillip to the phrase, and infused new life and vigour into it just as
it was dying away. The scene occurred in the chief criminal court of the
kingdom. A prisoner stood at the bar; the offence with which he had been
charged was clearly proved against him; his counsel had been heard, not in
his defence, but in extenuation, insisting upon his previous good life and
character as reasons for the lenity of the court. “And where are your
witnesses?” inquired the learned judge who presided. “Please you, my lord,
I knows the prisoner at the bar, and a more honester feller never breathed,”
said a rough voice in the gallery. The officers of the court looked aghast,
and the strangers tittered with ill-suppressed laughter. “Who are you?” said
the judge, looking suddenly up, but with imperturbable gravity. The court
was convulsed; the titter broke out into a laugh; and it was several minutes
before silence and decorum could be restored. When the ushers recovered
their self-possession, they made diligent search for the profane transgressor;
but he was not to be found. Nobody knew him; nobody had seen him. After
a while the business of the court again proceeded. The next prisoner
brought up for trial augured favourably of his prospects when he learned
that the solemn lips of the representative of justice had uttered the popular
phrase as if he felt and appreciated it. There was no fear that such a judge
would use undue severity. His heart was with the people; he understood
their language and their manners, and would make allowances for the
temptations which drove them into crime. So thought many of the prisoners,
if we may infer it from the fact that the learned judge suddenly acquired an
immense increase of popularity. The praise of his wit was in every mouth,
and “Who are you?” renewed its lease, and remained in possession of
public favour for another term in consequence.
But it must not be supposed that there were no interregna between the
dominion of one slang phrase and another. They did not arise in one long
line of unbroken succession, but shared with song the possession of popular
favour. Thus, when the people were in the mood for music, slang advanced
its claims to no purpose; and when they were inclined for slang, the sweet
voice of music wooed them in vain. About thirty years ago London
resounded with one chorus, with the love of which every body seemed to be
smitten. Girls and boys, young men and old, maidens and wives and
widows, were all alike musical. There was an absolute mania for singing;
and the worst of it was, that, like good Father Philip in the romance of The
Monastery, they seemed utterly unable to change their tune. “Cherry ripe!”
“Cherry ripe!” was the universal cry of all the idle in the town. Every
unmelodious voice gave utterance to it; every crazy fiddle, every cracked
flute, every wheezy pipe, every street-organ was heard in the same strain,
until studious and quiet men stopped their ears in desperation, or fled miles
away into the fields or woodlands to be at peace. This plague lasted for a
twelvemonth, until the very name of cherries became an abomination in the
land. At last the excitement wore itself away, and the tide of favour set in a
new direction. Whether it was another song or a slang phrase is difficult to
determine at this distance of time; but certain it is, that very shortly
afterwards people went mad upon a dramatic subject, and nothing was to be
heard of but “Tommy and Jerry.” Verbal wit had amused the multitude long
enough, and they became more practical in their recreation. Every youth on
the town was seized with the fierce desire of distinguishing himself by
knocking down the “charlies,” being locked up all night in a watch-house,
or kicking up a row among loose women and blackguard men in the low
dens of St. Giles’s. Imitative boys vied with their elders in similar exploits,
until this unworthy passion (for such it was) had lasted, like other follies, its
appointed time, and the town became merry after another fashion. It was
next thought the height of vulgar wit to answer all questions by placing the
point of the thumb upon the tip of the nose, and twirling the fingers in the
air. If one man wished to insult or annoy another, he had only to make use
of this cabalistic sign in his face, and his object was accomplished. At every
street-corner where a group was assembled, the spectator who was curious
enough to observe their movements would be sure to see the fingers of
some of them at their noses, either as a mark of incredulity, surprise,
refusal, or mockery, before he had watched two minutes. There is some
remnant of this absurd custom to be seen to this day; but it is thought low
even among the vulgar.
About sixteen years ago, London became again most preposterously
musical. The vox populi wore itself hoarse by singing the praises of “The
Sea, the Sea!” If a stranger (and a philosopher) had walked through
London, and listened to the universal chorus, he might have constructed a
very pretty theory upon the love of the English for the sea-service, and our
acknowledged superiority over all other nations upon that element. “No
wonder,” he might have said, “that this people is invincible upon the ocean.
The love of it mixes with their daily thoughts; they celebrate it even in the
market-place; their street-minstrels excite charity by it; and high and low,
young and old, male and female, chant lo pæans in its praise. Love is not
honoured in the national songs of this warlike race—Bacchus is no god to
them; they are men of sterner mould, and think only of ‘the Sea, the Sea!’
and the means of conquering upon it.”
Such would, doubtless, have been his impression if he had taken the
evidence only of his ears. Alas, in those days for the refined ears that were
musical! great was their torture when discord, with its thousand diversities
of tone, struck up this appalling anthem—there was no escape from it. The
migratory minstrels of Savoy caught the strain, and pealed it down the long
vistas of quiet streets, till their innermost and snuggest apartments re-
echoed with the sound. Men were obliged to endure this crying evil for full
six months, wearied to desperation, and made sea-sick on the dry land.
Several other songs sprang up in due succession, afterwards, but none of
them, with the exception of one, entitled “All round my Hat,” enjoyed any
extraordinary share of favour, until an American actor introduced a vile
song called “Jim Crow.” The singer sang his verses in appropriate costume,
with grotesque gesticulations, and a sudden whirl of his body at the close of
each verse. It took the taste of the town immediately, and for months the
ears of orderly people were stunned by the senseless chorus—
“Turn about and wheel about,
And do just so—
Turn about and wheel about,
And jump, Jim Crow!”
Street-minstrels blackened their faces in order to give proper effect to the
verses; and fatherless urchins, who had to choose between thieving and
singing for their livelihood, took the latter course, as likely to be the more
profitable, as long as the public taste remained in that direction. The
uncouth dance, its accompaniment, might be seen in its full perfection on
market nights in any great thoroughfare; and the words of the song might be
heard, piercing above all the din and buzz of the ever-moving multitude.
He, the calm observer, who during the hey-day popularity of this doggrel,
“Sate beside the public way,
Thick strewn with summer dust, and saw the stream
Of people there was hurrying to and fro,
Numerous as gnats upon the evening gleam,”
might have exclaimed with Shelley, that
“The million, with fierce song and maniac dance,
Did rage around.”
The philosophic theorist we have already supposed soliloquising upon the
English character, and forming his opinion of it from their exceeding love
for a sea-song, might, if he had again dropped suddenly into London, have
formed another very plausible theory to account for our unremitting efforts
for the abolition of the slave-trade. “Benevolent people!” he might have
said, “how unbounded are your sympathies! Your unhappy brethren of
Africa, differing from you only in the colour of their skins, are so dear to
you, and you begrudge so little the twenty millions you have paid on their
behalf, that you love to have a memento of them continually in your sight.
Jim Crow is the representative of that injured race, and as such is the idol of
your populace! See how they all sing his praises! how they imitate his
peculiarities! how they repeat his name in their moments of leisure and
relaxation! They even carve images of him to adorn their hearths, that his
cause and his sufferings may never be forgotten! Oh, philanthropic
England! oh, vanguard of civilisation!”
Such are a few of the peculiarities of the London multitude, when no
riot, no execution, no murder, no balloon, disturbs the even current of their
thoughts. These are the whimsies of the mass—the harmless follies by
which they unconsciously endeavour to lighten the load of care which
presses upon their existence. The wise man, even though he smile at them,
will not altogether withhold his sympathy, and will say, “Let them enjoy
their slang phrases and their choruses if they will; and if they cannot be
happy, at least let them be merry.” To the Englishman, as well as to the
Frenchman of whom Beranger sings, there may be some comfort in so
small a thing as a song, and we may own with him that
“Au peuple attristé
Ce qui rendra la gaîté,
C’est la GAUDRIOLE!
O gué!
C’est la GAUDRIOLE!”
SHERWOOD FOREST.
Popular Admiration of Great Thieves
Table of Contents
Jack. Where shall we find such another set of practical
philosophers, who, to a man, are above the fear of death!
Wat. Sound men and true!
Robin. Of tried courage and indefatigable industry!
Ned. Who is there here that would not die for his friend?
Harry. Who is there here that would betray him for his interest?
Mat. Shew me a gang of courtiers that could say as much!
Dialogue of Thieves in the Beggar’s Opera.
Whether it be that the multitude, feeling the pangs of poverty, sympathise
with the daring and ingenious depredators who take away the rich man’s
superfluity, or whether it be the interest that mankind in general feel for the
records of perilous adventure, it is certain that the populace of all countries
look with admiration upon great and successful thieves. Perhaps both these
causes combine to invest their career with charms in the popular eye.
Almost every country in Europe has its traditional thief, whose exploits are
recorded with all the graces of poetry, and whose trespasses
“Are cited up in rhymes,
And sung by children in succeeding tunes.”45
Those travellers who have made national manners and characteristics
their peculiar study, have often observed and remarked upon this feeling.
The learned Abbé le Blanc, who resided for some time in England at the
commencement of the eighteenth century, says, in his amusing letters on the
English and French nations, that he continually met with Englishmen who
were not less vain in boasting of the success of their highwaymen than of
the bravery of their troops. Tales of their address, their cunning, or their
generosity, were in the mouths of every body, and a noted thief was a kind
of hero in high repute. He adds that the mob, in all countries, being easily
moved, look in general with concern upon criminals going to the gallows;
but an English mob looked upon such scenes with extraordinary interest:
they delighted to see them go through their last trials with resolution, and
applauded those who were insensible enough to die as they had lived,
braving the justice both of God and men: such, he might have added, as the
noted robber Macpherson, of whom the old ballad says:
“Sae rantingly, sae wantonly,
Sae dauntingly gaed he:
He played a spring, and danced it round
Beneath the gallows tree.”
Among these traditional thieves the most noted in England, or perhaps
in any country, is Robin Hood, a name which popular affection has
encircled with a peculiar halo. “He robbed the rich to give to the poor;” and
his reward has been an immortality of fame, a tithe of which would be
thought more than sufficient to recompense a benefactor of his species.
Romance and poetry have been emulous to make him all their own; and the
forest of Sherwood, in which he roamed with his merry men, armed with
their long bows, and clad in Lincoln green, has become the resort of
pilgrims, and a classic spot sacred to his memory. The few virtues he had,
which would have ensured him no praise if he had been an honest man,
have been blazoned forth by popular renown during seven successive
centuries, and will never be forgotten while the English tongue endures. His
charity to the poor, and his gallantry and respect for women, have made him
the pre-eminent thief of all the world.
Among English thieves of a later date, who has not heard of Claude
Duval, Dick Turpin, Jonathan Wild, and Jack Sheppard, those knights of the
road and of the town, whose peculiar chivalry formed at once the dread and
the delight of England during the eighteenth century? Turpin’s fame is
unknown to no portion of the male population of England after they have
attained the age of ten. His wondrous ride from London to York has
endeared him to the imagination of millions; his cruelty in placing an old
woman upon a fire, to force her to tell him where she had hidden her
money, is regarded as a good joke; and his proud bearing upon the scaffold
is looked upon as a virtuous action. The Abbé le Blanc, writing in 1737,
says he was continually entertained with stories of Turpin—how, when he
robbed gentlemen, he would generously leave them enough to continue
their journey, and exact a pledge from them never to inform against him,
and how scrupulous such gentlemen were in keeping their word. He was
one day told a story with which the relator was in the highest degree
delighted. Turpin, or some other noted robber, stopped a man whom he
knew to be very rich, with the usual salutation—“Your money or your life!”
but not finding more than five or six guineas about him, he took the liberty
of entreating him, in the most affable manner, never to come out so ill
provided; adding that, if he fell in with him, and he had no more than such a
paltry sum, he would give him a good licking. Another story, told by one of
Turpin’s admirers, was of a robbery he had committed upon a Mr. C. near
Cambridge. He took from this gentleman his watch, his snuff-box, and all
his money but two shillings, and, before he left him, required his word of
honour that he would not cause him to be pursued or brought before a
justice. The promise being given, they both parted very courteously. They
afterwards met at Newmarket, and renewed their acquaintance. Mr. C. kept
his word religiously; he not only refrained from giving Turpin into custody,
but made a boast that he had fairly won some of his money back again in an
honest way. Turpin offered to bet with him on some favourite horse, and
Mr. C. accepted the wager with as good a grace as he could have done from
the best gentleman in England. Turpin lost his bet and paid it immediately,
and was so smitten with the generous behaviour of Mr. C., that he told him
how deeply he regretted that the trifling affair which had happened between
them did not permit them to drink together. The narrator of this anecdote
was quite proud that England was the birthplace of such a highwayman.46
Not less familiar to the people of England is the career of Jack
Sheppard, as brutal a ruffian as ever disgraced his country, but who has
claims upon the popular admiration which are very generally
acknowledged. He did not, like Robin Hood, plunder the rich to relieve the
poor, nor rob with an uncouth sort of courtesy, like Turpin; but he escaped
from Newgate with the fetters on his limbs. This achievement, more than
once repeated, has encircled his felon brow with the wreath of immortality,
and made him quite a pattern thief among the populace. He was no more
than twenty-three years of age at the time of his execution, and he died
much pitied by the crowd. His adventures were the sole topics of
conversation for months; the print-shops were filled with his effigies, and a
fine painting of him was made by Sir Richard Thornhill. The following
complimentary verses to the artist appeared in the British Journal of
November 28th, 1724:
“Thornhill! ’tis thine to gild with fame
Th’ obscure, and raise the humble name;
To make the form elude the grave,
And Sheppard from oblivion save!
Apelles Alexander drew—
Cæsar is to Aurelius due;
Cromwell in Lilly’s works doth shine,
And Sheppard, Thornhill, lives in thine!”
This was a very equivocal sort of compliment, and might have meant,
that if Apelles were worthy to paint a monarch, Thornhill was worthy to
paint a thief. But the artist did not view it in that light, nor did the public;
for they considered the verses to be very neat, pointed, and flattering. So
high was Jack’s fame, that he was thought a very fit subject for the stage;
and a pantomime entertainment, called “Harlequin Jack Sheppard,” was
devised by one Thurmond, and brought out with considerable success at
Drury Lane Theatre. All the scenes were painted from nature, including the
public-house that the robber frequented in Clare Market, and the
condemned cell from which he had made his escape in Newgate.47
The Rev. Mr. Villette, the editor of the Annals of Newgate, published in
1754, relates a curious sermon, which he says a friend of his heard
delivered by a street-preacher about the time of Jack’s execution. The
orator, after animadverting on the great care men took of their bodies, and
the little care they bestowed upon their souls, continued as follows, by way
of exemplifying the position:—“We have a remarkable instance of this in a
notorious malefactor, well known by the name of Jack Sheppard. What
amazing difficulties has he overcome! what astonishing things has he
performed! and all for the sake of a stinking, miserable carcass, hardly
worth the hanging! How dexterously did he pick the chain of his padlock
with a crooked nail! how manfully he burst his fetters asunder, climb up the
chimney, wrench out an iron bar, break his way through a stone wall, make
the strong door of a dark entry fly before him, till he got upon the leads of
the prison, then, fixing a blanket to the wall with a spike, he stole out of the
chapel! How intrepidly did he descend to the top of the turner’s house! how
cautiously pass down the stair, and make his escape to the street-door!
“Oh, that ye were all like Jack Sheppard! Mistake me not, my brethren
—I don’t mean in a carnal, but in a spiritual sense; for I propose to
spiritualise these things. What a shame it would be if we should not
think it worth our while to take as much pains, and employ as many
deep thoughts to save our souls as he has done to preserve his body!
“Let me exhort ye, then, to open the locks of your hearts with the
nail of repentance! Burst asunder the fetters of your beloved lusts,
mount the chimney of hope, take from thence the bar of good
resolution, break through the stone wall of despair, and all the
strongholds in the dark entry of the valley of the shadow of death!
Raise yourselves to the leads of divine meditation, fix the blanket of
faith with the spike of the Church, let yourselves down to the turner’s
house of resignation, and descend the stairs of humility! So shall you
come to the door of deliverance from the prison of iniquity, and escape
the clutches of that old executioner the devil!”
Jonathan Wild, whose name has been immortalised by Fielding, was no
favourite with the people. He had none of the virtues which, combined with
crimes, make up the character of the great thief. He was a pitiful fellow,
who informed against his comrades, and was afraid of death. This meanness
was not to be forgiven by the crowd; and they pelted him with dirt and
stones on his way to Tyburn, and expressed their contempt by every
possible means. How different was their conduct to Turpin and Jack
Sheppard, who died in their neatest attire, with nosegays in their button-
holes, and with the courage that a crowd expects. It was anticipated that the
body of Turpin would have been delivered up to the surgeons for dissection;
and the people seeing some men very busily employed in removing it,
suddenly set upon them, rescued the body, bore it about the town in
triumph, and then buried it in a very deep grave, filled with quicklime, to
hasten the progress of decomposition. They would not suffer the corpse of
their hero—of the man who had ridden from London to York in four-and-
twenty hours—to be mangled by the rude hands of unmannerly surgeons.
The death of Claude Duval would appear to have been no less
triumphant. Claude was a gentlemanly thief. According to Butler, in the
famous ode to his memory, he
“Taught the wild Arabs of the road
To rob in a more gentle mode;
Take prizes more obligingly than those
Who never had been bred filous;
And how to hang in a more graceful fashion
Than e’er was known before to the dull English nation.”
In fact, he was the pink of politeness, and his gallantry to the fair sex was
proverbial. When he was caught at last, pent in “stone walls and chains and
iron grates,” their grief was in proportion to his rare merits and his great
fame. Butler says, that to his dungeon
“Came ladies from all parts,
To offer up close prisoners their hearts.
Which he received as tribute due—
* * * *
Never did bold knight to relieve
Distressed dames, such dreadful feats achieve,
As feeble damsels for his sake
Would have been proud to undertake,
And, bravely ambitious to redeem
The world’s loss and their own,
Strove who should have the honour to lay down,
And change a life with him.”
Among the noted thieves of France, there is none to compare with the
famous Aimerigot Têtenoire, who flourished in the reign of Charles VI.
This fellow was at the head of four or five hundred men, and possessed two
very strong castles in Limousin and Auvergne. There was a good deal of the
feudal baron about him, although he possessed no revenues but such as the
road afforded him. At his death he left a singular will. “I give and
bequeath,” said the robber, “one thousand five hundred francs to St.
George’s Chapel, for such repairs as it may need; to my sweet girl, who so
loyally loved me, I give two thousand five hundred; and the surplus I give
to my companions. I hope they will all live as brothers, and divide it
amicably among them. If they cannot agree, and the devil of contention gets
among them, it is no fault of mine; and I advise them to get a good strong
sharp axe, and break open my strong box. Let them scramble for what it
contains, and the devil seize the hindmost.” The people of Auvergne still
recount with admiration the daring feats of this brigand.
Of later years, the French thieves have been such unmitigated
scoundrels as to have left but little room for popular admiration. The
famous Cartouche, whose name has become synonymous with ruffian in
their language, had none of the generosity, courtesy, and devoted bravery
which are so requisite to make a robber-hero. He was born at Paris, towards
the end of the seventeenth century, and broken alive on the wheel in
November 1727. He was, however, sufficiently popular to have been pitied
at his death, and afterwards to have formed the subject of a much-admired
drama, which bore his name, and was played with great success in all the
theatres of France during the years 1734, 5, and 6. In our own day the
French have been more fortunate in a robber; Vidocq bids fair to rival the
fame of Turpin and Jack Sheppard. Already he has become the hero of
many an apocryphal tale—already his compatriots boast of his manifold
achievements, and express their doubts whether any other country in
Europe could produce a thief so clever, so accomplished, so gentlemanly, as
Vidocq.
Germany has its Schinderhannes, Hungary its Schubry, and Italy and
Spain a whole host of brigands, whose names and exploits are familiar as
household words in the mouths of the children and populace of those
countries.
The Italian banditti are renowned over the world; and many of them are
not only very religious (after a fashion) but very charitable. Charity from
such a source is so unexpected, that the people doat upon them for it. One
of them, when he fell into the hands of the police, exclaimed, as they led
him away, “Ho fatto più carità!”—“I have given away more in charity than
any three convents in these provinces.” And the fellow spoke truth.
In Lombardy, the people cherish the memory of two notorious robbers,
who flourished about two centuries ago under the Spanish government.
Their story, according to Macfarlane, is contained in a little book well
known to all the children of the province, and read by them with much more
gusto than their Bibles.
Schinderhannes, the robber of the Rhine, is a great favourite on the
banks of the river which he so long kept in awe. Many amusing stories are
related by the peasantry48 of the scurvy tricks he played off upon rich Jews,
or too-presuming officers of justice—of his princely generosity, and
undaunted courage. In short, they are proud of him, and would no more
consent to have the memory of his achievements dissociated from their
river than they would have the rock of Ehrenbreitstein blown to atoms by
gunpowder.
There is another robber-hero, of whose character and exploits the people
of Germany speak admiringly. Mausch Nadel was captain of a considerable
band that infested the Rhine, Switzerland, Alsatia, and Lorraine, during the
years 1824, 5, and 6. Like Jack Sheppard, he endeared himself to the
populace by his most hazardous escape from prison. Being confined at
Bremen, in a dungeon on the third story of the prison of that town, he
contrived to let himself down without exciting the vigilance of the sentinels,
and to swim across the Weser, though heavily laden with irons. When about
half-way over, he was espied by a sentinel, who fired at him, and shot him
in the calf of the leg: but the undaunted robber struck out manfully, reached
the shore, and was out of sight before the officers of justice could get ready
their boats to follow him. He was captured again in 1826, tried at Mayence,
and sentenced to death. He was a tall, strong, handsome man, and his fate,
villain as he was, excited much sympathy all over Germany. The ladies
especially were loud in their regret that nothing could be done to save a
hero so good-looking, and of adventures so romantic, from the knife of the
headsman.
Mr. Charles Macfarlane, in speaking of Italian banditti, remarks, that the
abuses of the Catholic religion, with its confessions and absolutions, have
tended to promote crime of this description. But he adds more truly, that
priests and monks have not done half the mischief which has been
perpetrated by ballad-mongers and story-tellers. If he had said playwrights
also, the list would have been complete. In fact, the theatre, which can only
expect to prosper, in a pecuniary sense, by pandering to the tastes of the
people, continually recurs to the annals of thieves and banditti for its most
favourite heroes. These theatrical robbers, with their picturesque attire, wild
haunts, jolly, reckless, devil-may-care manners, take a wonderful hold upon
the imagination, and whatever their advocates may say to the contrary,
exercise a very pernicious influence upon public morals. In the Memoirs of
the Duke of Guise upon the Revolution of Naples in 1647 and 1648, it is
stated, that the manners, dress, and mode of life of the Neapolitan banditti
were rendered so captivating upon the stage, that the authorities found it
absolutely necessary to forbid the representation of dramas in which they
figured, and even to prohibit their costume at the masquerades. So
numerous were the banditti at this time, that the duke found no difficulty in
raising an army of them, to aid him in his endeavours to seize on the throne
of Naples. He thus describes them:49 “They were three thousand five
hundred men, of whom the oldest came short of five-and-forty years, and
the youngest was above twenty. They were all tall and well made, with long
black hair, for the most part curled; coats of black Spanish leather, with
sleeves of velvet, or cloth of gold; cloth breeches with gold lace, most of
them scarlet; girdles of velvet, laced with gold, with two pistols on each
side; a cutlass hanging at a belt, suitably trimmed, three fingers broad and
two feet long; a hawking-bag at their girdle, and a powder-flask hung about
their neck with a great silk riband. Some of them carried firelocks, and
others blunderbusses; they had all good shoes, with silk stockings, and
every one a cap of cloth of gold, or cloth of silver, of different colours, on
his head, which was very delightful to the eye.”
The Beggar’s Opera, in our own country, is another instance of the
admiration that thieves excite upon the stage. Of the extraordinary success
of this piece, when first produced, the following account is given in the
notes to The Dunciad, and quoted by Johnson in his Lives of the Poets:
“This piece was received with greater applause than was ever known.
Besides being acted in London sixty-three days without interruption, and
renewed the next season with equal applause, it spread into all the great
towns of England; was played in many places to the thirtieth and fortieth
time; at Bath and Bristol, &c. fifty. It made its progress into Wales,
Scotland, and Ireland, where it was performed twenty-four days
successively. The ladies carried about with them the favourite songs of it in
fans, and houses were furnished with it in screens. The fame of it was not
confined to the author only. The person who acted Polly, till then obscure,
became all at once the favourite of the town;50 her pictures were engraved
and sold in great numbers; her life written, books of letters and verses to her
published, and pamphlets made even of her sayings and jests. Furthermore,
it drove out of England, for that season, the Italian Opera, which had carried
all before it for ten years.” Dr. Johnson, in his life of the author, says, that
Herring, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, censured the opera, as
giving encouragement, not only to vice, but to crimes, by making the
highwayman the hero, and dismissing him at last unpunished; and adds, that
it was even said, that after the exhibition the gangs of robbers were
evidently multiplied. The Doctor doubts the assertion, giving as his reason
that highwaymen and housebreakers seldom frequent the playhouse, and
that it was not possible for any one to imagine that he might rob with safety,
because he saw Macheath reprieved upon the stage. But if Johnson had
wished to be convinced, he might very easily have discovered that
highwaymen and housebreakers did frequent the theatre, and that nothing
was more probable than that a laughable representation of successful
villany should induce the young and the already vicious to imitate it.
Besides, there is the weighty authority of Sir John Fielding, the chief
magistrate of Bow Street, who asserted positively, and proved his assertion
by the records of his office, that the number of thieves was greatly increased
at the time when that opera was so popular.
We have another instance of the same result much nearer our own times.
Schiller’s Räuber, that wonderful play, written by a green youth, perverted
the taste and imagination of all the young men in Germany. An
accomplished critic of our own country (Hazlitt), speaking of this play, says
it was the first he ever read, and such was the effect it produced on him, that
“it stunned him, like a blow.” After the lapse of five-and-twenty years, he
could not forget it; it was still, to use his own words, “an old dweller in the
chambers of his brain,” and he had not even then recovered enough from it
to describe how it was. The high-minded, metaphysical thief, its hero, was
so warmly admired, that several raw students, longing to imitate a character
they thought so noble, actually abandoned their homes and their colleges,
and betook themselves to the forests and the wilds to levy contributions
upon travellers. They thought they would, like Moor, plunder the rich, and
deliver eloquent soliloquies to the setting sun or the rising moon; relieve the
poor when they met them, and drink flasks of Rhenish with their free
companions in rugged mountain passes, or in tents in the thicknesses of the
forests. But a little experience wonderfully cooled their courage; they found
that real, everyday robbers were very unlike the conventional banditti of the
stage, and that three months in prison, with bread and water for their fare,
and damp straw to lie upon, was very well to read about by their own
firesides, but not very agreeable to undergo in their own proper persons.
Lord Byron, with his soliloquising, high-souled thieves, has, in a slight
degree, perverted the taste of the juvenile rhymers of his country. As yet,
however, they have shewn more good sense than their fellows of Germany,
and have not taken to the woods or the highways. Much as they admire
Conrad the Corsair, they will not go to sea, and hoist the black flag for him.
By words only, and not by deeds, they testify their admiration, and deluge
the periodicals and music-shops of the land with verses describing pirates’
and bandits’ brides, and robber adventures of every kind.
But it is the playwright who does most harm; and Byron has fewer sins
of this nature to answer for than Gay or Schiller. With the aid of scenery,
fine dresses and music, and the very false notions they convey, they vitiate
the public taste, not knowing,
“Vulgaires rimeurs!
Quelle force ont les arts pour demolir les mœurs.”
In the penny theatres that abound in the poor and populous districts of
London, and which are chiefly frequented by striplings of idle and dissolute
habits, tales of thieves and murderers are more admired, and draw more
crowded audiences, than any other species of representation. There the
footpad, the burglar, and the highwayman are portrayed in their natural
colours, and give pleasant lessons in crime to their delighted listeners.
There the deepest tragedy and the broadest farce are represented in the
career of the murderer and the thief, and are applauded in proportion to
their depth and their breadth. There, whenever a crime of unusual atrocity is
committed, it is brought out afresh, with all its disgusting incidents copied
from the life, for the amusement of those who will one day become its
imitators.
With the mere reader the case is widely different; and most people have
a partiality for knowing the adventures of noted rogues. Even in fiction they
are delightful: witness the eventful story of Gil Blas de Santillane, and of
that great rascal Don Guzman d’Alfarache. Here there is no fear of
imitation. Poets, too, without doing mischief, may sing of such heroes when
they please, wakening our sympathies for the sad fate of Jemmy Dawson, or
Gilderoy, or Macpherson the Dauntless; or celebrating in undying verse the
wrongs and the revenge of the great thief of Scotland, Rob Roy. If, by the
music of their sweet rhymes, they can convince the world that such heroes
are but mistaken philosophers, born a few ages too late, and having both a
theoretical and practical love for
“The good old rule, the simple plan,
That they should take who have the power,
That they should keep who can;”
the world may perhaps become wiser, and consent to some better
distribution of its good things, by means of which thieves may become
reconciled to the age, and the age to them. The probability, however, seems
to be, that the charmers will charm in vain, charm they ever so wisely.
FIGHT BETWEEN DU GUESCLIN AND TROUSSEL.
Duels and Ordeals
Table of Contents
There was an ancient sage philosopher,
Who swore the world, as he could prove,
Was mad of fighting.—Hudibras.
Most writers, in accounting for the origin of duelling, derive it from the
warlike habits of those barbarous nations who overran Europe in the early
centuries of the Christian era, and who knew no mode so effectual for
settling their differences as the point of the sword. In fact, duelling, taken in
its primitive and broadest sense, means nothing more than combating, and
is the universal resort of all wild animals, including man, to gain or defend
their possessions, or avenge their insults. Two dogs who tear each other for
a bone, or two bantams fighting on a dunghill for the love of some beautiful
hen, or two fools on Wimbledon Common, shooting at each other to satisfy
the laws of offended honour, stand on the same footing in this respect, and
are each and all mere duellists. As civilisation advanced, the best-informed
men naturally grew ashamed of such a mode of adjusting disputes, and the
promulgation of some sort of laws for obtaining redress for injuries was the
consequence. Still there were many cases in which the allegations of an
accuser could not be rebutted by any positive proof on the part of the
accused; and in all these, which must have been exceedingly numerous in
the early stages of European society, the combat was resorted to. From its
decision there was no appeal. God was supposed to nerve the arm of the
combatant whose cause was just, and to grant him the victory over his
opponent. As Montesquieu well remarks,51 this belief was not unnatural
among a people just emerging from barbarism. Their manners being wholly
warlike, the man deficient in courage, the prime virtue of his fellows, was
not unreasonably suspected of other vices besides cowardice, which is
generally found to be co-existent with treachery. He, therefore, who shewed
himself most valiant in the encounter was absolved by public opinion from
any crime with which he might be charged. As a necessary consequence,
society would have been reduced to its original elements, if the men of
thought, as distinguished from the men of action, had not devised some
means for taming the unruly passions of their fellows. With this view,
governments commenced by restricting within the narrowest possible limits
the cases in which it was lawful to prove or deny guilt by the single combat.
By the law of Gondebaldus king of the Burgundians, passed in the year 501,
the proof by combat was allowed in all legal proceedings in lieu of
swearing. In the time of Charlemagne, the Burgundian practice had spread
over the empire of the Francs, and not only the suitors for justice, but the
witnesses, and even the judges, were obliged to defend their cause, their
evidence, or their decision at the point of the sword. Louis the Debonnaire,
his successor, endeavoured to remedy the growing evil by permitting the
duel only in appeals of felony, in civil cases, or issue joined in a writ of
right, and in cases of the court of chivalry, or attacks upon a man’s
knighthood. None were exempt from these trials but women, the sick and
the maimed, and persons under fifteen or above sixty years of age.
Ecclesiastics were allowed to produce champions in their stead. This
practice in the course of time extended to all trials of civil and criminal
cases, which had to be decided by battle.
The clergy, whose dominion was an intellectual one, never approved of
a system of jurisprudence which tended so much to bring all things under
the rule of the strongest arm. From the first they set their faces against
duelling, and endeavoured, as far as the prejudices of their age would allow
them, to curb the warlike spirit, so alien from the principles of religion. In
the Council of Valentia, and afterwards in the Council of Trent, they
excommunicated all persons engaged in duelling; and not only them, but
even the assistants and spectators, declaring the custom to be hellish and
detestable, and introduced by the devil for the destruction both of body and
soul. They added also, that princes who connived at duels should be
deprived of all temporal power, jurisdiction, and dominion over the places
where they had permitted them to be fought. It will be seen hereafter that
this clause only encouraged the practice which it was intended to prevent.
But it was the blasphemous error of these early ages to expect that the
Almighty, whenever he was called upon, would work a miracle in favour of
a person unjustly accused. The priesthood, in condemning the duel, did not
condemn the principle on which it was founded. They still encouraged the
popular belief of divine interference in all the disputes or differences that
might arise among nations or individuals. It was the very same principle
that regulated the ordeals, which with all their influence they supported
against the duel. By the former, the power of deciding the guilt or innocence
was vested wholly in their hands; while by the latter they enjoyed no power
or privilege at all. It is not to be wondered at that, for this reason, if for no
other, they should have endeavoured to settle all differences by the peaceful
mode. While that prevailed, they were, as they wished to be, the first party
in the state; but while the strong arm of individual prowess was allowed to
be the judge in all doubtful cases, their power and influence became
secondary to those of the nobility.
Thus it was not the mere hatred of bloodshed which induced them to
launch the thunderbolts of excommunication against the combatants: it was
a desire to retain the power, which, to do them justice, they were in those
times the persons best qualified to wield. The germs of knowledge and
civilisation lay within the bounds of their order; for they were the
representatives of the intellectual, as the nobility were of the physical power
of man. To centralise this power in the Church, and make it the judge of the
last resort in all appeals, both in civil and criminal cases, they instituted five
modes of trial, the management of which lay wholly in their hands. These
were, the oath upon the evangelists; the ordeal of the cross and the fire
ordeal, for persons in the higher ranks; the water ordeal, for the humbler
classes; and, lastly, the corsned, or bread and cheese ordeal, for members of
their own body.
The oath upon the evangelists was taken in the following manner. The
accused who was received to this proof, says Paul Hay, Count du Chastelet,
in his Memoirs of Bertrand du Guesclin, swore upon a copy of the New
Testament, and on the relics of the holy martyrs, or on their tombs, that he
was innocent of the crime imputed to him. He was also obliged to find
twelve persons of acknowledged probity who should take oath at the same
time that they believed him innocent. This mode of trial led to very great
abuses, especially in cases of disputed inheritance, where the hardest
swearer was certain of the victory. This abuse was one of the principal
causes which led to the preference given to the trial by battle. It is not at all
surprising that a feudal baron, or captain of the early ages, should have
preferred the chances of a fair fight with his opponent to a mode by which
firm perjury would always be successful.
The trial by, or judgment of, the cross, which Charlemagne begged his
sons to have recourse to, in case of disputes arising between them, was
performed thus:—When a person accused of any crime had declared his
innocence upon oath, and appealed to the cross for its judgment in his
favour, he was brought into the church, before the altar. The priests
previously prepared two sticks exactly like one another, upon one of which
was carved a figure of the cross. They were both wrapped up with great
care and many ceremonies, in a quantity of fine wool, and laid upon the
altar, or on the relics of the saints. A solemn prayer was then offered up to
God, that he would be pleased to discover, by the judgment of his holy
cross, whether the accused person were innocent or guilty. A priest then
approached the altar, and took up one of the sticks, and the assistants
unswathed it reverently. If it was marked with the cross, the accused person
was innocent; if unmarked, he was guilty. It would be unjust to assert, that
the judgments thus delivered were, in all cases, erroneous; and it would be
absurd to believe that they were left altogether to chance. Many true
judgments were doubtless given, and, in all probability, most
conscientiously; for we cannot but believe that the priests endeavoured
beforehand to convince themselves by secret inquiry and a strict
examination of the circumstances, whether the appellant were innocent or
guilty, and that they took up the crossed or uncrossed stick accordingly.
Although, to all other observers, the sticks, as enfolded in the wool, might
appear exactly similar, those who enwrapped them could, without any
difficulty, distinguish the one from the other.
By the fire-ordeal the power of deciding was just as unequivocally left
in their hands. It was generally believed that fire would not burn the
innocent, and the clergy, of course, took care that the innocent, or such as it
was their pleasure or interest to declare so, should be so warned before
undergoing the ordeal, as to preserve themselves without any difficulty
from the fire. One mode of ordeal was to place red-hot ploughshares on the
ground at certain distances, and then, blindfolding the accused person, make
him walk barefooted over them. If he stepped regularly in the vacant
spaces, avoiding the fire, he was adjudged innocent; if he burned himself,
he was declared guilty. As none but the clergy interfered with the
arrangement of the ploughshares, they could always calculate beforehand
the result of the ordeal. To find a person guilty, they had only to place them
at irregular distances, and the accused was sure to tread upon one of them.
When Emma, the wife of King Ethelred, and mother of Edward the
Confessor, was accused of a guilty familiarity with Alwyn Bishop of
Winchester, she cleared her character in this manner. The reputation, not
only of their order, but of a queen, being at stake, a verdict of guilty was not
to be apprehended from any ploughshares which priests had the heating of.
This ordeal was called the Judicium Dei, and sometimes the Vulgaris
Purgatio, and might also be tried by several other methods. One was to hold
in the hand, unhurt, a piece of red-hot iron, of the weight of one, two, or
three pounds. When we read not only that men with hard hands, but women
of softer and more delicate skin, could do this with impunity, we must be
convinced that the hands were previously rubbed with some preservative, or
that the apparently hot iron was merely cold iron painted red. Another mode
was to plunge the naked arm into a caldron of boiling water. The priests
then enveloped it in several folds of linen and flannel, and kept the patient
confined within the church, and under their exclusive care, for three days.
If, at the end of that time, the arm appeared without a scar, the innocence of
the accused person was firmly established.52
As regards the water-ordeal, the same trouble was not taken. It was a
trial only for the poor and humble, and, whether they sank or swam, was
thought of very little consequence. Like the witches of more modern times,
the accused were thrown into a pond or river; if they sank, and were
drowned, their surviving friends had the consolation of knowing that they
were innocent; if they swam, they were guilty. In either case society was rid
of them.
But of all the ordeals, that which the clergy reserved for themselves was
the one least likely to cause any member of their corps to be declared guilty.
The most culpable monster in existence came off clear when tried by this
method. It was called the Corsned, and was thus performed. A piece of
barley bread and a piece of cheese were laid upon the altar, and the accused
priest, in his full canonicals, and surrounded by all the pompous adjuncts of
Roman ceremony, pronounced certain conjurations, and prayed with great
fervency for several minutes. The burden of the prayer was, that if he were
guilty of the crime laid to his charge, God would send his angel Gabriel to
stop his throat, that he might not be able to swallow the bread and cheese.
There is no instance upon record of a priest having been choked in this
manner.53
When, under Pope Gregory VII., it was debated whether the Gregorian
chant should be introduced into Castile, instead of the Musarabic, given by
St. Isidore of Seville to the churches of that kingdom, very much ill feeling
was excited. The churches refused to receive the novelty, and it was
proposed that the affair should be decided by a battle between two
champions, one chosen from each side. The clergy would not consent to a
mode of settlement which they considered impious, but had no objection to
try the merits of each chant by the fire-ordeal. A great fire was accordingly
made, and a book of the Gregorian and one of the Musarabic chant were
thrown into it, that the flames might decide which was most agreeable to
God by refusing to burn it. Cardinal Baronius, who says he was an eye-
witness of the miracle, relates, that the book of the Gregorian chant was no
sooner laid upon the fire, than it leaped out uninjured, visibly, and with a
great noise. Every one present thought that the saints had decided in favour
of Pope Gregory. After a slight interval, the fire was extinguished; but,
wonderful to relate! the other book of St. Isidore was found covered with
ashes, but not injured in the slightest degree. The flames had not even
warmed it. Upon this it was resolved, that both were alike agreeable to God,
and that they should be used by turns in all the churches of Seville.54
If the ordeals had been confined to questions like this, the laity would
have had little or no objection to them; but when they were introduced as
decisive in all the disputes that might arise between man and man, the
opposition of all those whose prime virtue was personal bravery, was
necessarily excited. In fact, the nobility, from a very early period, began to
look with jealous eyes upon them. They were not slow to perceive their true
purport, which was no other than to make the Church the last court of
appeal in all cases, both civil and criminal: and not only did the nobility
prefer the ancient mode of single combat from this cause, in itself a
sufficient one, but they clung to it because an acquittal gained by those
displays of courage and address which the battle afforded, was more
creditable in the eyes of their compeers, than one which it required but little
or none of either to accomplish. To these causes may be added another,
which was perhaps more potent than either in raising the credit of the
judicial combat at the expense of the ordeal. The noble institution of
chivalry was beginning to take root, and, notwithstanding the clamours of
the clergy, war was made the sole business of life, and the only elegant
pursuit of the aristocracy. The fine spirit of honour was introduced, any
attack upon which was only to be avenged in the lists, within sight of
applauding crowds, whose verdict of approbation was far more gratifying
than the cold and formal acquittal of the ordeal. Lothaire, the son of Louis
I., abolished that by fire and the trial of the cross within his dominions; but
in England they were allowed so late as the time of Henry III., in the early
part of whose reign they were prohibited by an order of council. In the
mean time, the Crusades had brought the institution of chivalry to the full
height of perfection. The chivalric spirit soon achieved the downfall of the
ordeal system, and established the judicial combat on a basis too firm to be
shaken. It is true that with the fall of chivalry, as an institution, fell the
tournament and the encounter in the lists; but the duel, their offspring, has
survived to this day, defying the efforts of sages and philosophers to
eradicate it. Among all the errors bequeathed to us by a barbarous age, it
has proved the most pertinacious. It has put variance between men’s reason
and their honour; put the man of sense on a level with the fool, and made
thousands who condemn it submit to it or practise it.
Those who are curious to see the manner in which these combats were
regulated, may consult the learned Montesquieu, where they will find a
copious summary of the code of ancient duelling.55 Truly does he remark,
in speaking of the clearness and excellence of the arrangements, that, as
there were many wise matters which were conducted in a very foolish
manner, so there were many foolish matters conducted very wisely. No
greater exemplification of it could be given than the wise and religious rules
of the absurd and blasphemous trial by battle.
In the ages that intervened between the Crusades and the new era that
was opened out by the invention of gunpowder and printing, a more rational
system of legislation took root. The inhabitants of cities, engaged in the
pursuits of trade and industry, were content to acquiesce in the decisions of
their judges and magistrates whenever any differences arose among them.
Unlike the class above them, their habits and manners did not lead them to
seek the battle-field on every slight occasion. A dispute as to the price of a
sack of corn, a bale of broad-cloth, or a cow, could be more satisfactorily
adjusted before the mayor or bailiff of their district. Even the martial
knights and nobles, quarrelsome as they were, began to see that the trial by
battle would lose its dignity and splendour if too frequently resorted to.
Governments also shared this opinion, and on several occasions restricted
the cases in which it was legal to proceed to this extremity. In France,
before the time of Louis IX., duels were permitted only in cases of lèse
majesté, rape, incendiarism, assassination, and burglary. Louis IX., by
taking off all restriction, made them legal in civil cases. This was not found
to work well, and, in 1303, Philip the Fair judged it necessary to confine
them, in criminal matters, to state offences, rape, and incendiarism; and in
civil cases, to questions of disputed inheritance. Knighthood was allowed to
be the best judge of its own honour, and might defend or avenge it as often
as occasion arose.
Among the earliest duels upon record, is a very singular one that took
place in the reign of Louis II. (A. D. 878). Ingelgerius count of Gastinois was
one morning discovered by his countess dead in bed at her side. Gontran, a
relation of the count, accused the countess of having murdered her husband,
to whom, he asserted, she had long been unfaithful, and challenged her to
produce a champion to do battle in her behalf, that he might establish her
guilt by killing him.56 All the friends and relatives of the countess believed
in her innocence; but Gontran was so stout and bold and renowned a
warrior that no one dared to meet him, for which, as Brantôme quaintly
says, “mauvais et poltrons parens estaient.” The unhappy countess began to
despair, when a champion suddenly appeared in the person of Ingelgerius
count of Anjou, a boy of sixteen years of age, who had been held by the
countess on the baptismal font, and received her husband’s name. He
tenderly loved his godmother, and offered to do battle in her cause against
any and every opponent. The king endeavoured to persuade the generous
boy from his enterprise, urging the great strength, tried skill, and invincible
courage of the challenger; but he persisted in his resolution, to the great
sorrow of all the court, who said it was a cruel thing to permit so brave and
beautiful a child to rush to such butchery and death.
DUEL BETWEEN INGELGERIUS AND GONTRAN.
When the lists were prepared, the countess duly acknowledged her
champion, and the combatants commenced the onset. Gontran rode so
fiercely at his antagonist, and hit him on the shield with such impetuosity,
that he lost his own balance and rolled to the ground. The young count, as
Gontran fell, passed his lance through his body, and then dismounting, cut
off his head, which, Brantôme says, “he presented to the king, who received
it most graciously, and was very joyful, as much so as if any one had made
him a present of a city.” The innocence of the countess was then proclaimed
with great rejoicings; and she kissed her godson, and wept over his neck
with joy, in the presence of all the assembly.
When the Earl of Essex was accused, by Robert de Montfort, before
King Henry II., in 1162, of having traitorously suffered the royal standard
of England to fall from his hands in a skirmish with the Welsh at Coleshill,
five years previously, the latter offered to prove the truth of the charge by
single combat. The Earl of Essex accepted the challenge, and the lists were
prepared near Reading. An immense concourse of persons assembled to
witness the battle. Essex at first fought stoutly, but, losing his temper and
self-command, he gave an advantage to his opponent which soon decided
the struggle. He was unhorsed, and so severely wounded, that all present
thought he was dead. At the solicitation of his relatives, the monks of the
Abbey of Reading were allowed to remove the body for interment, and
Montfort was declared the victor. Essex, however, was not dead, but
stunned only, and, under the care of the monks, recovered in a few weeks
from his bodily injuries. The wounds of his mind were not so easily healed.
Though a loyal and brave subject, the whole realm believed him a traitor
and a coward because he had been vanquished. He could not brook to return
to the world deprived of the good opinion of his fellows; he therefore made
himself a monk, and passed the remainder of his days within the walls of
the abbey.
Du Chastelet relates a singular duel that was proposed in Spain.57 A
Christian gentleman of Seville sent a challenge to a Moorish cavalier,
offering to prove against him, with whatever weapons he might choose, that
the religion of Jesus Christ was holy and divine, and that of Mahomet
impious and damnable. The Spanish prelates did not choose that
Christianity should be compromised within their jurisdiction by the result of
any such combat; the Moorish cavalier might, perchance, have proved to be
the stronger, and they commanded the knight, under pain of
excommunication, to withdraw the challenge.
The same author relates that, under Otho I., a question arose among
jurisconsults, viz. whether grandchildren, who had lost their father, should
share equally with their uncles in the property of their grandfather, at the
death of the latter. The difficulty of this question was found so
insurmountable, that none of the lawyers of that day could resolve it. It was
at last decreed that it should be decided by single combat. Two champions
were accordingly chosen; one for, and the other against, the claims of the
little ones. After a long struggle, the champion of the uncles was unhorsed
and slain; and it was therefore decided that the right of the grandchildren
was established, and that they should enjoy the same portion of their
grandfather’s possessions that their father would have done had he been
alive.
Upon pretexts just as strange, and often more frivolous that these, duels
continued to be fought in most of the countries of Europe during the whole
of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. A memorable instance of the
slightness of the pretext on which a man could be forced to fight a duel to
the death, occurs in the Memoirs of the brave Constable, Du Guesclin. The
advantage he had obtained, in a skirmish before Rennes, against William
Brembre, an English captain, so preyed on the spirits of William Troussel,
the chosen friend and companion of the latter, that nothing would satisfy
him but a mortal combat with the Constable. The Duke of Lancaster, to
whom Troussel applied for permission to fight the great Frenchman,
forbade the battle, as not warranted by the circumstances. Troussel
nevertheless burned with a fierce desire to cross his weapon with Du
Guesclin, and sought every occasion to pick a quarrel with him. Having so
good a will for it, of course he found a way. A relative of his had been taken
prisoner by the Constable, in whose hands he remained till he was able to
pay his ransom. Troussel resolved to make a quarrel out of this, and
despatched a messenger to Du Guesclin, demanding the release of his
prisoner, and offering a bond, at a distant date, for the payment of the
ransom. Du Guesclin, who had received intimation of the hostile purposes
of the Englishman, sent back word that he would not accept his bond,
neither would he release his prisoner until the full amount of his ransom
was paid. As soon as this answer was received, Troussel sent a challenge to
the Constable, demanding reparation for the injury he had done his honour,
by refusing his bond, and offering a mortal combat, to be fought three
strokes with the lance, three with the sword, and three with the dagger. Du
Guesclin, although ill in bed with the ague, accepted the challenge, and
gave notice to the Marshal d’Andreghem, the king’s lieutenant-general in
Lower Normandy, that he might fix the day and the place of combat. The
marshal made all necessary arrangements, upon condition that he who was
beaten should pay a hundred florins of gold to feast the nobles and
gentlemen who were witnesses of the encounter.
The Duke of Lancaster was very angry with his captain, and told him
that it would be a shame to his knighthood and his nation if he forced on a
combat with the brave Du Guesclin at a time when he was enfeebled by
disease and stretched on the couch of suffering. Upon these representations,
Troussel, ashamed of himself, sent notice to Du Guesclin that he was
willing to postpone the duel until such time as he should be perfectly
recovered. Du Guesclin replied, that he could not think of postponing the
combat after all the nobility had received notice of it; that he had sufficient
strength left not only to meet, but to conquer such an opponent as he was;
and that if he did not make his appearance in the lists at the time appointed,
he would publish him every where as a man unworthy to be called a knight,
or to wear an honourable sword by his side. Troussel carried this haughty
message to the Duke of Lancaster, who immediately gave permission for
the battle.
On the day appointed, the two combatants appeared in the lists, in the
presence of several thousand spectators. Du Guesclin was attended by the
flower of the French nobility, including the Marshal de Beaumanoir, Olivier
de Mauny, Bertrand de Saint Pern, and the Viscount de la Bellière; while
the Englishman appeared with no more than the customary retinue of two
seconds, two squires, two coutilliers or daggermen, and two trumpeters. The
first onset was unfavourable to the Constable. He received so heavy a blow
on his shield-arm, that he fell forward to the left upon his horse’s neck; and
being weakened by his fever, was nearly thrown to the ground. All his
friends thought he could never recover himself, and began to deplore his ill
fortune; but Du Guesclin collected his energies for a decisive effort, and at
the second charge aimed a blow at the shoulder of his enemy, which felled
him to the earth, mortally wounded. He then sprang from his horse, sword
in hand, with the intention of cutting off the head of his fallen foe, when the
Marshal d’Andreghem threw a golden wand into the arena as a signal that
hostilities should cease. Du Guesclin was proclaimed the victor amid the
joyous acclamations of the crowd, and retiring, left the field to the meaner
combatants, who were afterwards to make sport for the people. Four
English and as many French squires fought for some time with pointless
lances, when the French gaining the advantage, the sports were declared at
an end.
In the time of Charles VI., about the beginning of the fifteenth century, a
famous duel was ordered by the parliament of Paris. The Sieur de
Carrouges being absent in the Holy Land, his lady was violated by the Sieur
Legris. Carrouges, on his return, challenged Legris to mortal combat for the
twofold crime of violation and slander, inasmuch as he had denied his guilt
by asserting that the lady was a willing party. The lady’s asseverations of
innocence were held to be no evidence by the parliament, and the duel was
commanded, with all the ceremonies. “On the day appointed,” says
Brantôme,58 “the lady came to witness the spectacle in her chariot; but the
king made her descend, judging her unworthy, because she was criminal in
his eyes till her innocence was proved, and caused her to stand upon a
scaffold to await the mercy of God and this judgment by the battle. After a
short struggle, the Sieur de Carrouges overthrew his enemy, and made him
confess both the rape and the slander. He was then taken to the gallows and
hanged in the presence of the multitude; while the innocence of the lady
was proclaimed by the heralds, and recognised by her husband, the king,
and all the spectators.”
Numerous battles of a similar description constantly took place, until
the unfortunate issue of one encounter of the kind led the French king,
Henry II., to declare solemnly that he would never again permit any such
encounter, whether it related to a civil or criminal case, or the honour of a
gentleman.
This memorable combat was fought in the year 1547. François de
Vivonne, lord of La Chataigneraie, and Guy de Chabot, lord of Jarnac, had
been friends from their early youth, and were noted at the court of Francis I.
for the gallantry of their bearing and the magnificence of their retinue.
Chataigneraie, who knew that his friend’s means were not very ample,
asked him one day in confidence how it was that he contrived to be so well
provided? Jarnac replied, that his father had married a young and beautiful
woman, who, loving the son far better than the sire, supplied him with as
much money as he desired. La Chataigneraie betrayed the base secret to the
dauphin, the dauphin to the king, the king to his courtiers, and the courtiers
to all their acquaintance. In a short time it reached the ears of the old Lord
de Jarnac, who immediately sent for his son, and demanded to know in
what manner the report had originated, and whether he had been vile
enough not only to carry on such a connexion, but to boast of it? De Jarnac
indignantly denied that he had ever said so, or given reason to the world to
say so, and requested his father to accompany him to court and confront
him with his accuser, that he might see the manner in which he would
confound him. They went accordingly; and the younger De Jarnac, entering
a room where the dauphin, La Chataigneraie, and several courtiers were
present, exclaimed aloud, “That whoever had asserted that he maintained a
criminal connexion with his mother-in-law was a liar and a coward!” Every
eye was turned to the dauphin and La Chataigneraie, when the latter stood
forward and asserted, that De Jarnac had himself avowed that such was the
fact, and he would extort from his lips another confession of it. A case like
this could not be met or rebutted by any legal proof, and the royal council
ordered that it should be decided by single combat. The king, however, set
his face against the duel,59 and forbade them both, under pain of his high
displeasure, to proceed any further in the matter. But Francis died in the
following year, and the dauphin, now Henry II., who was himself
compromised, resolved that the combat should take place.
The lists were prepared in the court-yard of the chateau of St. Germain-
en-Laye, and the 10th of July, 1547, was appointed for the encounter. The
cartels of the combatants, which are preserved in the Mémoires de
Castelnau, were as follow:
“Cartel of François de Vivonne, lord of la Chataigneraie.
“Sire,
“Having learned that Guy Chabot de Jarnac, being lately at
Compiegne, asserted that whoever had said that he boasted of having
criminal intercourse with his mother-in-law was wicked and a wretch,
I, sire, with your good will and pleasure, do answer that he has
wickedly lied, and will lie as many times as he denies having said that
which I affirm he did say; for I repeat, that he told me several times,
and boasted of it, that he had slept with his mother-in-law.
“François de Vivonne.”
To this cartel De Jarnac replied:
“Sire,
“With your good will and permission, I say, that François de
Vivonne has lied in the imputation which he has cast upon me, and of
which I spoke to you at Compiegne. I therefore entreat you, sire, most
humbly, that you be pleased to grant us a fair field, that we may fight
this battle to the death.
“Guy Chabot.”
The preparations were conducted on a scale of the greatest
magnificence, the king having intimated his intention of being present. La
Chataigneraie made sure of the victory, and invited the king and a hundred
and fifty of the principal personages of the court to sup with him in the
evening, after the battle, in a splendid tent which he had prepared at the
extremity of the lists. De Jarnac was not so confident, though perhaps more
desperate. At noon, on the day appointed, the combatants met, and each
took the customary oath that he bore no charms or amulets about him, or
made use of any magic, to aid him against his antagonist. They then
attacked each other, sword in hand. La Chataigneraie was a strong robust
man, and over confident; De Jarnac was nimble, supple, and prepared for
the worst. The combat lasted for some time doubtful, until De Jarnac,
overpowered by the heavy blows of his opponent, covered his head with his
shield, and, stooping down, endeavoured to make amends by his agility for
his deficiency of strength. In this crouching posture he aimed two blows at
the left thigh of La Chataigneraie, who had left it uncovered, that the
motion of his leg might not be impeded. Each blow was successful, and,
amid the astonishment of all the spectators, and to the great regret of the
king, La Chataigneraie rolled over upon the sand. He seized his dagger, and
made a last effort to strike De Jarnac: but he was unable to support himself,
and fell powerless into the arms of the assistants. The officers now
interfered, and De Jarnac being declared the victor, fell down upon his
knees, uncovered his head, and, clasping his hands together, exclaimed: “O
Domine, non sum dignus!” La Chataigneraie was so mortified by the result
of the encounter, that he resolutely refused to have his wounds dressed. He
tore off the bandages which the surgeons applied, and expired two days
afterwards. Ever since that time, any sly and unforeseen attack has been
called by the French a coup de Jarnac. Henry was so grieved at the loss of
his favourite, that he made the solemn oath already alluded to, that he
would never again, so long as he lived, permit a duel. Some writers have
asserted, and among others, Mezerai, that he issued a royal edict forbidding
them. This has been doubted by others, and as there appears no registry of
the edict in any of the courts, it seems most probable that it was never
issued. This opinion is strengthened by the fact, that, two years afterwards,
the council ordered another duel to be fought with similar forms, but with
less magnificence, on account of the inferior rank of the combatants. It is
not anywhere stated that Henry interfered to prevent it, notwithstanding his
solemn oath; but that, on the contrary, he encouraged it, and appointed the
Marshal de la Marque to see that it was conducted according to the rules of
chivalry. The disputants were Fendille and D’Aguerre, two gentlemen of the
household, who, quarrelling in the king’s chamber, had proceeded from
words to blows. The council, being informed of the matter, decreed that it
could only be decided in the lists. Marshal de la Marque, with the king’s
permission, appointed the city of Sedan as the place of combat. Fendille,
who was a bad swordsman, was anxious to avoid an encounter with
D’Aguerre, who was one of the most expert men of the age; but the council
authoritatively commanded that he should fight, or be degraded from all his
honours. D’Aguerre appeared in the field attended by François de Vendôme,
Count de Chartres, while Fendille was accompanied by the Duke of Nevers.
Fendille appears to have been not only an inexpert swordsman, but a
thorough coward; one who, like Cowley, might have heaped curses on the
man,
“(Death’s factor sure), who brought
Dire swords into this peaceful world.”
On the very first encounter he was thrown from his horse, and, confessing
on the ground all that his victor required of him, slunk away ignominiously
from the arena.
One is tempted to look upon the death of Henry II. as a judgment upon
him for his perjury in the matter of duelling. In a grand tournament
instituted on the occasion of the marriage of his daughter, he broke several
lances in encounters with some of the bravest knights of the time.
Ambitious of still further renown, he would not rest satisfied until he had
also engaged the young Count de Montgommeri. He received a wound in
the eye from the lance of his antagonist, and died from its effects shortly
afterwards, in the forty-first year of his age.
In the succeeding reigns of Francis II., Charles IX., and Henry III., the
practice of duelling increased to an alarming extent. Duels were not rare in
the other countries of Europe at the same period; but in France they were so
frequent, that historians, in speaking of that age, designate it as “l’époque
de la fureur des duels.” The parliament of Paris endeavoured, as far as in its
power lay, to discourage the practice. By a decree dated the 26th of June
1559, it declared all persons who should be present at duels, or aiding and
abetting in them, to be rebels to the king, transgressors of the law, and
disturbers of the public peace.
When Henry III. was assassinated at St. Cloud in 1589, a young
gentleman, named L’Isle-Marivaut, who had been much beloved by him,
took his death so much to heart, that he resolved not to survive him. Not
thinking suicide an honourable death, and wishing, as he said, to die
gloriously in revenging his king and master, he publicly expressed his
readiness to fight any body to the death, who should assert that Henry’s
assassination was not a great misfortune to the community. Another youth,
of a fiery temper and tried courage, named Marolles, took him at his word,
and the day and place of the combat were forthwith appointed. When the
hour had come, and all were ready, Marolles turned to his second, and
asked whether his opponent had a casque or helmet only, or whether he
wore a sallade, or headpiece. Being answered a helmet only, he said gaily,
“So much the better; for, sir my second, you shall repute me the wickedest
man in all the world, if I do not thrust my lance right through the middle of
his head and kill him.” Truth to say, he did so at the very first onset, and the
unhappy L’Isle-Marivaut expired without a groan. Brantôme, who relates
this story, adds, that the victor might have done as he pleased with the body,
cut off the head, dragged it out of the camp, or exposed it upon an ass; but
that being a wise and very courteous gentleman, he left it to the relatives of
the deceased to be honourably buried, contenting himself with the glory of
his triumph, by which he gained no little renown and honour among the
ladies of Paris.
HENRY IV.
On the accession of Henry IV. that monarch determined to set his face
against duelling; but such was the influence of early education and the
prejudices of society upon him, that he never could find it in his heart to
punish a man for this offence. He thought it tended to foster a warlike spirit
among his people. When the chivalrous Créqui demanded his permission to
fight Don Philippe de Savoire, he is reported to have said, “Go, and if I
were not a king, I would be your second.” It is no wonder that when such
was known to be the king’s disposition, his edicts attracted but small
attention. A calculation was made by M. de Lomenie, in the year 1607, that
since the accession of Henry, in 1589, no less than four thousand French
gentlemen had lost their lives in these conflicts; which, for the eighteen
years, would have been at the rate of four or five in a week, or eighteen per
month! Sully, who reports this fact in his Memoirs, does not throw the
slightest doubt upon its exactness; and adds, that it was chiefly owing to the
facility and ill-advised good-nature of his royal master that the bad example
had so empoisoned the court, the city, and the whole country. This wise
minister devoted much of his time and attention to the subject; for the rage,
he says, was such as to cause him a thousand pangs, and the king also.
There was hardly a man moving in what was called good society, who had
not been engaged in a duel either as principal or second; and if there were
such a man, his chief desire was to free himself from the imputation of non-
duelling, by picking a quarrel with somebody. Sully constantly wrote letters
to the king, in which he prayed him to renew the edicts against this
barbarous custom, to aggravate the punishment against offenders, and
never, in any instance, to grant a pardon, even to a person who had
wounded another in a duel, much less to any one who had taken away life.
He also advised, that some sort of tribunal, or court of honour, should be
established, to take cognisance of injurious and slanderous language, and of
all such matters as usually led to duels; and that the justice to be
administered by this court should be sufficiently prompt and severe to
appease the complainant, and make the offender repent of his aggression.
GALLERY AT FONTAINEBLEAU.
Henry, being so warmly pressed by his friend and minister, called
together an extraordinary council in the gallery of the palace of
Fontainebleau, to take the matter into consideration. When all the members
were assembled, his majesty requested that some person conversant with
the subject would make a report to him on the origin, progress, and different
forms of the duel. Sully complacently remarks, that none of the councillors
gave the king any great reason to felicitate them on their erudition. In fact,
they all remained silent. Sully held his peace with the rest; but he looked so
knowing, that the king turned towards him, and said:—“Great master! by
your face I conjecture that you know more of this matter than you would
have us believe. I pray you, and indeed I command, that you tell us what
you think and what you know.” The coy minister refused, as he says, out of
mere politeness to his more ignorant colleagues; but, being again pressed by
the king, he entered into a history of duelling both in ancient and modern
times. He has not preserved this history in his Memoirs; and, as none of the
ministers or councillors present thought proper to do so, the world is
deprived of a discourse which was, no doubt, a learned and remarkable one.
The result was, that a royal edict was issued, which Sully lost no time in
transmitting to the most distant provinces, with a distinct notification to all
parties concerned that the king was in earnest, and would exert the full
rigour of the law in punishment of the offenders. Sully himself does not
inform us what were the provisions of the new law; but Father Matthias has
been more explicit, and from him we learn, that the marshals of France
were created judges of a court of chivalry, for the hearing of all causes
wherein the honour of a noble or gentleman was concerned, and that such
as resorted to duelling should be punished by death and confiscation of
property, and that the seconds and assistants should lose their rank, dignity,
or offices, and be banished from the court of their sovereign.60
But so strong a hold had the education and prejudice of his age upon the
mind of the king, that though his reason condemned, his sympathies
approved the duel. Notwithstanding this threatened severity, the number of
duels did not diminish, and the wise Sully had still to lament the prevalence
of an evil which menaced society with utter disorganisation. In the
succeeding reign the practice prevailed, if possible, to a still greater extent,
until the Cardinal de Richelieu, better able to grapple with it than Sully had
been, made some severe examples in the very highest classes. Lord Herbert,
the English ambassador at the court of Louis XIII., repeats, in his letters, an
observation that had been previously made in the reign of Henry IV., that it
was rare to find a Frenchman moving in good society who had not killed his
man in a duel. The Abbé Millot says of this period, that the duel madness
made the most terrible ravages. Men had actually a frenzy for combating.
Caprice and vanity, as well as the excitement of passion, imposed the
necessity of fighting. Friends were obliged to enter into the quarrels of their
friends, or be themselves called out for their refusal, and revenge became
hereditary in many families. It was reckoned that in twenty years eight
thousand letters of pardon had been issued to persons who had killed others
in single combat.61
Other writers confirm this statement. Amelot de Houssaye, in his
Memoirs, says, upon this subject, that duels were so common in the first
years of the reign of Louis XIII., that the ordinary conversation of persons
when they met in the morning was, “Do you know who fought yesterday?”
and after dinner, “Do you know who fought this morning?” The most
infamous duellist at that period was De Bouteville. It was not at all
necessary to quarrel with this assassin, to be forced to fight a duel with him.
When he heard that any one was very brave, he would go to him, and say,
“People tell me that you are brave; you and I must fight together!” Every
morning the most notorious bravos and duellists used to assemble at his
house, to take a breakfast of bread and wine, and practise fencing. M. de
Valençay, who was afterwards elevated to the rank of a cardinal, stood very
high in the estimation of De Bouteville and his gang. Hardly a day passed
but what he was engaged in some duel or other, either as principal or
second; and he once challenged De Bouteville himself, his best friend,
because De Bouteville had fought a duel without inviting him to become his
second. This quarrel was only appeased on the promise of De Bouteville
that, in his next encounter, he would not fail to avail himself of his services.
For that purpose he went out the same day, and picked a quarrel with the
Marquis des Portes. M. de Valençay, according to agreement, had the
pleasure of serving as his second, and of running through the body M. de
Cavois, the second of the Marquis des Portes, a man who had never done
him any injury, and whom he afterwards acknowledged he had never seen
before.
Cardinal Richelieu devoted much attention to this lamentable state of
public morals, and seems to have concurred with his great predecessor
Sully, that nothing but the most rigorous severity could put a stop to the
evil. The subject indeed was painfully forced upon him by his enemies. The
Marquis de Themines, to whom Richelieu, then Bishop of Luçon, had given
offence by some representations he had made to Mary of Medicis,
determined, since he could not challenge an ecclesiastic, to challenge his
brother. An opportunity was soon found. Themines, accosting the Marquis
de Richelieu, complained, in an insulting tone, that the Bishop of Luçon had
broken his faith. The Marquis resented both the manner and matter of his
speech, and readily accepted a challenge. They met in the Rue
d’Angoulême, and the unfortunate Richelieu was stabbed to the heart, and
instantly expired. From that moment the bishop became the steady foe of
the practice of duelling. Reason and the impulse of brotherly love alike
combined to make him detest it, and when his power in France was firmly
established, he set vigorously about repressing it. In his Testament
Politique, he has collected his thoughts upon the subject, in the chapter
entitled “Des moyens d’arrêter les Duels.” In spite of the edicts that he
published, the members of the nobility persisted in fighting upon the most
trivial and absurd pretences. At last Richelieu made a terrible example. The
infamous De Bouteville challenged and fought the Marquis de Beuvron;
and although the duel itself was not fatal to either, its consequences were
fatal to both. High as they were, Richelieu resolved that the law should
reach them both, and they were both tried, found guilty, and beheaded. Thus
did society get rid of one of the most bloodthirsty scoundrels that ever
polluted it.
SULLY.
In 1632 two noblemen fought a duel in which they were both killed. The
officers of justice had notice of the breach of the law, and arrived at the
scene of combat before the friends of the parties had time to remove the
bodies. In conformity with the cardinal’s severe code upon the subject, the
bodies were ignominiously stripped and hanged upon a gallows with their
heads downwards, for several hours, within sight of all the people.62 This
severity sobered the frenzy of the nation for a time; but it was soon
forgotten. Men’s minds were too deeply imbued with a false notion of
honour to be brought to a right way of thinking: by such examples, however
striking, Richelieu was unable to persuade them to walk in the right path,
though he could punish them for choosing the wrong one. He had with all
his acuteness, miscalculated the spirit of duelling. It was not death that a
duellist feared; it was shame, and the contempt of his fellows. As Addison
remarked more than eighty years afterwards, “Death was not sufficient to
deter men who made it their glory to despise it; but if every one who fought
a duel were to stand in the pillory, it would quickly diminish the number of
those imaginary men of honour, and put an end to so absurd a practice.”
Richelieu never thought of this.
Sully says, that in his time the Germans were also much addicted to
duelling. There were three places where it was legal to fight; Witzburg in
Franconia, and Uspach and Halle in Swabia. Thither of course, vast
numbers repaired, and murdered each other under sanction of the law. At an
earlier period in Germany, it was held highly disgraceful to refuse to fight.
Any one who surrendered to his adversary for a simple wound that did not
disable him, was reputed infamous, and could neither cut his beard, bear
arms, mount on horseback, or hold any office in the state. He who fell in a
duel was buried with great pomp and splendour.
In the year 1652, just after Louis XIV. had attained his majority, a
desperate duel was fought between the Dukes de Beaufort and De Nemours,
each attended by four gentlemen. Although brothers-in-law, they had long
been enemies, and their constant dissensions had introduced much
disorganisation among the troops which they severally commanded. Each
had long sought an opportunity for combat, which at last arose on a
misunderstanding relative to the places they were to occupy at the council-
board. They fought with pistols, and, at the first discharge, the Duke de
Nemours was shot through the body, and almost instantly expired. Upon
this the Marquis de Villars, who seconded Nemours, challenged Héricourt,
the second of the Duke de Beaufort, a man whom he had never before seen;
and the challenge being accepted, they fought even more desperately than
their principals. This combat, being with swords, lasted longer than the first,
and was more exciting to the six remaining gentlemen who stayed to
witness it. The result was fatal to Héricourt, who fell pierced to the heart by
the sword of De Villars. Any thing more savage than this can hardly be
imagined. Voltaire says such duels were frequent, and the compiler of the
Dictionnaire d’Anecdotes informs us that the number of seconds was not
fixed. As many as ten, or twelve, or twenty, were not unfrequent, and they
often fought together after their principals were disabled. The highest mark
of friendship one man could manifest towards another, was to choose him
for his second; and many gentlemen were so desirous of serving in this
capacity, that they endeavoured to raise every slight misunderstanding into
a quarrel, that they might have the pleasure of being engaged in it. The
Count de Bussy-Rabutin relates an instance of this in his Memoirs. He says,
that as he was one evening coming out of the theatre, a gentleman named
Bruc, whom he had not before known, stopped him very politely, and,
drawing him aside, asked him if it was true that the Count de Thianges had
called him (Bruc) a drunkard? Bussy replied that he really did not know, for
he saw the count very seldom. “Oh, he is your uncle!” replied Bruc; “and,
as I cannot have satisfaction from him, because he lives so far off in the
country, I apply to you.” “I see what you are at,” replied Bussy, “and, since
you wish to put me in my uncle’s place, I answer, that whoever asserted that
he called you a drunkard, told a lie!” “My brother said so,” replied Bruc,
“and he is a child.” “Horsewhip him, then, for his falsehood,” returned De
Bussy. “I will not have my brother called, a liar,” returned Bruc, determined
to quarrel with him; “so draw, and defend yourself!” They both drew their
swords in the public street, but were separated by the spectators. They
agreed, however, to fight on a future occasion, and with all the regular
forms of the duello. A few days afterwards, a gentleman, whom De Bussy
had never before seen, and whom he did not know even by name, called
upon him and asked if he might have the privilege of serving as his second.
He added, that he neither knew him nor Bruc, except by reputation, but
having made up his mind to be second of one of them, he had decided upon
accompanying De Bussy as the braver man of the two. De Bussy thanked
him very sincerely for his politeness, but begged to be excused, as he had
already engaged four seconds to accompany him, and he was afraid that if
he took any more the affair would become a battle instead of a duel.
When such quarrels as these were looked upon as mere matters of
course, the state of society must have been indeed awful. Louis XIV. very
early saw the evil, and as early determined to remedy it. It was not,
however, till the year 1679, when he instituted the “Chambre Ardente,” for
the trial of the slow poisoners and pretenders to sorcery, that he published
any edict against duelling. In that year his famous edict was promulgated, in
which he reiterated and confirmed the severe enactments of his
predecessors Henry IV. and Louis XIII., and expressed his determination
never to pardon any offender. By this celebrated ordinance a supreme court
of honour was established, composed of the marshals of France. They were
bound, on taking the office, to give to every one who brought a well-
founded complaint before them, such reparation as would satisfy the justice
of the case. Should any gentleman against whom complaint was made
refuse to obey the mandate of the court of honour, he might be punished by
fine and imprisonment; and when that was not possible, by reason of his
absenting himself from the kingdom, his estates might be confiscated till his
return.
Every man who sent a challenge, be the cause of offence what it might,
was deprived of all redress from the court of honour—suspended three
years from the exercise of any office in the state—was further imprisoned
for two years, and sentenced to pay a fine of half his yearly income.
He who accepted a challenge was subject to the same punishment. Any
servant or other person, who knowingly became the bearer of a challenge,
was, if found guilty, sentenced to stand in the pillory and be publicly
whipped for the first offence; and for the second, sent for three years to the
galleys.
Any person who actually fought, was to be held guilty of murder, even
though death did not ensue, and was to be punished accordingly. Persons in
the higher ranks of life were to be beheaded, and those of the middle class
hanged upon a gallows, and their bodies refused Christian burial.
At the same time that Louis published this severe edict, he exacted a
promise from his principal nobility that they would never engage in a duel
on any pretence whatever. He never swerved from his resolution to pursue
all duellists with the utmost rigour, and many were executed in various
parts of the country. A slight abatement of the evil was the consequence,
and in the course of a few years one duel was not fought where twelve had
been fought previously. A medal was struck to commemorate the
circumstance, by the express command of the king. So much had he this
object at heart, that, in his will, he particularly recommended to his
successor the care of his edict against duelling, and warned him against any
ill-judged lenity to those who disobeyed it.
A singular law formerly existed in Malta with regard to duelling. By this
law it was permitted, but only upon condition that the parties should fight in
one particular street. If they presumed to settle their quarrel elsewhere, they
were held guilty of murder, and punished accordingly. What was also very
singular, they were bound, under heavy penalties, to put up their swords
when requested to do so by a priest, a knight, or a woman. It does not
appear, however, that the ladies or the knights exercised this mild and
beneficent privilege to any great extent; the former were too often
themselves the cause of duels, and the latter sympathised too much in the
wounded honour of the combatants to attempt to separate them. The priests
alone were the great peacemakers. Brydone says, that a cross was always
painted on the wall opposite to the spot where a knight had been killed, and
that in the “street of duels” he counted about twenty of them.63
In England the private duel was also practised to a scandalous extent,
towards the end of the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth centuries.
The judicial combat now began to be more rare, but several instances of it
are mentioned in history. One was instituted in the reign of Elizabeth, and
another so late as the time of Charles I. Sir Henry Spelman gives an account
of that which took place in Elizabeth’s reign, which is curious, perhaps the
more so when we consider that it was perfectly legal, and that similar
combats remained so till the year 1819. A proceeding having been instituted
in the Court of Common Pleas for the recovery of certain manorial rights in
the county of Kent, the defendant offered to prove by single combat his
right to retain possession. The plaintiff accepted the challenge, and the
Court having no power to stay the proceedings, agreed to the champions
who were to fight in lieu of the principals. The queen commanded the
parties to compromise; but it being represented to her majesty that they
were justified by law in the course they were pursuing, she allowed them to
proceed. On the day appointed, the justices of the Common Pleas, and all
the counsel engaged in the cause, appeared as umpires of the combat, at a
place in Tothill-fields, where the lists had been prepared. The champions
were ready for the encounter, and the plaintiff and defendant were publicly
called to come forward and acknowledge them. The defendant answered to
his name, and recognised his champion with the due formalities, but the
plaintiff did not appear. Without his presence and authority the combat
could not take place; and his absence being considered an abandonment of
his claim, he was declared to be non-suited, and barred for ever from
renewing his suit before any other tribunal whatever.
LORD BACON.
The queen appears to have disapproved personally of this mode of
settling a disputed claim, but her judges and legal advisers made no attempt
to alter the barbarous law. The practice of private duelling excited more
indignation, from its being of every-day occurrence. In the time of James I.
the English were so infected with the French madness, that Bacon, when he
was attorney-general, lent the aid of his powerful eloquence to effect a
reformation of the evil. Informations were exhibited in the Star Chamber
against two persons, named Priest and Wright, for being engaged, as
principal and second, in a duel, on which occasion he delivered a charge
that was so highly approved of by the Lords of the Council, that they
ordered it to be printed and circulated over the country, as a thing “very
meet and worthy to be remembered and made known unto the world.” He
began by considering the nature and greatness of the mischief of duelling.
“It troubleth peace—it disfurnisheth war—it bringeth calamity upon private
men, peril upon the state, and contempt upon the law. Touching the cause of
it,” he observed, “that the first motive of it, no doubt, is a false and
erroneous imagination of honour and credit; but then, the seed of this
mischief being such, it is nourished by vain discourses and green and unripe
conceits. Hereunto may be added, that men have almost lost the true notion
and understanding of fortitude and valour. For fortitude distinguisheth of
the grounds of quarrel whether they be just; and not only so, but whether
they be worthy, and setteth a better price upon men’s lives than to bestow
them idly. Nay, it is weakness and disesteem of a man’s self to put a man’s
life upon such liedger performances. A man’s life is not to be trifled with; it
is to be offered up and sacrificed to honourable services, public merits,
good causes, and noble adventures. It is in expense of blood as it is in
expense of money. It is no liberality to make a profusion of money upon
every vain occasion, neither is it fortitude to make effusion of blood, except
the cause of it be worth.”64
The most remarkable event connected with duelling in this reign was
that between Lord Sanquir, a Scotch nobleman, and one Turner, a fencing-
master. In a trial of skill between them, his lordship’s eye was accidentally
thrust out by the point of Turner’s sword. Turner expressed great regret at
the circumstance, and Lord Sanquir bore his loss with as much philosophy
as he was master of, and forgave his antagonist. Three years afterwards,
Lord Sanquir was at Paris, where he was a constant visitor at the court of
Henry IV. One day, in the course of conversation, the affable monarch
inquired how he had lost his eye. Sanquir, who prided himself on being the
most expert swordsman of the age, blushed as he replied that it was
inflicted by the sword of a fencing-master. Henry, forgetting his assumed
character of an anti-duellist, carelessly, and as a mere matter of course,
inquired whether the man lived? Nothing more was said; but the query sank
deep into the proud heart of the Scotch baron, who returned shortly
afterwards to England, burning for revenge. His first intent was to challenge
the fencing-master to single combat; but, on further consideration, he
deemed it inconsistent with his dignity to meet him as an equal in fair and
open fight. He therefore hired two bravos, who set upon the fencing-master,
and murdered him in his own house at Whitefriars. The assassins were
taken and executed, and a reward of one thousand pounds offered for the
apprehension of their employer. Lord Sanquir concealed himself for several
days, and then surrendered to take his trial, in the hope (happily false) that
Justice would belie her name, and be lenient to a murderer because he was a
nobleman, who on a false point of honour had thought fit to take revenge
into his own hands. The most powerful intercessions were employed in his
favour, but James, to his credit, was deaf to them all. Bacon, in his character
of attorney-general, prosecuted the prisoner to conviction; and he died the
felon’s death on the 29th of June, 1612, on a gibbet erected in front of the
gate of Westminster Hall.
With regard to the public duel, or trial by battle, demanded under the
sanction of the law, to terminate a quarrel which the ordinary course of
justice could with difficulty decide, Bacon was equally opposed to it, and
thought that in no case should it be granted. He suggested that there should
be declared a constant and settled resolution in the state to abolish it
altogether; that care should be taken that the evil be no more cockered, nor
the humour of it fed, but that all persons found guilty should be rigorously
punished by the Star Chamber, and those of eminent quality banished from
the court.
In the succeeding reign, when Donald Mackay, the first Lord Reay,
accused David Ramsay of treason, in being concerned with the Marquis of
Hamilton in a design upon the crown of Scotland, he was challenged by the
latter to make good his assertion by single combat.65 It had been at first the
intention of the government to try the case by the common law, but Ramsay
thought he would stand a better chance of escape by recurring to the old and
almost exploded custom, but which was still the right of every man in
appeals of treason. Lord Reay readily accepted the challenge, and both were
confined in the Tower until they found security that they would appear on a
certain day appointed by the court to determine the question. The
management of the affair was delegated to the Marischal Court of
Westminster, and the Earl of Lindsay was created Lord Constable of
England for the purpose. Shortly before the day appointed, Ramsay
confessed in substance all that Lord Reay had laid to his charge, upon
which Charles I. put a stop to the proceedings.
But in England, about this period, sterner disputes arose among men
than those mere individual matters which generate duels. The men of the
Commonwealth encouraged no practice of the kind, and the subdued
aristocracy carried their habits and prejudices elsewhere, and fought their
duels at foreign courts. Cromwell’s parliament, however—although the evil
at that time was not so crying—published an order in 1654 for the
prevention of duels, and the punishment of all concerned in them. Charles
II., on his restoration, also issued a proclamation upon the subject. In his
reign an infamous duel was fought—infamous not only from its own
circumstances, but from the lenity that was shewn to the principal
offenders.
The worthless Duke of Buckingham, having debauched the Countess of
Shrewsbury, was challenged by her husband to mortal combat in January
1668. Charles II. endeavoured to prevent the duel, not from any regard to
public morality, but from fear for the life of his favourite. He gave
commands to the Duke of Albemarle to confine Buckingham to his house,
or take some other measures to prevent him from fighting. Albemarle
neglected the order, thinking that the king himself might prevent the combat
by some surer means. The meeting took place at Barn Elms; the injured
Shrewsbury being attended by Sir John Talbot, his relative, and Lord
Bernard Howard, son of the Earl of Arundel. Buckingham was
accompanied by two of his dependents, Captain Holmes and Sir John
Jenkins. According to the barbarous custom of the age, not only the
principals, but the seconds engaged each other. Jenkins was pierced to the
heart, and left dead upon the field, and Sir John Talbot severely wounded in
both arms. Buckingham himself escaping with slight wounds, ran his
unfortunate antagonist through the body, and then left the field with the
wretched woman, the cause of all the mischief, who, in the dress of a page,
awaited the issue of the conflict in a neighbouring wood, holding her
paramour’s horse to avoid suspicion. Great influence was exerted to save
the guilty parties from punishment, and the master, as base as the favourite,
made little difficulty in granting a free pardon to all concerned. In a royal
proclamation issued shortly afterwards, Charles II. formally pardoned the
murderers, but declared his intention never to extend in future any mercy to
such offenders. It would be hard, after this, to say who was the most
infamous, the king, the favourite, or the courtesan.
In the reign of Queen Anne, repeated complaints were made of the
prevalence of duelling. Addison, Swift, Steele, and other writers employed
their powerful pens in reprobation of it. Steele especially, in the Tatler and
Guardian, exposed its impiety and absurdity, and endeavoured both by
argument and by ridicule to bring his countrymen to a right way of
thinking.66 His comedy of The Conscious Lovers contains an admirable
exposure of the abuse of the word honour, which led men into an error so
lamentable. Swift, writing upon the subject, remarked that he could see no
harm in rogues and fools shooting each other. Addison and Steele took
higher ground; and the latter, in the Guardian, summed up nearly all that
could be said upon the subject in the following impressive words:—“A
Christian and a gentleman are made inconsistent appellations of the same
person. You are not to expect eternal life if you do not forgive injuries, and
your mortal life is rendered uncomfortable if you are not ready to commit a
murder in resentment of an affront; for good sense, as well as religion, is so
utterly banished the world, that men glory in their very passions, and pursue
trifles with the utmost vengeance, so little do they know that to forgive is
the most arduous pitch human nature can arrive at. A coward has often
fought, a coward has often conquered; but a coward never forgave.” Steele
also published a pamphlet, in which he gave a detailed account of the edict
of Louis XIV., and the measures taken by that monarch to cure his subjects
of their murderous folly.
On the 8th of May, 1711, Sir Cholmely Deering, M.P. for the county of
Kent, was slain in a duel by Mr. Richard Thornhill, also a member of the
House of Commons. Three days afterwards, Sir Peter King brought the
subject under the notice of the legislature; and after dwelling at
considerable length on the alarming increase of the practice, obtained leave
to bring in a bill for the prevention and punishment of duelling. It was read
a first time that day, and ordered for a second reading in the ensuing week.
About the same time, the attention of the Upper House of Parliament
was also drawn to the subject in the most painful manner. Two of its most
noted members would have fought had it not been that Queen Anne
received notice of their intention, and exacted a pledge that they would
desist; while a few months afterwards two other of its members lost their
lives in one of the most remarkable duels upon record. The first affair,
which happily terminated without a meeting, was between the Duke of
Marlborough and the Earl Pawlet; the latter and fatal encounter was
between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord Mohun.
The first arose out of a debate in the Lords upon the conduct of the
Duke of Ormond in refusing to hazard a general engagement with the
enemy, in which Earl Pawlet remarked that nobody could doubt the courage
of the Duke of Ormond. “He was not like a certain general, who led troops
to the slaughter, to cause great numbers of officers to be knocked on the
head in a battle, or against stone walls, in order to fill his pockets by
disposing of their commissions.” Every one felt that the remark was aimed
at the Duke of Marlborough, but he remained silent, though evidently
suffering in mind. Soon after the House broke up, the Earl Pawlet received
a visit from Lord Mohun, who told him that the Duke of Marlborough was
anxious to come to an explanation with him relative to some expressions he
had made use of in that day’s debate, and therefore prayed him to “go and
take a little air in the country.” Earl Pawlet did not affect to misunderstand
the hint, but asked him in plain terms whether he brought a challenge from
the duke. Lord Mohun said his message needed no explanation, and that he
[Lord Mohun] would accompany the Duke of Marlborough. He then took
his leave, and Earl Pawlet returned home and told his lady that he was
going out to fight a duel with the Duke of Marlborough. His lady, alarmed
for her lord’s safety, gave notice of his intention to the Earl of Dartmouth,
who immediately, in the queen’s name, sent to the Duke of Marlborough,
and commanded him not to stir abroad. He also caused Earl Pawlet’s house
to be guarded by two sentinels; and having taken these precautions,
informed the queen of the whole affair. Her Majesty sent at once for the
duke, expressed her abhorrence of the custom of duelling, and required his
word of honour that he would proceed no further. The duke pledged his
word accordingly, and the affair terminated.
The lamentable duel between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord Mohun
took place in November 1712, and sprang from the following
circumstances. A lawsuit had been pending for eleven years between these
two noblemen, and they looked upon each other in consequence with a
certain degree of coldness. They met together on the 13th of November in
the chambers of Mr. Orlebar, a master in Chancery, when, in the course of
conversation, the Duke of Hamilton reflected upon the conduct of one of
the witnesses in the cause, saying that he was a person who had neither
truth nor justice in him. Lord Mohun, somewhat nettled at this remark
applied to a witness favourable to his side, made answer hastily, that Mr.
Whiteworth, the person alluded to, had quite as much truth and justice in
him as the Duke of Hamilton. The duke made no reply, and no one present
imagined that he took offence at what was said; and when he went out of
the room he made a low and courteous salute to the Lord Mohun. In the
evening, General Macartney called twice upon the duke with a challenge
from Lord Mohun, and failing in seeing him, sought him a third time at a
tavern, where he found him, and delivered his message. The duke accepted
the challenge, and the day after the morrow, which was Sunday, the 15th of
November, at seven in the morning, was appointed for the meeting.
At that hour they assembled in Hyde Park, the duke being attended by
his relative Colonel Hamilton, and the Lord Mohun by General Macartney.
They jumped over a ditch into a place called the Nursery, and prepared for
the combat. The Duke of Hamilton, turning to General Macartney, said,
“Sir, you are the cause of this, let the event be what it will.” Lord Mohun
did not wish that the seconds should engage, but the duke insisted that
“Macartney should have a share in the dance.” All being ready, the two
principals took up their positions, and fought with swords so desperately,
that after a short time they both fell down mortally wounded. The Lord
Mohun expired upon the spot, and the Duke of Hamilton in the arms of his
servants as they were carrying him to his coach.
This unhappy termination caused the greatest excitement not only in the
metropolis, but all over the country. The Tories, grieved at the loss of the
Duke of Hamilton, charged the fatal combat on the Whig party, whose
leader, the Duke of Marlborough, had so recently set the example of
political duels. They called Lord Mohun the bully of the Whig faction (he
had already killed three men in duels, and been twice tried for murder), and
asserted openly that the quarrel was concocted between him and General
Macartney to rob the country of the services of the Duke of Hamilton by
murdering him. It was also asserted that the wound of which the duke died
was not inflicted by Lord Mohun, but by Macartney; and every means was
used to propagate this belief. Colonel Hamilton, against whom and
Macartney the coroner’s jury had returned a verdict of wilful murder,
surrendered a few days afterwards, and was examined before a privy
council sitting at the house of Lord Dartmouth. He then deposed, that
seeing Lord Mohun fall, and the duke upon him, he ran to the duke’s
assistance; and that he might with the more ease help him, he flung down
both their swords, and as he was raising the duke up, he saw Macartney
make a push at him. Upon this deposition, a royal proclamation was
immediately issued, offering a reward of 500l. for the apprehension of
Macartney, to which the Duchess of Hamilton afterwards added a reward of
300l.
Upon the further examination of Colonel Hamilton, it was found that
reliance could not be placed on all his statements, and that he contradicted
himself in several important particulars. He was arraigned at the old Bailey
for the murder of Lord Mohun, the whole political circles of London being
in a fever of excitement for the result. All the Tory party prayed for his
acquittal, and a Tory mob surrounded the doors and all the avenues leading
to the court of justice for many hours before the trial began. The
examination of witnesses lasted seven hours. The criminal still persisted in
accusing General Macartney of the murder of the Duke of Hamilton, but in
other respects, say the newspapers of the day, prevaricated foully. He was
found guilty of manslaughter. This favourable verdict was received with
universal applause, “not only from the court and all the gentlemen present,
but the common people shewed a mighty satisfaction, which they testified
by loud and repeated huzzas.”67
As the popular delirium subsided, and men began to reason coolly upon
the subject, they disbelieved the assertions of Colonel Hamilton that
Macartney had stabbed the duke, although it was universally admitted that
he had been much too busy and presuming. Hamilton was shunned by all
his former companions, and his life rendered so irksome to him, that he sold
out of the Guards and retired to private life, in which he died heart-broken
four years afterwards.
General Macartney surrendered about the same time, and was tried for
murder in the Court of King’s Bench. He was, however, found guilty of
manslaughter only.
At the opening of the session of Parliament of 1713, the queen made
pointed allusion in her speech to the frequency of duelling, and
recommended to the legislature to devise some speedy and effectual remedy
for it. A bill to that effect was brought forward, but thrown out on the
second reading, to the very great regret of all the sensible portion of the
community.
A famous duel was fought in 1765 between Lord Byron and Mr.
Chaworth. The dispute arose at a club-dinner, and was relative to which of
the two had the largest quantity of game on his estates. Infuriated by wine
and passion, they retired instantly into an adjoining room, and fought with
swords across a table, by the feeble glimmer of a tallow candle. Mr.
Chaworth, who was the more expert swordsman of the two, received a
mortal wound, and shortly afterwards expired. Lord Byron was brought to
trial for the murder before the House of Lords; and it appearing clearly that
the duel was not premeditated, but fought at once, and in the heat of
passion, he was found guilty of manslaughter only, and ordered to be
discharged upon payment of his fees. This was a very bad example for the
country, and duelling of course fell into no disrepute after such a verdict.
In France more severity was exercised. In the year 1769, the Parliament
of Grenoble took cognisance of the delinquency of the Sieur Duchelas, one
of its members, who challenged and killed in a duel a captain of the Flemish
legion. The servant of Duchelas officiated as second, and was arraigned
with his master for the murder of the captain. They were both found guilty.
Duchelas was broken alive on the wheel, and the servant condemned to the
galleys for life.
A barbarous and fiercely-contested duel was fought in November 1778,
between two foreign adventurers, at Bath, named Count Rice and the
Vicomte du Barri. Some dispute arose relative to a gambling transaction, in
the course of which Du Barri contradicted an assertion of the other, by
saying “That is not true!” Count Rice immediately asked him if he knew the
very disagreeable meaning of the words he had employed. Du Barri said he
was perfectly well aware of their meaning, and that Rice might interpret
them just as he pleased. A challenge was immediately given and accepted.
Seconds were sent for, who, arriving with but little delay, the whole party,
though it was not long after midnight, proceeded to a place called Claverton
Down, where they remained with a surgeon until daylight. They then
prepared for the encounter, each being armed with two pistols and a sword.
The ground having been marked out by the seconds, Du Barri fired first,
and wounded his opponent in the thigh. Count Rice then levelled his pistol,
and shot Du Barri mortally in the breast. So angry were the combatants, that
they refused to desist; both stepped back a few paces, and then rushing
forward, discharged their second pistols at each other. Neither shot took
effect, and both throwing away their pistols, prepared to finish the
sanguinary struggle by the sword. They took their places, and were
advancing towards each other, when the Vicomte du Barri suddenly
staggered, grew pale, and, falling on the ground, exclaimed, “Je vous
demande ma vie.” His opponent had but just time to answer, that he granted
it, when the unfortunate Du Barri turned upon the grass, and expired with a
heavy groan. The survivor of this savage conflict was then removed to his
lodgings, where he lay for some weeks in a dangerous state. The coroner’s
jury, in the mean while, sat upon the body of Du Barri, and disgraced
themselves by returning a verdict of manslaughter only. Count Rice, upon
his recovery, was indicted for the murder notwithstanding this verdict. On
his trial he entered into a long defence of his conduct, pleading the fairness
of the duel, and its unpremeditated nature; and, at the same time, expressing
his deep regret for the unfortunate death of Du Barri, with whom for many
years he had been bound in ties of the strictest friendship. These
considerations appear to have weighed with the jury, and this fierce duellist
was again found guilty of manslaughter only, and escaped with a merely
nominal punishment.
A duel, less remarkable from its circumstances, but more so from the
rank of the parties, took place in 1789. The combatants on this occasion
were the Duke of York and Colonel Lenox, the nephew and heir of the
Duke of Richmond. The cause of offence was given by the Duke of York,
who had said in presence of several officers of the Guards, that words had
been used to Colonel Lenox at Daubigny’s to which no gentleman ought to
have submitted. Colonel Lenox went up to the duke on parade, and asked
him publicly whether he had made such an assertion. The Duke of York,
without answering his question, coldly ordered him to his post. When
parade was over, he took an opportunity of saying publicly in the orderly-
room before Colonel Lenox, that he desired no protection from his rank as a
prince and his station as commanding officer; adding that, when he was off
duty he wore a plain brown coat like a private gentleman, and was ready as
such to give satisfaction. Colonel Lenox desired nothing better than
satisfaction; that is to say, to run the chance of shooting the duke through
the body, or being himself shot. He accordingly challenged his Royal
Highness, and they met on Wimbledon Common. Colonel Lenox fired first,
and the ball whizzed past the head of his opponent, so near to it as to graze
his projecting curl. The duke refused to return the fire, and the seconds
interfering, the affair terminated.
Colonel Lenox was very shortly afterwards engaged in another duel
arising out of this. A Mr. Swift wrote a pamphlet in reference to the dispute
between him and the Duke of York, at some expressions in which he took
so much offence, as to imagine that nothing but a shot at the writer could
atone for them. They met on the Uxbridge Road, but no damage was done
to either party.
The Irish were for a long time renowned for their love of duelling. The
slightest offence which it is possible to imagine that one man could offer to
another was sufficient to provoke a challenge. Sir Jonah Barrington relates,
in his Memoirs, that, previous to the Union, during the time of a disputed
election in Dublin, it was no unusual thing for three-and-twenty duels to be
fought in a day. Even in times of less excitement, they were so common as
to be deemed unworthy of note by the regular chroniclers of events, except
in cases where one or both of the combatants were killed.
In those days, in Ireland, it was not only the man of the military, but of
every profession, who had to work his way to eminence with the sword or
the pistol. Each political party had its regular corps of bullies, or fire-eaters,
as they were called, who qualified themselves for being the pests of society
by spending all their spare time in firing at targets. They boasted that they
could hit an opponent in any part of his body they pleased, and made up
their minds before the encounter began whether they should kill him,
disable, or disfigure him for life—lay him on a bed of suffering for a
twelvemonth, or merely graze a limb.
The evil had reached an alarming height, when, in the year 1808, an
opportunity was offered to King George III. of shewing in a striking manner
his detestation of the practice, and of setting an example to the Irish that
such murders were not to be committed with impunity. A dispute arose, in
the month of June 1807, between Major Campbell and Captain Boyd,
officers of the 21st regiment, stationed in Ireland, about the proper manner
of giving the word of command on parade. Hot words ensued on this slight
occasion, and the result was a challenge from Campbell to Boyd. They
retired into the mess-room shortly afterwards, and each stationed himself at
a corner, the distance obliquely being but seven paces. Here, without friends
or seconds being present, they fired at each other, and Captain Boyd fell
mortally wounded between the fourth and fifth ribs. A surgeon, who came
in shortly, found him sitting in a chair, vomiting and suffering great agony.
He was led into another room, Major Campbell following, in great distress
and perturbation of mind. Boyd survived but eighteen hours, and just before
his death, said, in reply to a question from his opponent, that the duel was
not fair, and added, “You hurried me, Campbell—you’re a bad
man.”—“Good God!” replied Campbell, “will you mention before these
gentlemen, was not every thing fair? Did you not say that you were ready?”
Boyd answered faintly, “Oh, no! you know I wanted you to wait and have
friends.” On being again asked whether all was fair, the dying man faintly
murmured, “Yes:” but in a minute after, he said, “You’re a bad man!”
Campbell was now in great agitation, and ringing his hands convulsively, he
exclaimed, “Oh, Boyd! you are the happiest man of the two! Do you forgive
me?” Boyd replied, “I forgive you—I feel for you, as I know you do for
me.” He shortly afterwards expired, and Major Campbell made his escape
from Ireland, and lived for some months with his family under an assumed
name, in the neighbourhood of Chelsea. He was, however, apprehended,
and brought to trial at Armagh, in August 1808. He said while in prison,
that, if found guilty of murder, he should suffer as an example to duellists in
Ireland; but he endeavoured to buoy himself up with the hope that the jury
would only convict him of manslaughter. It was proved in evidence upon
the trial, that the duel was not fought immediately after the offence was
given, but that Major Campbell went home and drank tea with his family
before he sought Boyd for the fatal encounter. The jury returned a verdict of
wilful murder against him, but recommended him to mercy on the ground
that the duel had been a fair one. He was condemned to die on the Monday
following, but was afterwards respited for a few days longer. In the mean
time the greatest exertions were made in his behalf. His unfortunate wife
went upon her knees before the Prince of Wales, to move him to use his
influence with the king in favour of her unhappy husband. Every thing a
fond wife and a courageous woman could do she tried, to gain the royal
clemency; but George III. was inflexible, in consequence of the
representations of the Irish viceroy that an example was necessary. The law
was therefore allowed to take its course, and the victim of a false spirit of
honour died the death of a felon.
The most inveterate duellists of the present day are the students in the
Universities of Germany. They fight on the most frivolous pretences, and
settle with swords and pistols the schoolboy disputes which in other
countries are arranged by the more harmless medium of the fisticuffs. It was
at one time the custom among these savage youths to prefer the sword-
combat, for the facility it gave them of cutting off the noses of their
opponents. To disfigure them in this manner was an object of ambition, and
the German duellists reckoned the number of these disgusting trophies
which they had borne away, with as much satisfaction as a successful
general the provinces he had reduced or the cities he had taken.
But it would be wearisome to enter into the minute detail of all the duels
of modern times. If an examination were made into the general causes
which produced them, it would be found that in every case they had been
either of the most trivial or the most unworthy nature. Parliamentary duels
were at one time very common, and amongst the names of those who have
soiled a great reputation by conforming to the practice, may be mentioned
those of Warren Hastings, Sir Philip Francis, Wilkes, Pitt, Fox, Grattan,
Curran, Tierney, and Canning. So difficult is it even for the superior mind to
free itself from the trammels with which foolish opinion has enswathed it—
not one of these celebrated persons who did not in his secret soul condemn
the folly to which he lent himself. The bonds of reason, though iron-strong,
are easily burst through; but those of folly, though lithe and frail as the
rushes by a stream, defy the stoutest heart to snap them asunder. Colonel
Thomas, an officer in the Guards, who was killed in a duel, added the
following clause to his will the night before he died:—“In the first place, I
commit my soul to Almighty God, in hope of his mercy and pardon for the
irreligious step I now (in compliance with the unwarrantable customs of this
wicked world) put myself under the necessity of taking.” How many have
been in the same state of mind as this wise, foolish man! He knew his error,
and abhorred it, but could not resist it for fear of the opinion of the
prejudiced and unthinking. No other could have blamed him for refusing to
fight a duel.
The list of duels that have sprung from the most degrading causes might
be stretched out to an almost indefinite extent. Sterne’s father fought a duel
about a goose; and the great Raleigh about a tavern-bill.68 Scores of duels
(many of them fatal) have been fought from disputes at cards, or a place at a
theatre; while hundreds of challenges, given and accepted over-night, in a
fit of drunkenness, have been fought out the next morning to the death of
one or both of the antagonists.
Two of the most notorious duels of modern times had their origin in
causes no more worthy than the quarrel of a dog and the favour of a
prostitute: that between Macnamara and Montgomery arising from the
former; and that between Best and Lord Camelford from the latter. The dog
of Montgomery attacked a dog belonging to Macnamara, and each master
interfering in behalf of his own animal, high words ensued. The result was
the giving and accepting a challenge to mortal combat. The parties met on
the following day, when Montgomery was shot dead, and his antagonist
severely wounded. The affair created a great sensation at the time, and
Heaviside, the surgeon who attended at the fatal field to render his
assistance if necessary, was arrested as an accessory to the murder, and
committed to Newgate.
In the duel between Best and Lord Camelford, two pistols were used
which were considered to be the best in England. One of them was thought
slightly superior to the other, and it was agreed that the belligerents should
toss up a piece of money to decide the choice of weapons. Best gained it,
and at the first discharge, Lord Camelford fell mortally wounded. But little
sympathy was expressed for his fate; he was a confirmed duellist, had been
engaged in many meetings of the kind, and the blood of more than one
fellow-creature lay at his door. As he had sowed, so did he reap; and the
violent man met an appropriate death.
It now only remains to notice the means that have been taken to stay the
prevalence of this madness of false honour in the various countries of the
civilised world. The efforts of the governments of France and England have
already been mentioned, and their want of success is but too well known.
The same efforts have been attended with the same results elsewhere. In
despotic countries, where the will of the monarch has been strongly
expressed and vigorously supported, a diminution of the evil has for a time
resulted, but only to be increased again, when death relaxed the iron grasp,
and a successor appeared of less decided opinions on the subject. This was
the case in Prussia, under the great Frederick, of whose aversion to duelling
a popular anecdote is recorded. It is stated of him that he permitted duelling
in his army, but only upon the condition that the combatants should fight in
presence of a whole battalion of infantry, drawn up on purpose to see fair
play. The latter received strict orders, when one of the belligerents fell, to
shoot the other immediately. It is added, that the known determination of
the king effectually put a stop to the practice.
The Emperor Joseph II. of Austria was as firm as Frederick, although
the measures he adopted were not so singular. The following letter explains
his views on the subject:
“To General * * * * *
“My General,
“You will immediately arrest the Count of K. and Captain W. The
count is young, passionate, and influenced by wrong notions of birth
and a false spirit of honour. Captain W. is an old soldier, who will
adjust every dispute with the sword and pistol, and who has received
the challenge of the young count with unbecoming warmth.
“I will suffer no duelling in my army. I despise the principles of
those who attempt to justify the practice, and who would run each
other through the body in cold blood.
“When I have officers who bravely expose themselves to every
danger in facing the enemy—who at all times exhibit courage, valour,
and resolution in attack and defence, I esteem them highly. The
coolness with which they meet death on such occasions is serviceable
to their country, and at the same time redounds to their own honour;
but should there be men amongst them who are ready to sacrifice
every thing to their vengeance and hatred, I despise them. I consider
such a man as no better than a Roman gladiator.
“Order a court-martial to try the two officers. Investigate the
subject of their dispute with that impartiality which I demand from
every judge; and he that is guilty, let him be a sacrifice to his fate and
the laws.
“Such a barbarous custom, which suits the age of the Tamerlanes
and Bajazets, and which has often had such melancholy effects on
single families, I will have suppressed and punished, even if it should
deprive me of one half of my officers. There are still men who know
how to unite the character of a hero with that of a good subject; and he
only can be so who respects the laws.
“August, 1771.69
Joseph.”
In the United States of America the code varies considerably. In one or
two of the still wild and simple states of the far West, where no duel has yet
been fought, there is no specific law upon the subject beyond that in the
Decalogue, which says, “Thou shalt do no murder;” but duelling every
where follows the steps of modern civilisation; and by the time the
backwoodsman is transformed into the citizen, he has imbibed the false
notions of honour which are prevalent in Europe and around him, and is
ready, like his progenitors, to settle his differences with the pistol. In the
majority of the States the punishment for challenging, fighting, or acting as
second, is solitary imprisonment and hard labour for any period less than a
year, and disqualification for serving any public office for twenty years. In
Vermont the punishment is total disqualification for office, deprivation of
the rights of citizenship, and a fine; in fatal cases, the same punishment as
that of murderers. In Rhode Island, the combatant, though death does not
ensue, is liable to be carted to the gallows, with a rope about his neck, and
to sit in this trim for an hour exposed to the peltings of the mob. He may be
further imprisoned for a year, at the option of the magistrate. In Connecticut
the punishment is total disqualification for office or employ, and a fine
varying from one hundred to a thousand dollars. The laws of Illinois require
certain officers of the state to make oath, previous to their instalment, that
they have never been, nor ever will be, concerned in a duel.70
Amongst the edicts against duelling, promulgated at various times in
Europe, may be mentioned that of Augustus King of Poland, in 1712, which
decreed the punishment of death against principals and seconds, and minor
punishments against the bearers of a challenge. An edict was also published
at Munich, in 1773, according to which both principals and seconds, even in
duels where no one was either killed or wounded, should be hanged, and
their bodies buried at the foot of the gallows.
The king of Naples issued an ordinance against duelling in 1838, in
which the punishment of death is decreed against all concerned in a fatal
duel. The bodies of those killed, and of those who may be executed in
consequence, are to be buried in unconsecrated ground, and without any
religious ceremony; nor is any monument to be erected on the spot. The
punishment for duels in which either, or both, are wounded, and for those in
which no damage whatever is done, varies according to the case, and
consists of fine, imprisonment, loss of rank and honours, and incapacity for
filling any public situation. Bearers of challenges may also be punished
with fine and imprisonment.
It might be imagined that enactments so severe all over the civilised
world would finally eradicate a custom, the prevalence of which every wise
and good man must deplore. But the frowns of the law never yet have
taught, and never will teach, men to desist from this practice, as long as it is
felt that the lawgiver sympathises with it in his heart. The stern judge upon
the bench may say to the unfortunate wight who has been called a liar by
some unmannerly opponent, “If you challenge him, you meditate murder,
and are guilty of murder!” but the same judge, divested of his robes of state,
and mixing in the world with other men, would say, “If you do not
challenge him, if you do not run the risk of making yourself a murderer, you
will be looked upon as a mean-spirited wretch, unfit to associate with your
fellows, and deserving nothing but their scorn and their contempt!” It is
society, and not the duellist, who is to blame. Female influence too, which
is so powerful in leading men either to good or to evil, takes in this case the
evil part. Mere animal bravery has, unfortunately, such charms in the female
eye, that a successful duellist is but too often regarded as a sort of hero; and
the man who refuses to fight, though of truer courage, is thought a poltroon,
who may be trampled on. Mr. Graves, a member of the American
legislature, who, early in 1838, killed a Mr. Cilley in a duel, truly and
eloquently said, on the floor of the House of Representatives, when
lamenting the unfortunate issue of that encounter, that society was more to
blame than he was. “Public opinion,” said the repentant orator, “is
practically the paramount law of the land. Every other law, both human and
divine, ceases to be observed; yea, withers and perishes in contact with it. It
was this paramount law of this nation and of this House that forced me,
under the penalty of dishonour, to subject myself to the code, which
impelled me unwillingly into this tragical affair. Upon the heads of this
nation, and at the doors of this House, rests the blood with which my
unfortunate hands have been stained!”
As long as society is in this mood; as long as it thinks that the man who
refuses to resent an insult, deserved that insult, and should be scouted
accordingly; so long, it is to be feared, will duelling exist, however severe
the laws may be. Men must have redress for injuries inflicted; and when
those injuries are of such a nature that no tribunal will take cognisance of
them, the injured will take the law into their own hands, and right
themselves in the opinion of their fellows, at the hazard of their lives. Much
as the sage may affect to despise the opinion of the world, there are few
who would not rather expose their lives a hundred times than be condemned
to live on, in society, but not of it—a by-word of reproach to all who know
their history, and a mark for scorn to point his finger at.
The only practicable means for diminishing the force of a custom which
is the disgrace of civilisation, seems to be the establishment of a court of
honour, which should take cognisance of all those delicate and almost
intangible offences which yet wound so deeply. The court established by
Louis XIV. might be taken as a model. No man now fights a duel when a fit
apology has been offered; and it should be the duty of this court to weigh
dispassionately the complaint of every man injured in his honour, either by
word or deed, and to force the offender to make a public apology. If he
refused the apology, he would be the breaker of a second law; an offender
against a high court, as well as against the man he had injured, and might be
punished with fine and imprisonment, the latter to last until he saw the error
of his conduct, and made the concession which the court demanded.
If, after the establishment of this tribunal, men should be found of a
nature so bloodthirsty as not to be satisfied with its peaceful decisions, and
should resort to the old and barbarous mode of an appeal to the pistol, some
means might be found of dealing with them. To hang them as murderers
would be of no avail; for to such men death would have few terrors. Shame
alone would bring them to reason. Transportation, the tread-wheel, or a
public whipping, would perhaps be sufficient.
Relics
Table of Contents
A fouth o’ auld knick-knackets,
Rusty airn caps and jinglin’ jackets,
Wad hand the Lothians three, in tackets,
A towmond guid;
An’ parritch pats, and auld saut backets,
Afore the flood.
Burns.
The love for relics is one which will never be eradicated as long as feeling
and affection are denizens of the heart. It is a love which is most easily
excited in the best and kindliest natures, and which few are callous enough
to scoff at. Who would not treasure the lock of hair that once adorned the
brow of the faithful wife now cold in death, or that hung down the neck of a
beloved infant now sleeping under the sward? Not one! They are home-
relics, whose sacred worth is intelligible to all: spoils rescued from the
devouring grave, which to the affectionate are beyond all price. How dear to
a forlorn survivor the book over whose pages he has pored with one
departed! How much greater its value, if that hand, now cold, had written a
thought, an opinion, or a name, upon the leaf! Besides these sweet domestic
relics, there are others which no one can condemn: relics sanctified by that
admiration of greatness and goodness which is akin to love; such as the
copy of Montaigne’s Florio, with the name of Shakspeare upon the leaf,
written by the poet of all time himself; the chair preserved at Antwerp, in
which Rubens sat when he painted the immortal Descent from the Cross; or
the telescope, preserved in the Museum of Florence, which aided Galileo in
his sublime discoveries. Who would not look with veneration upon the
undoubted arrow of William Tell—the swords of Wallace or of Hampden—
or the Bible whose leaves were turned by some stern old father of the faith?
Thus the principle of reliquism is hallowed and enshrined by love. But
from this germ of purity how numerous the progeny of errors and
superstitions! Men, in their admiration of the great, and of all that
appertained to them, have forgotten that goodness is a component part of
true greatness, and have made fools of themselves for the jawbone of a
saint, the toe-nail of an apostle, the handkerchief a king blew his nose in, or
the rope that hanged a criminal. Desiring to rescue some slight token from
the graves of their predecessors, they have confounded the famous and the
infamous, the renowned and the notorious. Great saints, great sinners; great
philosophers, great quacks; great conquerors, great murderers; great
ministers, great thieves; each and all have had their admirers, ready to
ransack earth, from the equator to either pole, to find a relic of them.
The reliquism of modern times dates its origin from the centuries
immediately preceding the Crusades. The first pilgrims to the Holy Land
brought back to Europe thousands of apocryphal relics, in the purchase of
which they had expended all their store. The greatest favourite was the
wood of the true cross, which, like the oil of the widow, never diminished.
It is generally asserted, in the traditions of the Romish Church, that the
Empress Helen, the mother of Constantine the Great, first discovered the
veritable “true cross” in her pilgrimage to Jerusalem. The Emperor
Theodosius made a present of the greater part of it to St. Ambrose, Bishop
of Milan, by whom it was studded with precious stones, and deposited in
the principal church of that city. It was carried away by the Huns, by whom
it was burnt, after they had extracted the valuable jewels it contained.
Fragments, purporting to have been cut from it, were, in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, to be found in almost every church in Europe, and would,
if collected together in one place, have been almost sufficient to have built a
cathedral. Happy was the sinner who could get a sight of one of them;
happier he who possessed one! To obtain them the greatest dangers were
cheerfully braved. They were thought to preserve from all evils, and to cure
the most inveterate diseases. Annual pilgrimages were made to the shrines
that contained them, and considerable revenues collected from the devotees.
Next in renown were those precious relics, the tears of the Saviour. By
whom and in what manner they were preserved, the pilgrims did not
inquire. Their genuineness was vouched by the Christians of the Holy Land,
and that was sufficient. Tears of the Virgin Mary, and tears of St. Peter, were
also to be had, carefully enclosed in little caskets, which the pious might
wear in their bosoms. After the tears the next most precious relics were
drops of the blood of Jesus and the martyrs, and the milk of the Virgin
Mary. Hair and toe-nails were also in great repute, and were sold at
extravagant prices. Thousands of pilgrims annually visited Palestine in the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, to purchase pretended relics for the home
market. The majority of them had no other means of subsistence than the
profits thus obtained. Many a nail, cut from the filthy foot of some
unscrupulous ecclesiastic, was sold at a diamond’s price, within six months
after its severance from its parent toe, upon the supposition that it had once
belonged to a saint or an apostle. Peter’s toes were uncommonly prolific,
for there were nails enough in Europe, at the time of the Council of
Clermont, to have filled a sack, all of which were devoutly believed to have
grown on the sacred feet of that great apostle. Some of them are still shewn
in the cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle. The pious come from a distance of a
hundred German miles to feast their eyes upon them.
At Port Royal, in Paris, is kept with great care a thorn, which the priests
of that seminary assert to be one of the identical thorns that bound the holy
head of the Son of God. How it came there, and by whom it was preserved,
has never been explained. This is the famous thorn, celebrated in the long
dissensions of the Jansenists and the Molenists, and which worked the
miraculous cure upon Mademoiselle Perrier: by merely kissing it she was
cured of a disease of the eyes of long standing.71
What traveller is unacquainted with the Santa Scala, or Holy Stairs, at
Rome? They were brought from Jerusalem along with the true cross, by the
Empress Helen, and were taken from the house which, according to popular
tradition, was inhabited by Pontius Pilate. They are said to be the steps
which Jesus ascended and descended when brought into the presence of the
Roman governor. They are held in the greatest veneration at Rome: it is
sacrilegious to walk upon them. The knees of the faithful must alone touch
them in ascending or descending, and that only after the pilgrims have
reverentially kissed them.
Europe still swarms with these religious relics. There is hardly a Roman
Catholic church in Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, or Belgium, without one
or more of them. Even the poorly endowed churches of the villages boast
the possession of miraculous thigh-bones of the innumerable saints of the
Romish calendar. Aix-la-Chapelle is proud of the veritable châsse, or thigh-
bone of Charlemagne, which cures lameness. Halle has a thigh-bone of the
Virgin Mary; Spain has seven or eight, all said to be undoubted relics.
Brussels at one time preserved, and perhaps does now, the teeth of St.
Gudule. The faithful, who suffered from the toothache, had only to pray,
look at them, and be cured. Some of these holy bones have been buried in
different parts of the Continent. After a certain lapse of time, water is said to
ooze from them, which soon forms a spring, and cures all the diseases of
the faithful.
It is curious to remark the avidity manifested in all ages, and in all
countries, to obtain possession of some relic of any persons who have been
much spoken of, even for their crimes. When William Longbeard, leader of
the populace of London in the reign of Richard I., was hanged at
Smithfield, the utmost eagerness was shewn to obtain a hair from his head,
or a shred from his garments. Women came from Essex, Kent, Suffolk,
Sussex, and all the surrounding counties, to collect the mould at the foot of
his gallows. A hair of his beard was believed to preserve from evil spirits,
and a piece of his clothes from aches and pains.
In more modern days, a similar avidity was shewn to obtain a relic of
the luckless Masaniello, the fisherman of Naples. After he had been raised
by mob favour to a height of power more despotic than monarch ever
wielded, he was shot by the same populace in the streets, as if he had been a
mad dog. His headless trunk was dragged through the mire for several
hours, and cast at night-fall into the city ditch. On the morrow the tide of
popular feeling turned once more in his favour. His corpse was sought,
arrayed in royal robes, and buried magnificently by torch-light in the
cathedral, ten thousand armed men, and as many mourners, attending at the
ceremony. The fisherman’s dress which he had worn was rent into shreds by
the crowd, to be preserved as relics; the door of his hut was pulled off its
hinges by a mob of women, and eagerly cut up into small pieces, to be
made into images, caskets, and other mementos. The scanty furniture of his
poor abode became of more value than the adornments of a palace; the
ground he had walked upon was considered sacred, and, being collected in
small phials, was sold at its weight in gold, and worn in the bosom as an
amulet.
Almost as extraordinary was the frenzy manifested by the populace of
Paris on the execution of the atrocious Marchioness de Brinvilliers. There
were grounds for the popular wonder in the case of Masaniello, who was
unstained with personal crimes. But the career of Madame de Brinvilliers
was of a nature to excite no other feelings than disgust and abhorrence. She
was convicted of poisoning several persons, and sentenced to be burned in
the Place de Grève, and to have her ashes scattered to the winds. On the day
of her execution, the populace, struck by her gracefulness and beauty,
inveighed against the severity of her sentence. Their pity soon increased to
admiration, and, ere evening, she was considered a saint. Her ashes were
industriously collected; even the charred wood, which had aided to
consume her, was eagerly purchased by the populace. Her ashes were
thought to preserve from witchcraft.
In England many persons have a singular love for the relics of thieves
and murderers, or other great criminals. The ropes with which they have
been hanged are very often bought by collectors at a guinea per foot. Great
sums were paid for the rope which hanged Dr. Dodd, and for those more
recently which did justice upon Mr. Fauntleroy for forgery, and on Thurtell
for the murder of Mr. Weare. The murder of Maria Marten, by Corder, in
the year 1828, excited the greatest interest all over the country. People came
from Wales and Scotland, and even from Ireland, to visit the barn where the
body of the murdered woman was buried. Every one of them was anxious
to carry away some memorial of his visit. Pieces of the barn-door, tiles from
the roof, and, above all, the clothes of the poor victim, were eagerly sought
after. A lock of her hair was sold for two guineas, and the purchaser thought
himself fortunate in getting it so cheaply.
So great was the concourse of people to visit the house in Camberwell
Lane, where Greenacre murdered Hannah Brown, in 1837, that it was found
necessary to station a strong detachment of police on the spot. The crowd
was so eager to obtain a relic of the house of this atrocious criminal, that the
police were obliged to employ force to prevent the tables and chairs, and
even the doors, from being carried away.
In earlier times, a singular superstition was attached to the hand of a
criminal who had suffered execution. It was thought that by merely rubbing
the dead hand on the body, the patient afflicted with the king’s evil would
be instantly cured. The executioner at Newgate formerly derived no
inconsiderable revenue from this foolish practice. The possession of the
hand was thought to be of still greater efficacy in the cure of diseases and
the prevention of misfortunes. In the time of Charles II., as much as ten
guineas was thought a small price for one of these disgusting relics.
When the maniac, Thom, or Courtenay, was shot, in the spring of 1838,
the relic-hunters were immediately in motion to obtain a memento of so
extraordinary an individual. His long black beard and hair, which were cut
off by the surgeons, fell into the hands of his disciples, by whom they were
treasured with the utmost reverence. A lock of his hair commanded a great
price, not only amongst his followers, but among the more wealthy
inhabitants of Canterbury and its neighbourhood. The tree against which he
fell when he was shot, was stripped of all its bark by the curious; while a
letter, with his signature to it, was paid for in gold coins; and his favourite
horse became as celebrated as its master. Parties of ladies and gentlemen
went to Boughton from a distance of a hundred and fifty miles, to visit the
scene of that fatal affray, and stroke on the back the horse of the “mad
knight of Malta.” If a strict watch had not been kept over his grave for
months, the body would have been disinterred, and the bones carried away
as memorials.
Among the Chinese no relics are more valued than the boots which have
been worn by an upright magistrate. In Davis’s interesting description of the
empire of China, we are informed, that whenever a judge of unusual
integrity resigns his situation, the people all congregate to do him honour. If
he leaves the city where he has presided, the crowd accompany him from
his residence to the gates, where his boots are drawn off with great
ceremony, to be preserved in the hall of justice. Their place is immediately
supplied by a new pair, which, in their turn, are drawn off to make room for
others before he has worn them five minutes, it being considered sufficient
to consecrate them that he should have merely drawn them on.
Among the most favourite relics of modern times, in Europe, are
Shakspeare’s mulberry-tree, Napoleon’s willow, and the table at Waterloo
on which the emperor wrote his despatches. Snuff-boxes of Shakspeare’s
mulberry-tree are comparatively rare, though there are doubtless more of
them in the market than were ever made of the wood planted by the great
bard. Many a piece of alien wood passes under this name. The same may be
said of Napoleon’s table at Waterloo. The original has long since been
destroyed, and a round dozen of counterfeits along with it. Many preserve
the simple stick of wood; others have them cut into brooches and every
variety of ornament; but by far the greater number prefer them as snuff-
boxes. In France they are made into bonbonnières, and are much esteemed
by the many thousands whose cheeks still glow and whose eyes still sparkle
at the name of Napoleon.
Bullets from the field of Waterloo, and buttons from the coats of the
soldiers who fell in the fight, are still favourite relics in Europe. But the
same ingenuity which found new tables after the old one was destroyed, has
cast new bullets for the curious. Many a one who thinks himself the
possessor of a bullet which aided in giving peace to the world on that
memorable day, is the owner of a dump, first extracted from the ore a dozen
years afterwards. Let all lovers of genuine relics look well to their money
before they part with it to the ciceroni that swarm in the village of
Waterloo!
Few travellers stopped at the lonely isle of St. Helena without cutting a
twig from the willow that drooped over the grave of Napoleon, prior to the
removal of the body by the government of Louis Philippe. Many of them
have since been planted in different parts of Europe, and have grown into
trees as large as their parent. Relic-hunters, who are unable to procure a
twig of the original, are content with one from these. Several of them are
growing in the neighbourhood of London.
But in relics, as in every thing else, there is the use and the abuse. The
undoubted relics of great men, or great events, will always possess
attractions for the thinking and refined. There are few who would not join
with Cowley in the extravagant wish introduced in his lines “written while
sitting in a chair made of the remains of the ship in which Sir Francis Drake
sailed round the world:”
And I myself, who now love quiet too,
Almost as much, as any chair can do,
Would yet a journey take
An old wheel of that chariot to see,
Which Phaeton so rashly brake.
Footnotes
1. Guibert de Nogent.
2. Guibert de Nogent.
3. Guibert de Nogent.
4. M. Wilken’s Geschichte der Kreuzzüge.
5. Wilken.
6. Fulcher of Chartres; Guibert de Nogent; Vital.
7. William of Tyre; Mills; Wilken, &c.
8. Vide William of Tyre.
9. Guibert de Nogent relates a curious instance of the imitativeness of these juvenile Crusaders. He
says that, during the siege of Antioch, the Christian and Saracen boys used to issue forth every
evening from the town and camp in great numbers, under the command of captains chosen from
among themselves. Armed with sticks instead of swords, and stones instead of arrows, they
ranged themselves in battle order, and, shouting each the war-cry of their country, fought with
the utmost desperation. Some of them lost their eyes, and many became cripples for life from
the injuries they received on these occasions.
10. The sacking of Vitry reflects indelible disgrace upon Louis VII. His predecessors had been long
engaged in resistance to the outrageous powers assumed by the Popes, and Louis continued the
same policy. The ecclesiastical chapter of Bourges, having elected an archbishop without his
consent, he proclaimed the election to be invalid, and took severe and prompt measures against
the refractory clergy. Thibault count de Champagne took up arms in defence of the Papal
authority, and entrenched himself in the town of Vitry. Louis immediately took the field to
chastise the rebel, and he besieged the town with so much vigour that the count was forced to
surrender. Upwards of thirteen hundred of the inhabitants, fully one half of whom were women
and children, took refuge in the church; and, when the gates of the city were opened, and all
resistance had ceased, Louis inhumanly gave orders to set fire to the sacred edifice, and a
thousand persons perished in the flames.
11. Philip, Archdeacon of the cathedral of Liege, wrote a detailed account of all the miracles
performed by St. Bernard during thirty-four days of his mission. They averaged about ten per
day. The disciples of St. Bernard complained bitterly that the people flocked around their master
in such numbers, that they could not see half the miracles he performed. But they willingly
trusted the eyes of others, as far as faith in the miracles went, and seemed to vie with each other
whose credulity should be greatest.
12. James of Vitry; William de Nangis.
13. The desire of comparing two great men has tempted many writers to drown Frederick in the
river Cydnus, in which Alexander so imprudently bathed (Q. Curt. lib. iii. c. 4, 5); but, from the
march of the emperor, I rather judge that his Saleph is the Calycadnus, a stream of less fame, but
of a longer course.—Gibbon.
14. Stowe.
15. Elémens de l’Histoire de France
16. Strutt’s Sports and Pastimes.
17. Richard left a high reputation in Palestine. So much terror did his name occasion, that the
women of Syria used it to frighten their children for ages afterwards. Every disobedient child
became still when told that King Richard was coming. Even men shared the panic that his name
created; and a hundred years afterwards, whenever a horse shied at any object in the way, his
rider would exclaim, “What! dost thou think King Richard is in the bush?”
18. The following is a list of some of the works of art thus destroyed, from Nicetas, a contemporary
Greek author: 1st. A colossal Juno, from the forum of Constantine, the head of which was so
large that four horses could scarcely draw it from the place where it stood to the palace. 2d. The
statue of Paris, presenting the apple to Venus. 3d. An immense bronze pyramid, crowned by a
female figure, which turned with the wind. 4th. The colossal statue of Bellerophon, in bronze,
which was broken down and cast into the furnace. Under the inner nail of the horse’s hind foot
on the left side, was found a seal wrapped in a woollen cloth. 5th. A figure of Hercules, by
Lysimachus, of such vast dimensions that the thumb was equal in circumference to the waist of
a man. 6th. The Ass and his Driver, cast by order of Augustus after the battle of Actium, in
commemoration of his having discovered the position of Anthony through the means of an ass-
driver. 7th. The Wolf suckling the Twins of Rome. 8th. The gladiator in combat with a lion. 9th.
The Hippopotamus. 10th. The Sphinxes. 11th. An Eagle fighting with a Serpent. 12th. A
beautiful statue of Helen. 13th. A group, with a monster somewhat resembling a bull, engaged in
deadly conflict with a serpent; and many other works of art, too numerous to mention.
19. See Jacob de Voragine and Albericus.
20. Elémens de l’Histoire de France.
21. Mills, in his history, gives the name of this chief as “Al Malek al Dhaker Rok neddin Abulfeth
Bibars al Ali al Bundokdari al Salehi.”
22. The reader will recognise the incident which Sir Walter Scott has introduced into his beautiful
romance, The Talisman, and which, with the license claimed by poets and romancers, he
represents as having befallen King Richard I.
23. See article on “Demonology” in the sixth volume of the Foreign Quarterly Review.
24. Histoire de la Magie en France. Rois de la seconde race, p. 29.
25. M. Michaud, in his History of the Crusades, M. Guinguené, in his Literary History of Italy, and
some other critics, have objected to Tasso’s poem, that he has attributed to the Crusaders a belief
in magic, which did not exist at that time. If these critics had referred to the edicts of
Charlemagne, they would have seen that Tasso was right, and that a disposition too eager to spy
out imperfections in a great work was leading themselves into error.
26. Entstehungsgeschichte der freistädlischen Bünde im Mittelalter, von Dr. F. Kortüm. 1827.
27. Bodin, p. 95 Garinet, p. 125; Anti-demon de Serclier, p. 346.
28. Tablier. See also Boguet, Discours sur les Sorciers; and M. Jules Garinet, Histoire de la Magie,
p. 150.
29. Foreign Quarterly Review, vol. vi. p. 41.
30. News from Scotland, declaring the Damnable Life of Dr. Fian.
31. Satan’s Invisible World Discovered, by the Rev. G. Sinclair.
32. This illustration, representing Matthew Hopkins examining two witches, who are confessing to
him the names of their imps and familiars, is copied from Caulfield’s Memoirs of Remarkable
Persons, 1794, where it is taken from an extremely rare print.
33. Pitcairn’s Records of Justiciary.
34. Preface to Law’s Memorials, edited by Sharpe.
35. Zauberbibliothek, Thiel 5.
36. They sent a hangman’s assistant down to her in her prison; they clothed him properly in a bear’s
skin, as if he were the devil. Him, when the witch saw, she thought he was her familiar. She said
to him quickly, “Why hast thou left me so long in the magistrate’s hands? Help me out of their
power, as thou hast promised, and I will be thine alone. Help me from this anguish, O thou
dearest devil [or lover] mine!”
37. A very graphic account of the execution of this unfortunate gentleman is to be found in the
excellent romance of M. Alfred de Vigny, entitled Cinq Mars; but if the reader wishes for a full
and accurate detail of all the circumstances of one of the most extraordinary trials upon record,
he is referred to a work published anonymously, at Amsterdam, in 1693, entitled Histoire des
Diables de Loudun, ou de la Possession des Religieuses Ursulines, et de la Condemnation et du
Supplice d’Urbain Grandier.
38. The punishment for the contumacious was expressed by the words onere, frigore, et fame. By
the first was meant, that the culprit should be extended on his back on the ground, and weights
placed over his body, gradually increased, until he expired. Sometimes the punishment was not
extended to this length, and the victim being allowed to recover, underwent the second portion,
the frigore, which consisted in his standing naked in the open air, for a certain space, in the sight
of all the people. The third, or fame, was more dreadful, the statute saying, “That he was to be
preserved with the coarsest bread that could be got, and water out of the next sink, or puddle, to
the place of execution; and that day he had water he should have no bread, and that day he had
bread he should have no water;” and in this torment he was to linger as long as nature would
hold out.
39. This is denied by Voltaire in his Age of Louis XIV.; but he does not state for what reason. His
words are, “Il est faux qu’elle eut essayé ses poisons dans les hôpitaux, comme le disait le
peuple, et comme il est écrit dans les Causes Célèbres, ouvrage d’un avocat sans cause et fait
pour le peuple.”
40. Slow poisoning is a crime which has unhappily been revived in England within the last few
years, and which has been carried to an extent sufficient to cast a stain upon the national
character. The poisoners have been principally women of the lowest class, and their victims
have been their husbands or their children. The motive for the crime has in most instances been
the basest that can be imagined,—the desire to obtain from burial-clubs to which they
subscribed, the premium, or burial-money. A recent enactment, restricting the sale of arsenic and
other poisons, will, it is to be hoped, check, if it do not extirpate this abominable crime.—1851.
41. Garinet, Histoire de la Magie en France, p. 75.
42. Ibid. p. 156.
43. Dr. H. More’s Continuation of Glanvil’s Collection of Relations in proof of Witchcraft.
44. The woman whose ghost was said to manifest itself in Cock Lane was buried in the crypt or
cloister of St. John, Clerkenwell. The vault is composed of two aisles, that on the south being
much narrower than the other,—it was here she was deposited.
About seven years since, I was sketching a picturesque trefoil-headed door leading into this
part of the vault; and the place being at that time in great confusion with coffins, remains of
bodies, some of which were dried like mummies, &c., I could find no better seat than one of the
coffins. The sexton’s boy, who held my light, informed me this was the coffin of Scratching
Fanny, which recalled the Cock Lane story to my mind. I got off the lid of the coffin, and saw
the face of a handsome woman, with an aquiline nose; this feature remaining perfect, an
uncommon case, for the cartilage mostly gives way. The remains had become adipocere, and
were perfectly preserved. She was said to have been poisoned by deleterious punch, but this was
legally disproved; and, if I remember rightly, she was otherwise declared to have died of small-
pox; of this disease there was not the least sign; but as some mineral poisons tend to render
bodies adipocere, here was some evidence in support of the former allegation. I made particular
inquiries at the time of Mr. Bird, churchwarden, a respectable and judicious man; and he gave
me good assurance that this coffin had always been looked upon as the one containing the Cock
Lane woman. Since that time the vault has been set in order, and the above-mentioned coffin,
with others, put away.
The niche near the window in the drawing of the Ghost Room is the place where the bed-
head was, and where the scratching, knocks, &c. were heard. This is the tradition of the house.
Mrs. King, who holds the premises, informs me that her family has had the house about eighty
years.—J. W. Archer.
45. Shakspeare’s Rape of Lucretia.
46. The Abbé, in the second volume, in the letter No. 79, addressed to Monsieur de Buffon, gives
the following curious particulars of the robbers of 1737, which are not without interest at this
day, if it were only to shew the vast improvement which has taken place since that period. “It is
usual in travelling to put ten or a dozen guineas in a separate pocket, as a tribute to the first that
comes to demand them the right of passport, which custom has established here in favour of the
robbers, who are almost the only highway surveyors in England, has made this necessary; and
accordingly the English call these fellows the ‘Gentlemen of the Road,’ the government letting
them exercise their jurisdiction upon travellers without giving them any great molestation. To
say the truth, they content themselves with only taking the money of those who obey without
disputing; but notwithstanding their boasted humanity, the lives of those who endeavour to get
away are not always safe. They are very strict and severe in levying their impost; and if a man
has not wherewithal to pay them, he may run the chance of getting himself knocked on the head
for his poverty.
“About fifteen years ago, these robbers, with the view of maintaining their rights, fixed
up papers at the doors of rich people about London, expressly forbidding all persons, of
whatsoever quality or condition, from going out of town without ten guineas and a
watch about them, on pain of death. In bad times, when there is little or nothing to be
got on the roads, these fellows assemble in gangs, to raise contributions even in London
itself, and the watchmen seldom trouble themselves to interfere with them in their
vocation.”
47. Since the publication of the first edition of this volume, Jack Sheppard’s adventures have been
revived. A novel upon the real or fabulous history of the burglar has afforded, by its
extraordinary popularity, a further exemplification of the allegations in the text. The Sixth
Report of the Inspector of Prisons for the Northern Districts of England contains a mass of
information upon the pernicious effect of such romances, and of the dramas founded upon them.
The Inspector examined several boys attending the prison school in the New Bailey at
Manchester, from whose evidence the following passages bearing upon the subject are
extracted:
“J. L. (aged 14). The first time I was ever at the theatre was to see Jack Sheppard. There
were two or three boys near to the house who were going, and they asked me. I took
sixpence from the money I used to lay up weekly for clothes. The next time I went,
which was the week after, I borrowed the money from a boy; I returned it to him the
Saturday after. I then went many times. I took the money from my mother out of her
pocket as she was sitting down, and I beside her. There was more than sixpence in her
pocket. I got a great love for the theatre, and stole from people often to get there. I
thought this Jack Sheppard was a clever fellow for making his escape and robbing his
master. If I could get out of gaol, I think I should be as clever as him: but, after all his
exploits, he got done at last. I have had the book out of a library at Dole Field. I had
paid two-pence a book for three volumes. I also got Richard Turpin, in two volumes,
and paid the same. I have seen Oliver Twist, and think the Artful Dodger is very like
some of the boys here. I am here for picking a pocket of 25l.
“H. C. (aged 15). When we came to Manchester, I went to the play, and saw Jack
Sheppard the first night it came out. There were pictures of him about the streets on
boards and on the walls; one of them was his picking a pocket in the church. I likedJack
Sheppard much. I had not been in prison there. I was employed in a warehouse at 6s.
6d. a-week, and was allowed 6d. out of it for myself, and with that I went regularly to
the play. I saw Jack Sheppard afterwards four times in one week. I got the money out of
my money-bag by stealth, and without my master’s knowledge. I once borrowed 10s. in
my mother’s name from Mrs. ——, a shopkeeper, with whom she used to deal; I went
to the play with it.
“J. M’D. (aged 15). I have heard of Jack Sheppard: a lad whom I know told me of
it, who had seen it, and said it was rare fun to see him break out of prison.
“J. L. (aged 11). Has been to the play twice, and seen Jack Sheppard. Went with his
brother the first time, and by himself the second. I took the money to go a second time
out of mother’s house, off the chimney-piece, where she had left a sixpence. It was the
first night Jack Sheppard was played. There was great talk about it, and there were nice
pictures about it all over the walls. I thought him a very clever fellow; but Blueskin
made the most fun. I first went to the markets, and begun by stealing apples. I also
knew a lad, ——, who has been transported, and went with him two or three times. The
most I ever got was 10s. out of a till.”
The Inspector’s Report on Juvenile Delinquency at Liverpool contains much matter of the
same kind; but sufficient has been already quoted to shew the injurious effects of the deification
of great thieves by thoughtless novelists.
48. For a full account of this noted robber, and indeed of European thieves and banditti in general,
see the very amusing work upon the subject by Mr. Charles Macfarlane.
49. See also Foreign Quarterly Review, vol. iv. p. 398.
50. Lavinia Fenton, afterwards Duchess of Bolton.
51. Esprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. chap. xvii.
52. Very similar to this is the fire-ordeal of the modern Hindoos, which is thus described in Forbes’s
Oriental Memoirs, vol. i. c. xi.:—“When a man, accused of a capital crime, chooses to undergo
the ordeal trial, he is closely confined for several days; his right hand and arm are covered with
thick wax-cloth, tied up and sealed, in the presence of proper officers, to prevent deceit. In the
English districts the covering was always sealed with the Company’s arms, and the prisoner
placed under an European guard. At the time fixed for the ordeal, a caldron of oil is placed over
a fire; when it boils, a piece of money is dropped into the vessel; the prisoner’s arm is unsealed
and washed in the presence of his judges and accusers. During this part of the ceremony the
attendant Brahmins supplicate the Deity. On receiving their benediction, the accused plunges his
hand into the boiling fluid, and takes out the coin. The arm is afterwards again sealed up until
the time appointed for a re-examination. The seal is then broken; if no blemish appears, the
prisoner is declared innocent; if the contrary, he suffers the punishment due to his crime.”… On
this trial the accused thus addresses the element before plunging his hand into the boiling oil:
—“Thou, O fire! pervadest all things. O cause of purity! who givest evidence of virtue and of
sin, declare the truth in this my hand!” If no juggling were practised, the decisions by this ordeal
would be all the same way; but as some are by this means declared guilty, and others innocent, it
is clear that the Brahmins, like the Christian priests of the middle ages, practise some deception
in saving those whom they wish to be thought guiltless.
53. An ordeal very like this is still practised in India. Consecrated rice is the article chosen, instead
of bread and cheese. Instances are not rare in which, through the force of imagination, guilty
persons are not able to swallow a single grain. Conscious of their crime, and fearful of the
punishment of Heaven, they feel a suffocating sensation in their throat when they attempt it, and
they fall on their knees, and confess all that is laid to their charge. The same thing, no doubt,
would have happened with the bread and cheese of the Roman Church, if it had been applied to
any others but ecclesiastics. The latter had too much wisdom to be caught in a trap of their own
setting.
54. Histoire de Messire Bertrand du Guesclin, par Paul Hay du Chastelet, liv. i. ch. xix.
55. Esprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. ch. xxv.
56. Mémoires de Brantôme touchant les Duels.
57. Histoire de Messire Bertrand du Guesclin, liv. i. ch. xix.
58. Mémoires de Brantôme touchant les Duels.
59. Although Francis shewed himself in this case an enemy to duelling, yet in his own case he had
not the same objection. Every reader of history must remember his answer to the challenge of
the Emperor Charles V. The Emperor wrote that he had failed in his word, and that he would
sustain their quarrel single-handed against him. Francis replied, that he lied—qu’il en avait
menti par la gorge, and that he was ready to meet him in single combat whenever and wherever
he pleased.
60. Le Père Matthias, tome ii. livre iv.
61. Elémens de l’Histoire de France, vol. iii. p. 219.
62. Mercure de France, vol. xiii.
63. Brydone’s Tour in Malta, 1772.
64. See Life and Character of Lord Bacon, by Thomas Martin, Barrister-at-Law.
65. See History of the House and Clan of Mackay.
66. See Spectator, Nos. 84, 97, and 99; and Tatler, Nos. 25, 26, 29, 31, 38, and 39; and Guardian,
No. 20.
67. Post-Boy, December 13th, 1712.
68. Raleigh at one period of his life appeared to be an inveterate duellist, and it was said of him that
he had been engaged in more encounters of the kind than any man of note among his
contemporaries. More than one fellow-creature he had deprived of life; but he lived long enough
to be convinced of the sinfulness of his conduct, and made a solemn vow never to fight another
duel. The following anecdote of his forbearance is well known, but it will bear repetition:
A dispute arose in a coffee-house between him and a young man on some trivial point,
and the latter, losing his temper, impertinently spat in the face of the veteran. Sir Walter,
instead of running him through the body, as many would have done, or challenging him
to mortal combat, coolly took out his handkerchief, wiped his face, and said, “Young
man, if I could as easily wipe from my conscience the stain of killing you, as I can this
spittle from my face, you should not live another minute.” The young man immediately
begged his pardon.
69. Vide the Letters of Joseph II. to distinguished Princes and Statesmen, published for the first time
in England in The Pamphleteer for 1821. They were originally published in Germany a few
years previously, and throw a great light upon the character of that monarch and the events of
his reign.
70. Encyclopedia Americana, art. Duelling.
71. Voltaire, Siècle de Louis XIV.
Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War
(Wilfred Trotter)
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Preface
Preface to the Second Edition
Herd Instinct and Its Bearing on the Psychology of Civilized Man
I. Introduction
II. Psychological Aspects of Instinct
III. Biological Significance of Gregariousness
IV. Mental Characteristics of the Gregarious Animal
Sociological Applications of the Psychology of Herd Instinct
Gregariousness and the Future of Man
Speculations Upon the Human Mind in 1915
Man’s Place in Nature and Nature’s Place in Man
Comments on an Objective System of Human Psychology
Some Principles of a Biological Psychology
The Biology of Gregariousness
Characters of the Gregarious Animal Displayed by Man
Some Peculiarities of the Social Habit in Man
Imperfections of the Social Habit in Man
Gregarious Species at War
England Against Germany—Germany
England Against Germany—England
Postscript of 1919
Prejudice in Time of War
Psychological Anticipations
After the War
The Instability of Civilization
Some Characters of a Rational Statecraft
Preface
Table of Contents
The first two essays in this book were written some ten years ago and
published in the Sociological Review in 1908 and 1909. They had formed a
single paper, but it was found necessary to publish in two instalments at an
interval of six months, and to cut down to a considerable extent the total
bulk.
It was lately suggested to me that as the numbers of the review in which
the two essays appeared were out of print, the fact that the subject
concerned was not without some current interest might justify a
republication. It was not possible to do this without trying to embody such
fruits as there might be of ten years’ further speculation and some attempt to
apply to present affairs the principles which had been sketched out.
The new comment very soon surpassed by far in bulk the original text,
and constitutes, in fact, all but a comparatively few pages of this book. This
rather minute record is made here not because it has any interest of its own,
but especially to point out that I have been engaged in trying to apply to the
affairs of to-day principles which had taken shape ten years ago. I point this
out not in order to claim any gift of foresight in having suggested so long
ago reasons for regarding the stability of civilization as unsuspectedly
slight, but because it is notorious that the atmosphere of a great war is
unfavourable to free speculation. If the principles upon which my argument
is based had been evolved during the present times, the reader would have
had special reason to suspect their validity, however plausible they might
seem in the refracting air of national emergency.
The general purpose of this book is to suggest that the science of
psychology is not the mass of dreary and indefinite generalities of which it
sometimes perhaps seems to be made up; to suggest that, especially when
studied in relation to other branches of biology, it is capable of becoming a
guide in the actual affairs of life and of giving an understanding of the
human mind such as may enable us in a practical and useful way to foretell
some of the course of human behaviour. The present state of public affairs
gives an excellent chance for testing the truth of this suggestion, and adds to
the interest of the experiment the strong incentive of an urgent national
peril.
If this war is becoming, as it obviously is, daily more and more
completely a contest of moral forces, some really deep understanding of the
nature and sources of national morale must be at least as important a source
of strength as the technical knowledge of the military engineer and the
maker of cannon. One is apt to suppose that the chief function of a sound
morale is the maintenance of a high courage and resolution through the ups
and downs of warfare. In a nation whose actual independence and existence
are threatened from without such qualities may be taken for granted and
may be present when the general moral forces are seriously disordered. A
satisfactory morale gives something much more difficult to attain. It gives
smoothness of working, energy and enterprise to the whole national
machine, while from the individual it ensures the maximal outflow of effort
with a minimal interference from such egoistic passions as anxiety,
impatience, and discontent. A practical psychology would define these
functions and indicate means by which they are to be called into activity.
The more we consider the conduct of government in warfare the clearer
does it become that every act of authority produces effects in two distinct
fields—that of its primary function as directed more or less immediately
against the enemy, and that of its secondary action upon the morale of the
nation. The first of these two constituents possesses the uncertainty of all
military enterprises, and its success or failure cannot be foretold; the
influence of the second constituent is susceptible of definition and foresight
and need never be wholly ambiguous to any but the ignorant or the
indifferent.
The relative importance of the military and the moral factors in any act
or enterprise varies much, but it may be asserted that while the moral factor
may sometimes be enormously the more important, it is never wholly
absent. This constant and admittedly significant factor in all acts of
government is usually awarded an attention so thoroughly inexpert and
perfunctory, as to justify the feeling that the customary belief in its
importance is no more than a conventional expression.
The method I have used is frankly speculative, and I make no apology
for it because the facts are open to the observation of all and available for
confirmation or disproof. I have tried to point out a way; I have tried not to
exhort or persuade to the use of it—these are matters outside my province.
November, 1915.
Preface to the Second Edition
Table of Contents
A few errors in the text of the First Edition have been corrected, and a
sentence which had caused misunderstanding has been omitted. No other
change has been made. A Postscript has been added in order to point out
some of the directions in which the psychological inquiry made during the
war gave a practical foresight that was confirmed by the course of events,
and in order to examine the remarkable situation in which society now finds
itself.
In the Preface to the First Edition I ventured to suggest that some
effective knowledge of the mind might be of value to a nation at war; I take
this opportunity of suggesting that such knowledge might be not less useful
to a tired nation seeking peace. At the same time it should perhaps be added
that this book is concerned wholly with the examination of principles, is
professedly speculative in methods and conclusions, and is quite without
pretensions to advise upon the conduct of affairs.
August, 1919.
Herd Instinct and Its Bearing on the Psychology
of Civilized Man
Table of Contents
I. Introduction
Table of Contents
Few subjects have led to discussion so animated and prolonged as has the
definition of the science of sociology. It is therefore necessary, as it is hoped
that this essay may be capable of sociological applications, that the writer
should define the sense in which he uses the term. By calling it a science is,
of course, denoted the view that sociology is a body of knowledge derived
from experience of its material and co-ordinated so that it shall be useful in
forecasting and, if possible, directing the future behaviour of that material.
This material is man in society of associated man.
Sociology, therefore, is obviously but another name for psychology, in
the widest sense, for, that is to say, a psychology which can include all the
phenomena of the mind without the exception even of the most complex,
and is essentially practical in a fuller sense than any orthodox psychology
which has yet appeared.
Sociology has, of course, often been described as social psychology and
has been regarded as differing from ordinary psychology in being
concerned with those forms of mental activity which man displays in his
social relations, the assumption being made that society brings to light a
special series of mental aptitudes with which ordinary psychology, dealing
as it does essentially with the individual, is not mainly concerned. It may be
stated at once that it is a principal thesis of this essay that this attitude is a
fallacious one, and has been responsible for the comparative sterility of the
psychological method in sociology. The two fields—the social and the
individual—are regarded here as absolutely continuous; all human
psychology, it is contended, must be the psychology of associated man,
since man as a solitary animal is unknown to us, and every individual must
present the characteristic reactions of the social animal if such exist. The
only difference between the two branches of the science lies in the fact that
ordinary psychology makes no claim to be practical in the sense of
conferring useful foresight; whereas sociology does profess to deal with the
complex, unsimplified problems of ordinary life, ordinary life being, by a
biological necessity, social life. If, therefore, sociology is to be defined as
psychology, it would be better to call it practical or applied psychology than
social psychology.
The first effect of the complete acceptance of this point of view is to
render very obvious the difficulty and immensity of the task of sociology;
indeed, the possibility of such a science is sometimes denied. For example,
at an early meeting of the Sociological Society, Professor Karl Pearson
expressed the opinion that the birth of the science of sociology must await
the obstetrical genius of some one man of the calibre of Darwin or Pasteur.
At a later meeting Mr. H. G. Wells went farther, and maintained that as a
science sociology not only does not but cannot exist.
Such scepticism appears in general to be based upon the idea that a
practical psychology in the sense already defined is impossible. According
to some this is because the human will introduces into conduct an element
necessarily incommensurable, which will always render the behaviour of
man subject to the occurrence of true variety and therefore beyond the reach
of scientific generalization; according to another and a more deterministic
school, human conduct, while not theoretically liable to true variety in the
philosophic sense or to the intrusion of the will as a first cause, is in fact so
complex that no reduction of it to a complete system of gen­er­al­i­za­tions will
be possible until science in general has made very great progress beyond its
present position. Both views lead in practice to attitudes of equal pessimism
towards sociology.
The observable complexity of human conduct is, undoubtedly, very
great and discouraging. The problem of generalizing from it presents,
however, one important peculiarity, which is not very evident at first sight.
It is that as observers we are constantly pursued by man’s own account of
his behaviour; that of a given act our observation is always more or less
mixed with a knowledge, derived from our own feelings, of how it seems to
the author of the act, and it is much more difficult than is often supposed to
disentangle and allow for the influence of this factor. Each of us has the
strongest conviction that his conduct and beliefs are fundamentally
individual and reasonable and in essence independent of external causation,
and each is ready to furnish a series of explanations of his conduct
consistent with these principles. These explanations, moreover, are the ones
which will occur spontaneously to the observer watching the conduct of his
fellows.
It is suggested here that the sense of the unimaginable complexity and
variability of human affairs is derived less than is generally supposed from
direct observation and more from this second factor of introspectual
interpretation which may be called a kind of an­thro­po­mor­phism. A reaction
against this in human psychology is no less necessary therefore than was in
comparative psychology the similar movements the extremer developments
of which are associated with the names of Bethe, Beer, Uexküll and Nuel. It
is contended that it is this an­thro­po­mor­phism in the general attitude of
psychologists which, by disguising the observable uniformities of human
conduct, has rendered so slow the establishment of a really practical
psychology. Little as the subject has been studied from the point of view of
a thorough-going objectivism, yet even now certain gen­er­al­i­za­tions
summarising some of the ranges of human belief and conduct might already
be formulated. Such an inquiry, however, is not the purpose of this essay,
and these considerations have been advanced, in the first place, to suggest
that theory indicates that the problem of sociology is not so hopelessly
difficult as it at first appears, and secondly, as a justification for an
examination of certain aspects of human conduct by the deductive method.
The writer would contend that while that method is admittedly dangerous
when used as a substitute for a kind of investigation in which deductive
processes are reduced to a minimum, yet it has its special field of usefulness
in cases where the significance of previously accumulated facts has been
misinterpreted, or where the exacter methods have proved unavailing
through the investigator having been without indications of precisely what
facts were likely to be the most fruitful subject for measurement. This essay,
then, will be an attempt to obtain by a deductive consideration of conduct
some guidance for the application of those methods of measurement and co-
ordination of facts upon which all true science is based.
A very little consideration of the problem of conduct makes it plain that
it is in the region of feeling, using the term in its broadest sense, that the
key is to be sought. Feeling has relations to instinct as obvious and
fundamental as are the analogies between intellectual processes and reflex
action; it is with the consideration of instinct, therefore, that this paper must
now be occupied.
II. Psychological Aspects of Instinct
Table of Contents
Many years ago, in a famous chapter of his Text Book of Psychology,
William James analysed and established with a quite final delicacy and
precision the way in which instinct appears to introspection. He showed that
the impulse of an instinct reveals itself as an axiomatically obvious
proposition, as something which is so clearly “sense” that any idea of
discussing its basis is foolish or wicked.﻿1
When we recognize that decisions due to instinct come into the mind in
a form so characteristic and easily identifiable we are encouraged at once to
ask whether all decisions having this form must be looked upon as
essentially of instinctive origin. Inquiry, however, reveals the fact that the
bulk of opinion based upon assumptions having these introspectual
characters is so vast that any answer but a negative one would seem totally
incompatible with current conceptions of the nature of human thought.﻿2
Many attempts have been made to explain the behaviour of man as
dictated by instinct. He is, in fact, moved by the promptings of such
obvious instincts as self-preservation, nutrition, and sex enough to render
the enterprise hopeful and its early spoils enticing. So much can so easily be
generalized under these three impulses that the temptation to declare that all
human behaviour could be resumed under them was irresistible. These early
triumphs of materialism soon, however, began to be troubled by doubt.
Man, in spite of his obvious duty to the contrary, would continue so often
not to preserve himself, not to nourish himself and to prove resistant to the
blandishments of sex, that the attempt to squeeze his behaviour into these
three categories began to involve an increasingly obvious and finally
intolerable amount of pushing and pulling, as well as so much pretence that
he was altogether “in,” when, quite plainly, so large a part of him remained
“out,” that the enterprise had to be given up, and it was once more
discovered that man escaped and must always escape any complete
generalization by science.
A more obvious inference would have been that there was some other
instinct which had not been taken into account, some impulse, perhaps,
which would have no very evident object as regarded the individual, but
would chiefly appear as modifying the other instincts and leading to new
combinations in which the primitive instinctive impulse was unrecognizable
as such. A mechanism such as this very evidently would produce a series of
actions in which uniformity might be very difficult to recognize by direct
observation, but in which it would be very obvious if the characters of this
unknown “x” were available.
Now, it is a striking fact that amongst animals there are some whose
conduct can be generalized very readily in the categories of self-
preservation, nutrition, and sex, while there are others whose conduct
cannot be thus summarized. The behaviour of the tiger and the cat is simple,
and easily comprehensible, presenting no unassimilable anomalies, whereas
that of the dog, with his conscience, his humour, his terror of loneliness, his
capacity for devotion to a brutal master, or that of the bee, with her selfless
devotion to the hive, furnishes phenomena which no sophistry can
assimilate without the aid of a fourth instinct. But little examination will
show that the animals whose conduct it is difficult to generalize under the
three primitive instinctive categories are gregarious. If then it can be shown
that gre­gar­i­ous­ness is of a biological significance approaching in
importance that of the other instincts, we may expect to find in it the source
of these anomalies of conduct, and if we can also show that man is
gregarious, we may look to it for the definition of the unknown “x” which
might account for the complexity of human behaviour.
1. Not one man in a billion, when taking his dinner, ever thinks of utility. He eats because the food
tastes good and makes him want more. If you ask him why he should want to eat more of what
tastes like that, instead of revering you as a philosopher he will probably laugh at you for a fool.
The connexion between the savoury sensation and the act it awakens is for him absolute and
selbst­ver­ständ­lich, an “a priori synthesis” of the most perfect sort needing no proof but its own
evidence. . . . To the metaphysician alone can such questions occur as: Why do we smile, when
pleased, and not scowl? Why are we unable to talk to a crowd as to a single friend? Why does a
particular maiden turn our wits so upside down? The common man can only say, “Of course we
smile, of course our heart palpitates at the sight of the crowd, of course we love the maiden, that
beautiful soul clad in that perfect form, so palpably and flagrantly made from all eternity to be
loved” (W. James, “Principles of Psychology” vol. ii. p. 386).
2. This introspectual quality of the “a priori synthesis of the most perfect sort” is found, for
example, in the assumptions upon which is based the bulk of opinion in matters of Church and
State, the family, justice, probity, honour, purity, crime, and so forth. Yet clearly we cannot say
that there is a specific instinct concerned with each of these subjects, for that, to say the least,
would be to postulate an unimaginable multiplicity of instincts, for the most part wholly without
any conceivable biological usefulness. For example, there are considerable difficulties in
imagining an instinct for making people Wesleyans or Roman Catholics, or an instinct for
making people regard British family life as the highest product of civilization, yet there can be
no question that these positions are based upon assumptions having all the characters described
by James as belonging to the impulses of instinct.
III. Biological Significance of Gregariousness
Table of Contents
The animal kingdom presents two relatively sudden and very striking
advances in complexity and in the size of the unit upon which natural
selection acts unmodified. These advances consist in the aggregation of
units which were previously independent and exposed to the full normal
action of natural selection, and the two instances are, of course, the passage
from the unicellular to the multicellular, and from the solitary to the social.
It is obvious that in the multicellular organism individual cells lose
some of the capacities of the unicellular—reproductive capacity is regulated
and limited, nutrition is no longer possible in the old simple way and
response to stimuli comes only in certain channels. In return for these
sacrifices we may say, metaphorically, that the action of natural selection is
withdrawn from within the commune. Unfitness of a given cell or group of
cells can be eliminated only through its effect upon the whole organism.
The latter is less sensitive to the vagaries of a single cell than is the
organism of which the single cell is the whole. It would seem, therefore,
that there is now allowed a greater range of variability for the individual
cells, and perhaps, therefore, an increased richness of the material to be
selected from. Variations, moreover, which were not immediately
favourable would now have a chance of surviving.
Looked at in this way, multi­cel­lu­lar­ity presents itself as an escape from
the rigour of natural selection, which for the unicellular organism had
narrowed competition to so desperate a struggle that any variation outside
the straitest limits was fatal, for even though it might be favourable in one
respect, it would, in so small a kingdom, involve a loss in another. The only
way, therefore, for further advantageous elaboration to occur was by the
enlargement of the competing unit. Various species of multicellular
organisms might in time be supposed in turn to reach the limit of their
powers. Competition would be at its maximum, smaller and smaller
variations would be capable of producing serious results. In the species
where these conditions prevail an enlargement of the unit is imminent if
progress is to occur. It is no longer possible by increases of physical
complexity and the apparently inevitable sequence is the appearance of gre­‐
gar­i­ous­ness. The necessity and inevitableness of the change are shown by
its scattered development in very widely separated regions (for example, in
insects and in mammals) just as, we may suspect, multi­cel­lu­lar­ity appeared.
Gregariousness seems frequently to be regarded as a somewhat
superficial character, scarcely deserving, as it were, the name of an instinct,
advantageous it is true, but not of fundamental importance or likely to be
deeply ingrained in the inheritance of the species. This attitude may be due
to the fact that among mammals at any rate the appearance of gre­gar­i­ous­‐
ness has not been accompanied by any very gross physical changes which
are obviously associated with it.﻿3
To whatever it may be due, this method of regarding the social habit is,
in the opinion of the present writer, not justified by the facts, and prevents
the attainment of conclusions of considerable fruitfulness.
A study of bees and ants shows at once how fundamental the
importance of gre­gar­i­ous­ness may become. The individual in such
communities is completely incapable, often physically, of existing apart
from the community, and this fact at once gives rise to the suspicion that
even in communities less closely knit than those of the ant and the bee, the
individual may in fact be more dependent on communal life than appears at
first sight.
Another very striking piece of general evidence of the significance of
gre­gar­i­ous­ness as no mere late acquirement is the remarkable coincidence
of its occurrence with that of exceptional grades of intelligence or the
possibility of very complex reactions to environment. It can scarcely be
regarded as an unmeaning accident that the dog, the horse, the ape, the
elephant, and man are all social animals. The instances of the bee and the
ant are perhaps the most amazing. Here the advantages of gre­gar­i­ous­ness
seem actually to outweigh the most prodigious differences of structure, and
we find a condition which is often thought of as a mere habit, capable of
enabling the insect nervous system to compete in the complexity of its
power of adaptation with that of the higher vertebrates.
If it be granted that gre­gar­i­ous­ness is a phenomenon of profound
biological significance and one likely therefore to be responsible for an
important group of instinctive impulses, the next step in our argument is the
discussion of the question as to whether man is to be regarded as gregarious
in the full sense of the word, whether, that is to say, the social habit may be
expected to furnish him with a mass of instinctive impulse as mysteriously
potent as the impulses of self-preservation, nutrition, and sex. Can we look
to the social instinct for an explanation of some of the “a priori syntheses of
the most perfect sort needing no proof but their own evidence,” which are
not explained by the three primitive categories of instinct, and remain
stumbling-blocks in the way of generalizing the conduct of man?
The conception of man as a gregarious animal is, of course, extremely
familiar; one frequently meets with it in the writings of psychologists and
sociologists, and it has obtained a respectable currency with the lay public.
It has, indeed, become so hackneyed that it is the first duty of a writer who
maintains the thesis that its significance is not even yet fully understood, to
show that the popular conception of it has been far from exhaustive. As
used hitherto the idea seems to have had a certain vagueness which greatly
impaired its practical value. It furnished an interesting analogy for some of
the behaviour of man, or was enunciated as a half serious illustration by a
writer who felt himself to be in an exceptionally sardonic vein, but it was
not at all widely looked upon as a definite fact of biology which must have
consequences as precise and a significance as ascertainable as the secretion
of the gastric juice or the refracting apparatus of the eye. One of the most
familiar attitudes was that which regarded the social instinct as a late
development. The family was looked upon as the primitive unit; from it
developed the tribe, and by the spread of family feeling to the tribe the
social instinct arose. It is interesting that the psychological attack upon this
position has been anticipated by sociologists and anthropologists, and that it
is already being recognized that an undifferentiated horde rather than the
family must be regarded as the primitive basis of human society.
The most important consequence of this vague way of regarding the
social habit of man has been that no exhaustive investigation of its
psychological corollaries has been carried out. When we see the enormous
effect in determining conduct that the gregarious inheritance has in the bee,
the ant, the horse, or the dog, it is quite plain that if the gre­gar­i­ous­ness of
man had been seriously regarded as a definite fact a great amount of work
would have been done in determining precisely what reactive tendencies it
had marked out in man’s mind. Unfortunately, the amount of precise work
of this kind has been very small.
From the biological standpoint the probability of gre­gar­i­ous­ness being a
primitive and fundamental quality in man seems to be considerable. As
already pointed out, like the other great enlargement of the biological unit,
but in a much more easily recognizable degree, it would appear to have the
effect of enlarging the advantages of variation. Varieties not immediately
favourable, varieties departing widely from the standard, varieties even
unfavourable to the individual may be supposed to be given by it a chance
of survival. Now the course of the development of man seems to present
many features incompatible with its having proceeded amongst isolated
individuals exposed to the unmodified action of natural selection. Changes
so serious as the assumption of the upright posture, the reduction in the jaw
and its musculature, the reduction in the acuity of smell and hearing,
demand, if the species is to survive, either a delicacy of adjustment with the
compensatingly developing intelligence so minute as to be almost
inconceivable, or the existence of some kind of protective enclosure,
however imperfect, in which the varying individuals were sheltered from
the direct influence of natural selection. The existence of such a mechanism
would compensate losses of physical strength in the individual by the
greatly increased strength of the larger unit, of the unit, that is to say, upon
which natural selection still acts unmodified.
A realization, therefore, of this function of gre­gar­i­ous­ness relieves us
from the necessity of supposing that the double variations of diminishing
physical and increasing mental capacity always occurred pari passu. The
case for the primitiveness of the social habit would seem to be still further
strengthened by a consideration of such widely aberrant developments as
speech and the æsthetic activities, but a discussion of them here would
involve an unnecessary indulgence of biological speculation.
3. Among gregarious insects there are of course physical changes arising out of and closely
dependent on the social organization.
IV. Mental Characteristics of the Gregarious
Animal
Table of Contents
(a) Current Views in Sociology and Psychology.
If we now assume that gre­gar­i­ous­ness may be regarded as a fundamental
quality of man, it remains to discuss the effects we may expect it to have
produced upon the structure of his mind. It would be well, however, first, to
attempt to form some idea of how far investigation has already gone in this
direction. It is of course clear that no complete review of all that has been
said concerning a conception so familiar can be attempted here, and, even if
it were possible, it would not be a profitable enterprise, as the great bulk of
writers have not seen in the idea anything to justify a fundamental
examination of it. What will be done here, therefore, will be to mention a
few representative writers who have dealt with the subject, and to give in a
summary way the characteristic features of their exposition.
As far as I am aware, the first person to point out any of the less obvious
biological significance of gre­gar­i­ous­ness was Professor Karl Pearson.﻿4
He called attention to the enlargement of the selective unit effected by
the appearance of gre­gar­i­ous­ness, and to the fact that therefore within the
group the action of natural selection becomes modified. This conception
had, as is well known, escaped the insight of Haeckel, of Spencer, and of
Huxley, and Pearson showed into what confusions in their treatment of the
problems of society these three had been led by the oversight.﻿5 For example
may be mentioned the famous antithesis of the “cosmical” and the “ethical”
processes expounded in Huxley’s Romanes Lecture. It was quite definitely
indicated by Pearson that the so-called ethical process, the appearance, that
is to say, of altruism, is to be regarded as a directly instinctive product of
gre­gar­i­ous­ness, and as natural, therefore, as any other instinct.
These very clear and valuable conceptions do not seem, however, to
have received from biologists the attention they deserved, and as far as I am
aware their author has not continued further the examination of the structure
of the gregarious mind, which would undoubtedly have yielded in his hands
further conclusions of equal value.
We may next examine the attitude of a modern sociologist. I have
chosen for this purpose the work of an American sociologist, Lester Ward,
and propose briefly to indicate his position as it may be gathered from his
book entitled “Pure Sociology.”﻿6
The task of summarizing the views of any sociologist seems to me to be
rendered difficult by a certain vagueness in outline of the positions laid
down, a certain tendency for a description of fact to run into an analogy, and
an analogy to fade into an illustration. It would be discourteous to doubt
that these tendencies are necessary to the fruitful treatment of the material
of sociology, but, as they are very prominent in connection with the subject
of gre­gar­i­ous­ness, it is necessary to say that one is fully conscious of the
difficulties they give rise to, and feels that they may have led one into
unintentional mis­rep­re­sen­ta­tion.
With this proviso it may be stated that the writings of Ward produce the
feeling that he regards gre­gar­i­ous­ness as furnishing but few precise and
primitive char­ac­ter­is­tics of the human mind. The mechanisms through
which group “instinct” acts would seem to be to him largely rational
processes, and group instinct itself is regarded as a relatively late
development more or less closely associated with a rational knowledge that
it “pays.” For example, he says: “For want of a better name, I have
characterized this social instinct, or instinct of race safety, as religion, but
not without clearly perceiving that it constitutes the primordial
undifferentiated plasm out of which have subsequently developed all the
more important human institutions. This . . . if it be not an instinct, is at
least the human homologue of animal instinct, and served the same purpose
after the instincts had chiefly disappeared, and when the egotistic reason
would otherwise have rapidly carried the race to destruction in its mad
pursuit of pleasure for its own sake.”﻿7
That gre­gar­i­ous­ness has to be considered amongst the factors shaping
the tendencies of the human mind has long been recognized by the more
empirical psychologists. In the main, however, it has been regarded as a
quality perceptible only in the char­ac­ter­is­tics of actual crowds—that is to
say, assemblies of persons being and acting in association. This conception
has served to evoke a certain amount of valuable work in the observation of
the behaviour of crowds.﻿8
Owing, however, to the failure to investigate as the more essential
question the effects of gre­gar­i­ous­ness in the mind of the normal individual
man, the theoretical side of crowd psychology has remained incomplete and
relatively sterile.
There is, however, one exception, in the case of the work of Boris Sidis.
In a book entitled “The Psychology of Suggestion”﻿9 he has described
certain psychical qualities as necessarily associated with the social habit in
the individual as in the crowd. His position, therefore, demands some
discussion. The fundamental element in it is the conception of the normal
existence in the mind of a subconscious self. This subconscious or
subwaking self is regarded as embodying the “lower” and more obviously
brutal qualities of man. It is irrational, imitative, credulous, cowardly, cruel,
and lacks all individuality, will, and self-control.﻿10 This personality takes
the place of the normal personality during hypnosis and when the individual
is one of an active crowd, as, for example, in riots, panics, lynchings,
revivals, and so forth.
Of the two personalities—the subconscious and the normal—the former
alone is suggestible; the successful operation of suggestion implies the
recurrence, however transient, of a disaggregation of personality, and the
emergence of the subwaking self as the controlling mind (pp. 89 and 90). It
is this suggestibility of the subwaking self which enables man to be a social
animal. “Suggestibility is the cement of the herd, the very soul of the
primitive social group. . . . Man is a social animal, no doubt, but he is social
because he is suggestible. Suggestibility, however, requires disaggregation
of consciousness, hence society presupposes a cleavage of the mind.
Society and mental epidemics are intimately related; for the social
gregarious self is the suggestible subconscious self” (p. 310).
Judged from our present standpoint, the most valuable feature of Sidis’s
book is that it calls attention to the undoubtedly intimate relation between
gre­gar­i­ous­ness and suggestibility. The mechanism, however, by which he
supposes suggestibility to come into action is more open to criticism. The
conception of a permanent subconscious self is one to which it is doubtful
whether the evidence compels assent.﻿11 The essential difference, however,
which Sidis’s views present from those to be developed below, lies in his
regarding suggestibility as being something which is liable to intrude upon
the normal mind as the result of a disaggregation of consciousness, instead
of as a necessary quality of every normal mind, continually present, and an
inalienable accompaniment of human thought. A careful reading of his book
gives a very clear impression that he looks upon suggestibility as a
disreputable and disastrous legacy of the brute and the savage, undesirable
in civilized life, opposed to the satisfactory development of the normal
individuality, and certainly in no way associated at its origin with a quality
so valuable as altruism. Moreover, one gets the impression that he regards
suggestibility as being manifested chiefly, if not solely, in crowds, in panics,
revivals, and in conditions generally in which the element of close
association is well marked.
(b) Deductive Considerations
The functions of the gregarious habit in a species may broadly be defined as
offensive or defensive, or both. Whichever of these modes it has assumed in
the animal under consideration, it will be correlated with effects which will
be divisible into two classes—the general char­ac­ter­is­tics of the social
animal, and the special char­ac­ter­is­tics of the form of social habit possessed
by the given animal. The dog and the sheep illustrate well the char­ac­ter­is­‐
tics of the two simple forms of gre­gar­i­ous­ness—offensive and defensive.
1. Special Characteristics of the Gregarious Animal.
These need not be dealt with here, as they are the qualities which for the
most part have been treated of by psychologists in such work as has been
done on the corollaries of gre­gar­i­ous­ness in man. This is because they are
qualities which are most evident in man’s behaviour when he acts in
crowds, and are then evident as something temporarily superadded to the
possibilities of the isolated individual. Hence it has come about that they
have been taken for the most part as constituting the whole of man’s
gregarious inheritance, while the possibility that that inheritance might have
equally important consequences for the individual has been relatively
neglected.
2. General Characteristics of the Gregarious Animal.
The cardinal quality of the herd is homogeneity. It is clear that the great
advantage of the social habit is to enable large numbers to act as one,
whereby in the case of the hunting gregarious animal strength in pursuit and
attack is at once increased to beyond that of the creatures preyed upon,﻿12
and in protective socialism the sensitiveness of the new unit to alarms is
greatly in excess of that of the individual member of the flock.
To secure these advantages of homogeneity, it is evident that the
members of the herd must possess sensitiveness to the behaviour of their
fellows. The individual isolated will be of no meaning, the individual as
part of the herd will be capable of transmitting the most potent impulses.
Each member of the flock tending to follow its neighbour and in turn to be
followed, each is in some sense capable of leadership; but no lead will be
followed that departs widely from normal behaviour. A lead will be
followed only from its resemblance to the normal. If the leader go so far
ahead as definitely to cease to be in the herd, he will necessarily be ignored.
The original in conduct, that is to say resistiveness to the voice of the
herd, will be suppressed by natural selection; the wolf which does not
follow the impulses of the herd will be starved; the sheep which does not
respond to the flock will be eaten.
Again, not only will the individual be responsive to impulses coming
from the herd, but he will treat the herd as his normal environment. The
impulse to be in and always to remain with the herd will have the strongest
instinctive weight. Anything which tends to separate him from his fellows,
as soon as it becomes perceptible as such, will be strongly resisted.
So far, we have regarded the gregarious animal objectively. We have
seen that he behaves as if the herd were the only environment in which he
can live, that he is especially sensitive to impulses coming from the herd,
and quite differently affected by the behaviour of animals not in the herd.
Let us now try to estimate the mental aspects of these impulses. Suppose a
species in possession of precisely the instinctive endowments which we
have been considering, to be also self-conscious, and let us ask what will be
the forms under which these phenomena will present themselves in its
mind. In the first place, it is quite evident that impulses derived from herd
feeling will enter the mind with the value of instincts—they will present
themselves as “a priori syntheses of the most perfect sort needing no proof
but their own evidence.” They will not, however, it is important to
remember, necessarily always give this quality to the same specific acts, but
will show this great distinguishing characteristic that they may give to any
opinion whatever the characters of instinctive belief, making it into an “a
priori synthesis”; so that we shall expect to find acts which it would be
absurd to look upon as the results of specific instincts carried out with all
the enthusiasm of instinct, and displaying all the marks of instinctive
behaviour. The failure to recognize this appearance of herd impulse as a
tendency, as a power which can confer instinctive sanctions on any part of
the field of belief or action, has prevented the social habit of man from
attracting as much of the attention of psychologists as it might profitably
have done.
In interpreting into mental terms the consequences of gre­gar­i­ous­ness,
we may conveniently begin with the simplest. The conscious individual will
feel an unanalysable primary sense of comfort in the actual presence of his
fellows, and a similar sense of discomfort in their absence. It will be
obvious truth to him that it is not good for the man to be alone. Loneliness
will be a real terror, insurmountable by reason.
Again, certain conditions will become secondarily associated with
presence with, or absence from, the herd. For example, take the sensations
of heat and cold. The latter is prevented in gregarious animals by close
crowding, and experienced in the reverse condition; hence it comes to be
connected in the mind with separation, and so acquires altogether
unreasonable associations of harmfulness. Similarly, the sensation of
warmth is associated with feelings of the secure and salutary. It has taken
medicine many thousands of years to begin to doubt the validity of the
popular conception of the harmfulness of cold; yet to the psychologist such
a doubt is immediately obvious.﻿13
Slightly more complex manifestations of the same tendency to
homogeneity are seen in the desire for identification with the herd in
matters of opinion. Here we find the biological explanation of the
ineradicable impulse mankind has always displayed towards segregation
into classes. Each one of us in his opinions and his conduct, in matters of
dress, amusement, religion, and politics, is compelled to obtain the support
of a class, of a herd within the herd. The most eccentric in opinion or
conduct is, we may be sure, supported by the agreement of a class, the
smallness of which accounts for his apparent eccentricity, and the
preciousness of which accounts for his fortitude in defying general opinion.
Again, anything which tends to emphasize difference from the herd is
unpleasant. In the individual mind there will be an unanalysable dislike of
the novel in action or thought. It will be “wrong,” “wicked,” “foolish,”
“undesirable,” or as we say “bad form,” according to varying circumstances
which we can already to some extent define.
Manifestations relatively more simple are shown in the dislike of being
conspicuous, in shyness and in stage fright. It is, however, sensitiveness to
the behaviour of the herd which has the most important effects upon the
structure of the mind of the gregarious animal. This sensitiveness is closely
associated with the suggestibility of the gregarious animal, and therefore
with that of man. The effect of it will clearly be to make acceptable those
suggestions which come from the herd, and those only. It is of especial
importance to note that this suggestibility is not general, and that it is only
herd suggestions which are rendered acceptable by the action of instinct.
Man is, for example, notoriously insensitive to the suggestions of
experience. The history of what is rather grandiosely called human progress
everywhere illustrates this. If we look back upon the development of some
such thing as the steam-engine, we cannot fail to be struck by the extreme
obviousness of each advance, and how obstinately it was refused
assimilation until the machine almost invented itself.
Again, of two suggestions, that which the more perfectly embodies the
voice of the herd is the more acceptable. The chances an affirmation has of
being accepted could therefore be most satisfactorily expressed in terms of
the bulk of the herd by which it is backed.
It follows from the foregoing that anything which dissociates a
suggestion from the herd will tend to ensure such a suggestion being
rejected. For example, an imperious command from an individual known to
be without authority is necessarily disregarded, whereas the same person
making the same suggestion in an indirect way so as to link it up with the
voice of the herd will meet with success.
It is unfortunate that in discussing these facts it has been necessary to
use the word “suggestibility,” which has so thorough an implication of the
abnormal. If the biological explanation of suggestibility here set forth be
accepted, the latter must necessarily be a normal quality of the human mind.
To believe must be an ineradicable natural bias of man, or in other words an
affirmation, positive or negative, is more readily accepted than rejected,
unless its source is definitely dissociated from the herd. Man is not,
therefore, suggestible by fits and starts, not merely in panics and in mobs,
under hypnosis, and so forth, but always, everywhere, and under any
circumstances. The capricious way in which man reacts to different
suggestions has been attributed to variations in his suggestibility. This in the
opinion of the present writer is an incorrect interpretation of the facts which
are more satisfactorily explained by regarding the variations as due to the
differing extent to which suggestions are identified with the voice of the
herd.
Man’s resistiveness to certain suggestions, and especially to experience,
as is seen so well in his attitude to the new, becomes therefore but another
evidence of his suggestibility, since the new has always to encounter the
opposition of herd tradition.
The apparent diminution in direct suggestibility with advancing years,
such as was demonstrated in children by Binet, is in the case of the adult
familiar to all, and is there usually regarded as evidence of a gradually
advancing organic change in the brain. It can be regarded, at least plausibly,
as being due to the fact that increase of years must bring an increase in the
accumulations of herd suggestion, and so tend progressively to fix opinion.
In the early days of the human race, the appearance of the faculty of
speech must have led to an immediate increase in the extent to which the
decrees of the herd could be promulgated, and the field to which they
applied. Now the desire for certitude is one of profound depth in the human
mind, and possibly a necessary property of any mind, and it is very
plausible to suppose that it led in these early days to the whole field of life
being covered by pronouncements backed by the instinctive sanction of the
herd. The life of the individual would be completely surrounded by
sanctions of the most tremendous kind. He would know what he might and
might not do, and what would happen if he disobeyed. It would be
immaterial if experience confirmed these beliefs or not, because it would
have incomparably less weight than the voice of the herd. Such a period is
the only trace perceptible by the biologist of the Golden Age fabled by the
poet, when things happened as they ought, and hard facts had not begun to
vex the soul of man. In some such condition we still find the Central
Australian native. His whole life, to its minutest detail, is ordained for him
by the voice of the herd, and he must not, under the most dreadful
sanctions, step outside its elaborate order. It does not matter to him that an
infringement of the code under his very eyes is not followed by judgment,
for with tribal suggestion so compactly organized, such cases are in fact no
difficulty, and do not trouble his belief, just as in more civilized countries
apparent instances of malignity in the reigning deity are not found to be
inconsistent with his benevolence.
Such must everywhere have been primitive human conditions, and upon
them reason intrudes as an alien and hostile power, disturbing the perfection
of life, and causing an unending series of conflicts.
Experience, as is shown by the whole history of man, is met by
resistance because it invariably encounters decisions based upon instinctive
belief, and nowhere is this fact more clearly to be seen than in the way in
which the progress of science has been made.
In matters that really interest him, man cannot support the suspense of
judgment which science so often has to enjoin. He is too anxious to feel
certain to have time to know. So that we see of the sciences, mathematics
appearing first, then astronomy, then physics, then chemistry, then biology,
then psychology, then sociology—but always the new field was grudged to
the new method, and we still have the denial to sociology of the name of
science. Nowadays, matters of national defence, of politics, of religion, are
still too important for knowledge, and remain subjects for certitude; that is
to say, in them we still prefer the comfort of instinctive belief, because we
have not learnt adequately to value the capacity to foretell.
Direct observation of man reveals at once the fact that a very
considerable proportion of his beliefs are non-rational to a degree which is
immediately obvious without any special examination, and with no special
resources other than common knowledge. If we examine the mental
furniture of the average man, we shall find it made up of a vast number of
judgments of a very precise kind upon subjects of very great variety,
complexity, and difficulty. He will have fairly settled views upon the origin
and nature of the universe, and upon what he will probably call its meaning;
he will have conclusions as to what is to happen to him at death and after, as
to what is and what should be the basis of conduct. He will know how the
country should be governed, and why it is going to the dogs, why this piece
of legislation is good and that bad. He will have strong views upon military
and naval strategy, the principles of taxation, the use of alcohol and
vaccination, the treatment of influenza, the prevention of hydrophobia,
upon municipal trading, the teaching of Greek, upon what is permissible in
art, satisfactory in literature, and hopeful in science.
The bulk of such opinions must necessarily be without rational basis,
since many of them are concerned with problems admitted by the expert to
be still unsolved, while as to the rest it is clear that the training and
experience of no average man can qualify him to have any opinion upon
them at all. The rational method adequately used would have told him that
on the great majority of these questions there could be for him but one
attitude—that of suspended judgment.
In view of the considerations that have been discussed above, this
wholesale acceptance of non-rational belief must be looked upon as normal.
The mechanism by which it is effected demands some examination, since it
cannot be denied that the facts conflict noticeably with popularly current
views as to the part taken by reason in the formation of opinion.
It is clear at the outset that these beliefs are invariably regarded by the
holder as rational, and defended as such, while the position of one who
holds contrary views is held to be obviously unreasonable. The religious
man accuses the atheist of being shallow and irrational, and is met by a
similar reply; to the Conservative, the amazing thing about the Liberal is his
incapacity to see reason and accept the only possible solution of public
problems. Examination reveals the fact that the differences are not due to
the commission of the mere mechanical fallacies of logic, since these are
easily avoided, even by the politician, and since there is no reason to
suppose that one party in such controversies is less logical than the other.
The difference is due rather to the fundamental assumptions of the
antagonists being hostile, and these assumptions are derived from herd
suggestion; to the Liberal, certain basal conceptions have acquired the
quality of instinctive truth, have become “a priori syntheses,” because of
the accumulated suggestions to which he has been exposed, and a similar
explanation applies to the atheist, the Christian, and the Conservative. Each,
it is important to remember, finds in consequence the rationality of his
position flawless, and is quite incapable of detecting in it the fallacies which
are obvious to his opponent, to whom that particular series of assumptions
has not been rendered acceptable by herd suggestion.
To continue further the analysis of non-rational opinion, it should be
observed that the mind rarely leaves uncriticized the assumptions which are
forced on it by herd suggestion, the tendency being for it to find more or
less elaborately rationalized justifications of them. This is in accordance
with the enormously exaggerated weight which is always ascribed to reason
in the formation of opinion and conduct, as is very well seen, for example,
in the explanation of the existence of altruism as being due to man seeing
that it “pays.”
It is of cardinal importance to recognize that in this process of the
rationalization of instinctive belief, it is the belief which is the primary
thing, while the explanation, although masquerading as the cause of the
belief, as the chain of rational evidence on which the belief is founded, is
entirely secondary, and but for the belief would never have been thought of.
Such rationalizations are often, in the case of intelligent people, of extreme
ingenuity, and may be very misleading unless the true instinctive basis of
the given opinion or action is thoroughly understood.
This mechanism enables the English lady, who, to escape the stigma of
having normal feet, subjects them to a formidable degree of lateral
compression, to be aware of no logical inconsequence when she subscribes
to missions to teach the Chinese lady how absurd it is to compress her feet
longitudinally; it enables the European lady who wears rings in her ears to
smile at the barbarism of the coloured lady who wears her rings in her nose;
it enables the Englishman who is amused by the African chieftain’s regard
for the top hat as an essential piece of the furniture of state to ignore the
identity of his own behaviour when he goes to church beneath the same
tremendous ensign.
The objectivist finds himself compelled to regard these and similar
correspondences between the behaviour of civilized and barbarous man as
no mere interesting coincidences, but as phenomena actually and in the
grossest way identical, but such an attitude is possible only when the
mechanism is understood by which rationalization of these customs is
effected.
The process of rationalization which has just been illustrated by some of
its simpler varieties is best seen on the largest scale, and in the most
elaborate form, in the pseudosciences of political economy and ethics. Both
of these are occupied in deriving from eternal principles justifications for
masses of non-rational belief which are assumed to be permanent merely
because they exist. Hence the notorious acrobatic feats of both in the face of
any considerable variation in herd belief.
It would seem that the obstacles to rational thought which have been
pointed out in the foregoing discussion have received much less attention
than should have been directed towards them. To maintain an attitude of
mind which could be called scientific in any complete sense, it is of
cardinal importance to recognize that belief of affirmations sanctioned by
the herd is a normal mechanism of the human mind, and goes on however
much such affirmations may be opposed by evidence, that reason cannot
enforce belief against herd suggestion, and finally that totally false opinions
may appear to the holder of them to possess all the characters of rationally
verifiable truth, and may be justified by secondary processes of
rationalization which it may be impossible directly to combat by argument.
It should be noticed, however, that verifiable truths may acquire the
potency of herd suggestion, so that the suggestibility of man does not
necessarily or always act against the advancement of knowledge. For
example, to the student of biology the principles of Darwinism may acquire
the force of herd suggestion through being held by the class which he most
respects, is most in contact with and the class which has therefore acquired
suggestionizing power with him. Propositions consistent with these
principles will now necessarily be more acceptable to him, whatever the
evidence by which they are supported, than they would be to one who had
not been exposed to the same influences. The opinion, in fact, may be
hazarded that the acceptance of any proposition is invariably the resultant of
suggestive influences, whether the proposition be true or false, and that the
balance of suggestion is usually on the side of the false, because, education
being what it is, the scientific method—the method, that is to say, of
experience—has so little chance of acquiring suggestionizing force.
Thus far sensitiveness to the herd has been discussed in relation to its
effect upon intellectual processes. Equally important effects are traceable in
feeling.
It is obvious that when free communication is possible by speech, the
expressed approval or disapproval of the herd will acquire the qualities of
identity or dissociation from the herd respectively. To know that he is doing
what would arouse the disapproval of the herd will bring to the individual
the same profound sense of discomfort which would accompany actual
physical separation, while to know that he is doing what the herd would
approve will give him the sense of rightness, of gusto, and of stimulus
which would accompany physical presence in the herd and response to its
mandates. In both cases it is clear that no actual expression by the herd is
necessary to arouse the appropriate feelings, which would come from
within and have, in fact, the qualities which are recognized in the dictates of
conscience. Conscience, then, and the feelings of guilt and of duty are the
peculiar possessions of the gregarious animal. A dog and a cat caught in the
commission of an offence will both recognize that punishment is coming;
but the dog, moreover, knows that he has done wrong, and he will come to
be punished, unwillingly it is true, and as if dragged along by some power
outside him, while the cat’s sole impulse is to escape. The rational
recognition of the sequence of act and punishment is equally clear to the
gregarious and to the solitary animal, but it is the former only who
understands that he has committed a crime, who has, in fact, the sense of
sin. That this is the origin of what we call conscience is confirmed by the
char­ac­ter­is­tics of the latter which are accessible to observation. Any
detailed examination of the phenomena of conscience would lead too far to
be admissible here. Two facts, however, should be noticed. First, the
judgments of conscience vary in different circles, and are dependent on
local environments; secondly, they are not advantageous to the species to
the slightest degree beyond the dicta of the morals current in the circle in
which they originate. These facts—stated here in an extremely summary
way—demonstrate that conscience is an indirect result of the gregarious
instinct, and is in no sense derived from a special instinct forcing men to
consider the good of the race rather than individual desires.

4. Many references to the subject will be found in his published works, for example in “The
Grammar of Science,” in “National Life from the Standpoint of Science,” and in “The Chances
of Death.” In the collection of Essays last named the essay entitled “Socialism and Natural
Selection” deals most fully with the subject.
5. “Socialism and Natural Selection” in “The Chances of Death.”
6. Lester F. Ward, “Pure Sociology: a Treatise on the Origin and Spontaneous Development of
Society.” New York: The Macmillan Co. 1903. I do not venture to decide whether this work may
be regarded as representative of orthodox sociology, if there be such a thing; I have made the
choice because of the author’s capacity for fresh and ingenious speculation and his obviously
wide knowledge of sociological literature.
7. “Pure Sociology,” p. 134. Italics not in original. Passages of a similar tendency will be found on
pp. 200 and 556.
8. For example, the little book of Gustave Le Bon—“Psychologie des Foules,” Paris: Felix Alcan—
in which are formulated many gen­er­al­i­za­tions.
9. “The Psychology of Suggestion: a Research into the Subconscious Nature of Man and Society,”
by Boris Sidis, with an Introduction by Prof. Wm. James. New York. 1903.
10. “Psychology of Suggestion,” p. 295.
11. In this connexion the “Symposium on the Subconscious” in the Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, vol. ii. Nos. 1 and 2, is of much interest. The discussion is contributed to by
Münsterberg, Ribot Jastrow, Pierre Janet, and Morton Prince.
12. The wolf pack forms an organism, it is interesting to note, stronger than the lion or the tiger;
capable of compensating for the loss of members; inexhaustible in pursuit, and therefore capable
by sheer strength of hunting down without wile or artifice the fleetest animals; capable finally of
consuming all the food it kills, and thus possessing another considerable advantage over the
large solitary carnivora in not tending uselessly to exhaust its food supply. The advantages of the
social habit in carnivora is well shown by the survival of wolves in civilized countries even to-
day.
13. Any one who has watched the behaviour of the dog and the cat towards warmth and cold cannot
have failed to notice the effect of the gregarious habit on the former. The cat displays a moderate
liking for warmth, but also a decided indifference to cold, and will quietly sit in the snow in a
way which would be impossible to the dog.
Sociological Applications of the Psychology of
Herd Instinct
Table of Contents
It was shown in the previous essay that the gregarious mental character is
evident in man’s behaviour, not only in crowds and other circumstances of
actual association, but also in his behaviour as an individual, however
isolated. The conclusions were arrived at that man’s suggestibility is not the
abnormal casual phenomenon it is often supposed to be, but a normal
instinct present in every individual, and that the apparent inconstancy of its
action is due to the common failure to recognize the extent of the field over
which suggestion acts; that the only medium in which man’s mind can
function satisfactorily is the herd, which therefore is not only the source of
his opinions, his credulities, his disbeliefs, and his weaknesses, but of his
altruism, his charity, his enthusiasms, and his power.
The subject of the psychological effects of herd instinct is so wide that
the discussion of it in the former essay covered only a comparatively small
part of the field, and that in a very cursory way. Such as it was, however, it
cannot be further amplified here, where an attempt will rather be made to
sketch some of the practical corollaries of such gen­er­al­i­za­tions as were laid
down there.
In the first place, it must be stated with emphasis that deductive
speculation of this sort finds its principal value in opening up new
possibilities for the application of a more exact method. Science is
measurement, but the deductive method may indicate those things which
can be most profitably measured.
When the overwhelming importance of the suggestibility of man is
recognized our first effort should be to obtain exact numerical expressions
of it. This is not the place to attempt any exposition of the directions in
which experiment should proceed; but it may be stated that what we want to
know is, how much suggestion can do in the way of inducing belief, and it
may be guessed that we shall ultimately be able to express the force of
suggestion in terms of the number of undifferentiated units of the herd it
represents. In the work that has already been done, chiefly by Binet and by
Sidis, the suggestive force experimented with was relatively feeble, and the
effects consequently were rendered liable to great disturbance from the
spontaneous action of other forces of suggestion already in the mind. Sidis,
for example, found that his subjects often yielded to his suggestions out of
“politeness”; this source of difficulty was obviously due to his use of pure
individual suggestion, a variety which theory shows to be weak or even
directly resisted.
The next feature of practical interest is connected with the hypothesis,
which we attempted in the former article to demonstrate, that irrational
belief forms a large bulk of the furniture of the mind, and is indis­tin­guish­‐
able by the subject from rational verifiable knowledge. It is obviously of
cardinal importance to be able to effect this distinction, for it is the failure
to do so which, while it is not the cause of the slowness of advance in
knowledge, is the mechanism by which this delay is brought about. Is there,
then, we may ask, any discoverable touchstone by which non-rational
opinion may be distinguished from rational? Non-rational judgments, being
the product of suggestion, will have the quality of instinctive opinion, or, as
we may call it, of belief in the strict sense. The essence of this quality is
obviousness; the truth held in this way is one of James’s “a priori syntheses
of the most perfect sort”; to question it is to the believer to carry scepticism
to an insane degree, and will be met by contempt, disapproval, or
condemnation, according to the nature of the belief in question. When,
therefore, we find ourselves entertaining an opinion about the basis of
which there is a quality of feeling which tells us that to inquire into it would
be absurd, obviously unnecessary, unprofitable, undesirable, bad form, or
wicked, we may know that that opinion is a non-rational one, and probably,
therefore, founded upon inadequate evidence.
Opinions, on the other hand, which are acquired as the result of
experience alone do not possess this quality of primary certitude. They are
true in the sense of being verifiable, but they are unaccompanied by that
profound feeling of truth which belief possesses, and, therefore, we have no
sense of reluctance in admitting inquiry into them. That heavy bodies tend
to fall to the earth and that fire burns fingers are truths verifiable and
verified every day, but we do not hold them with impassioned certitude, and
we do not resent or resist inquiry into their basis; whereas in such a
question as that of the survival of death by human personality we hold the
favourable or the adverse view with a quality of feeling entirely different,
and of such a kind that inquiry into the matter is looked upon as
disreputable by orthodox science and as wicked by orthodox religion. In
relation to this subject, it may be remarked, we often see it very
interestingly shown that the holders of two diametrically opposed opinions,
one of which is certainly right, may both show by their attitude that the
belief is held instinctively and non-rationally, as, for example, when an
atheist and a Christian unite in repudiating inquiry into the existence of the
soul.
A third practical corollary of a recognition of the true gre­gar­i­ous­ness of
man is the very obvious one that it is not by any means necessary that
suggestion should always act on the side of unreason. The despair of the
reformer has always been the irrationality of man, and latterly some have
come to regard the future as hopeless until we can breed a rational species.
Now, the trouble is not irrationality, not a definite preference for unreason,
but suggestibility—that is, a capacity for accepting reason or unreason if it
comes from the proper source.
This quality we have seen to be a direct consequence of the social habit,
of a single definite instinct, that of gre­gar­i­ous­ness, the same instinct which
makes social life at all possible and altruism a reality.
It does not seem to have been fully understood that if you attack
suggestibility by selection—and that is what you do if you breed for
rationality—you are attacking gre­gar­i­ous­ness, for there is at present no
adequate evidence that the gregarious instinct is other than a simple
character and one which cannot be split up by the breeder. If, then, such an
effort in breeding were successful, we should exchange the manageable
unreason of man for the inhuman rationality of the tiger.
The solution would seem rather to lie in seeing to it that suggestion
always acts on the side of reason; if rationality were once to become really
respectable, if we feared the entertaining of an unverifiable opinion with the
warmth with which we fear using the wrong implement at the dinner table,
if the thought of holding a prejudice disgusted us as does a foul disease,
then the dangers of man’s suggestibility would be turned into advantages.
We have seen that suggestion already has begun to act on the side of reason
in some small part of the life of the student of science, and it is possible that
a highly sanguine prophetic imagination might detect here a germ of future
changes.
Again, a fourth corollary of gre­gar­i­ous­ness in man is the fact expounded
many years ago by Pearson that human altruism is a natural instinctive
product. The obvious dependence of the evolution of altruism upon increase
in knowledge and inter-communication has led to its being regarded as a
late and a conscious development—as something in the nature of a
judgment by the individual that it pays him to be unselfish. This is an
interesting rationalization of the facts because in the sense in which “pay” is
meant it is so obviously false. Altruism does not at present, and cannot, pay
the individual in anything but feeling, as theory declares it must. It is clear,
of course, that as long as altruism is regarded as in the nature of a judgment,
the fact is overlooked that necessarily its only reward can be in feeling.
Man is altruistic because he must be, not because reason recommends it, for
herd suggestion opposes any advance in altruism, and when it can the herd
executes the altruist, not of course as such but as an innovator. This is a
remarkable instance of the protean character of the gregarious instinct and
the complexity it introduces into human affairs, for we see one instinct
producing manifestations directly hostile to each other—prompting to ever
advancing developments of altruism, while it necessarily leads to any new
product of advance being attacked. It shows, moreover, as will be pointed
out again later, that a gregarious species rapidly developing a complex
society can be saved from inextricable confusion only by the appearance of
reason and the application of it to life.
When we remember the fearful repressing force which society has
always exercised on new forms of altruism and how constantly the
dungeon, the scaffold, and the cross have been the reward of the altruist, we
are able to get some conception of the force of the instinctive impulse
which has triumphantly defied these terrors, and to appreciate in some
slight degree how irresistible an enthusiasm it might become if it were
encouraged by the unanimous voice of the herd.
In conclusion we have to deal with one more consequence of the social
habit in man, a consequence the discussion of which involves some
speculation of a necessarily quite tentative kind.
If we look in a broad, general way at the four instincts which bulk
largely in man’s life, namely, those of self-preservation, nutrition, sex, and
the herd, we shall see at once that there is a striking difference between the
mode of action of the first three and that of the last. The first three, which
we may, for convenience and without prejudice, call the primitive instincts,
have in common the characteristic of attaining their maximal activities only
over short periods and in special sets of circumstances, and of being
fundamentally pleasant to yield to. They do not remain in action
concurrently, but when the circumstances are appropriate for the yielding to
one, the others automatically fall into the background, and the governing
impulse is absolute master. Thus these instincts cannot be supposed at all
frequently to conflict amongst themselves, and the animal possessing them
alone, however highly developed his consciousness might be, would lead a
life emotionally quite simple, for at any given moment he would necessarily
be doing what he most wanted to do. We may, therefore, imagine him to be
endowed with the feelings of free-will and reality to a superb degree,
wholly unperplexed by doubt and wholly secure in his unity of purpose.
The appearance of the fourth instinct, however, introduces a profound
change, for this instinct has the characteristic that it exercises a controlling
power upon the individual from without. In the case of the solitary animal
yielding to instinct the act itself is pleasant, and the whole creature, as it
were body and soul, pours itself out in one smooth concurrence of reaction.
With the social animal controlled by herd instinct it is not the actual deed
which is instinctively done, but the order to do it which is instinctively
obeyed. The deed, being ordained from without, may actually be
unpleasant, and so be resisted from the individual side and yet be forced
instinctively into execution. The instinctive act seems to have been too
much associated in current thought with the idea of yielding to an impulse
irresistibly pleasant to the body, yet it is very obvious that herd instinct at
once introduces a mechanism by which the sanctions of instinct are
conferred upon acts by no means necessarily acceptable to the body or
mind. This, of course, involves an enormous increase of the range through
which instinct can be made use of. Its appearance marks the beginning of
the multifarious activities of man and of his stupendous success as a
species; but a spectator watching the process at its outset, had he been
interested in the destiny of the race, might have felt a pang of apprehension
when he realized how momentous was the divorce which had been
accomplished between instinct and individual desire. Instinctive acts are
still done because they are based on “a priori syntheses of the most perfect
sort,” but they are no longer necessarily pleasant. Duty has first appeared in
the world, and with it the age-long conflict which is described in the
memorable words of Paul: “I delight in the law of God after the inward
man; but I see another law in my members warring against the law of my
mind and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my
members.”
Into the features and consequences of this conflict it is now necessary
for us to probe a little farther.
The element of conflict in the normal life of all inhabitants of a civilized
state is so familiar that no formal demonstration of its existence is
necessary. In childhood the process has begun. The child receives from the
herd the doctrines, let us say, that truthfulness is the most valuable of all the
virtues, that honesty is the best policy, that to the religious man death has no
terrors, and that there is in store a future life of perfect happiness and
delight. And yet experience tells him with persistence that truthfulness as
often as not brings him punishment, that his dishonest playfellow has as
good if not a better time than he, that the religious man shrinks from death
with as great a terror as the unbeliever, is as broken-hearted by
bereavement, and as determined to continue his hold upon this imperfect
life rather than trust himself to what he declares to be the certainty of future
bliss. To the child, of course, experience has but little suggestive force, and
he is easily consoled by the perfunctory rationalizations offered him as
explanations by his elders. Yet who of us is there who cannot remember the
vague feeling of dissatisfaction, the obscure and elusive sense of something
being wrong, which is left by these and similar conflicts?
When the world begins to open out before us and experience to flow in
with rapidly increasing volume, the state of affairs necessarily becomes
more obvious. The mental unrest which we, with a certain cynicism, regard
as normal to adolescence is evidence of the heavy handicap we lay upon the
developing mind in forcing it to attempt to assimilate with experience the
dicta of herd suggestion. Moreover, let us remember, to the adolescent
experience is no longer the shadowy and easily manipulable series of
dreams which it usually is to the child. It has become touched with the
warmth and reality of instinctive feeling. The primitive instincts are now
fully developed and finding themselves balked at every turn by herd
suggestion; indeed, even products of the latter are in conflict among
themselves. Not only sex, self-preservation, and nutrition are at war with
the pronouncements of the herd, but altruism, the ideal of rationality, the
desire for power, the yearning for protection, and other feelings which have
acquired instinctive force from group suggestion.
The sufferings entailed by this condition are commonplace knowledge,
and there is scarcely a novelist who has not dealt with them. It is around
matters of sex and of religion that the conflict is most severe, and while it is
no part of our purpose to make any detailed survey of the condition, it may
be of interest to point out some of the more obvious significances of this
localization.
Religion has always been to man an intensely serious matter, and when
we realize its biological significance we can see that this is due to a deeply
ingrained need of his mind. The individual of a gregarious species can
never be truly independent and self-sufficient. Natural selection has ensured
that as an individual he must have an abiding sense of incompleteness,
which, as thought develops in complexity, will come to be more and more
abstractly expressed. This is the psychological germ which expresses itself
in the religious feelings, in the desire for completion, for mystical union, for
incorporation with the infinite, which are all provided for in Christianity
and in all the successful sub-varieties of Christianity which modern times
have seen develop. This need seems with the increasing complexity of
society to become more and more imperious, or rather to be satisfiable only
by more and more elaborately rationalized expressions. The following is a
representative passage from a recent very popular book of mystical religion:
“The great central fact in human life, in your life and in mine, is the coming
into a conscious vital realization of our oneness with the Infinite Life and
the opening of ourselves fully to this divine inflow.” It is very interestingly
shown here to what lengths of rationalization may be forced the
consequences of that yearning in us which is identical with the mechanism
that binds the wolf to the pack, the sheep to the flock, and to the dog makes
the company of his master like walking with God in the cool of the evening.
Did an opportunity offer, it would be interesting to inquire into the
relation of the same instinctive impulse to the genesis of philosophy. Such
an attempt would, however, involve too great a digression from the
argument of this essay.
That sex should be a chief field for the conflicts we are discussing is
comprehensible not only from the immense strength of the impulse and the
fact that it is a mode of man’s activity which herd suggestion has always
tried to regulate, but also because there is reason to believe that the sex
impulse becomes secondarily associated with another instinctive feeling of
great strength, namely, altruism. We have seen already that altruism is
largely antagonized by herd tradition, and it is plausible to suppose that the
overwhelming rush of this feeling which is usually associated with sex
feelings is not altogether sexual in quality, but secondarily associated
therewith as being the only outlet through which it is allowed by the herd to
indulge manifestations of really passionate intensity. If this were so it would
clearly be of great practical importance should the rational method ever
come to be applied to the solution of the problems for the sociologist and
statesman which surround the relations of the sexes.
The conflicts which we are discussing are of course by no means
limited to the periods of childhood and adolescence, but are frequently
carried over into adult life. To understand how the apparent calm of normal
adult life is attained, it is necessary to consider the effects upon the mind of
these processes of contention.
Let us consider the case of a person caught in one of those dilemmas
which society presents so abundantly to its members—a man seized with a
passion for some individual forbidden to him by the herd, or a man whose
eyes have been opened to the vision of the cruelty which everywhere lies
close below the surface of life, and yet has deeply ingrained in him the
doctrine of the herd that things, on the whole, are fundamentally right, that
the universe is congruous with his moral feelings, that the seeming cruelty
is mercy and the apparent indifference long-suffering. Now, what are the
possible developments in such a tormented soul?
The conflict may end through the subsidence of either antagonist. Years,
other instincts, or grosser passions may moderate the intensity of
ungratified love or take away the sharpness from the sight of in­com­pre­hen­‐
sible pain.
Again, scepticism may detect the nature of the herd suggestion and
deprive it of its compelling force.
Thirdly, the problem may be shirked by the easy mechanism of
rationalization. The man may take his forbidden pleasure and endow a
chapel, persuading himself that his is a special case, that at any rate he is
not as bad as X, or Y, or Z, who committed such and such enormities, that
after all there is Divine mercy, and he never beat his wife, and was always
regular with his subscriptions to missions and the hospitals. Or, if his
difficulty is the ethical one, he will come to see how right the herd view
really is; that it is a very narrow mind which cannot see the intrinsic
excellence of suffering; that the sheep and cattle we breed for eating, the
calf we bleed to death that its meat may be white, the one baby out of four
we kill in the first year of life, that cancer, consumption, and insanity and
the growing river of blood which bathes the feet of advancing mankind, all
have their part in the Increasing Purpose which is leading the race ever
upwards and onwards to a Divine consummation of joy. Thus the conflict
ceases, and the man is content to watch the blood and the Purpose go on
increasing together and to put on flesh unperplexed by the shallow and
querulous scruples of his youth.
Of these three solutions that of scepticism is unquestionably the least
common, though the impression that this is not the case is created by the
frequency of apparent scepticism, which, in fact, merely masks the
continuation of conflict in the deeper strata of the mind. A man the subject
of such submerged conflict, though he may appear to others, and, of course,
to himself, to have reached a secure and uncontested basis of stability, may,
after a period of apparently frictionless mental life, betray by unmistakable
evidence the fact that conflict has continued disastrously below the surface.
The solutions by indifference and by rationalization or by a mixture of
these two processes are characteristic of the great class of normal, sensible,
reliable middle age, with its definite views, its resiliency to the depressing
influence of facts, and its gift for forming the backbone of the State. In
them herd suggestion shows its capacity to triumph over experience, to
delay the evolution of altruism, and to obscure the existence and falsify the
results of the contest between personal and social desires. That it is able to
do so has the advantage of establishing existing society with great firmness,
but it has also the consequence of entrusting the conduct of the State and
the attitude of it towards life to a class which their very stability shows to
possess a certain relative incapacity to take experience seriously, a certain
relative insensibility to the value of feeling and to suffering, and a decided
preference for herd tradition over all other sources of conduct.
Early in history the bulk of mankind must have been of this type,
because experience, being still relatively simple, would have but little
suggestive force, and would therefore readily be suppressed by herd
suggestion. There would be little or no mental conflict, and such as there
was would be readily stilled by comparatively simple rationalizations. The
average man would then be happy, active, and possessed of an inexhaustible
fund of motive and energy, capable of intense patriotism and even of self-
immolation for the herd. The nation consequently, in an appropriate
environment, would be an expanding one and rendered ruthless and
formidable by an intense, unshakable conviction of its divine mission. Its
blindness towards the new in experience would keep its patriots narrow and
fierce, its priests bigoted and bloodthirsty, its rulers arrogant, reactionary,
and over-confident. Should chance ordain that there arose no great
environmental change rendering necessary great modifications, such a
nation would have a brilliant career of conquest as has been so often
demonstrated by history.
Amongst the first-class Powers to-day the mentally stable are still the
directing class, and their characteristic tone is discernible in national
attitudes towards experience, in national ideals and religions, and in
national morality. It is this possession of the power of directing national
opinion by a class which is in essence relatively insensitive towards new
combinations of experience; this persistence of a mental type which may
have been adequate in the simpler past, into a world where environments
are daily becoming more complex—it is this survival, so to say, of the
waggoner upon the footplate of the express engine, which has made the
modern history of nations a series of such breathless adventures and
hairbreadth escapes. To those who are able to view national affairs from an
objective standpoint, it is obvious that each of these escapes might very
easily have been a disaster, and that sooner or later one of them must be
such.
Thus far we have seen that the conflict between herd suggestion and
experience is associated with the appearance of the great mental type which
is commonly called normal. Whether or not it is in fact to be regarded as
such is comparatively unimportant and obviously a question of statistics;
what is, however, of an importance impossible to exaggerate is the fact that
in this type of mind personal satisfactoriness or adequacy, or, as we may
call it, mental comfort, is attained at the cost of an attitude towards
experience which greatly affects the value to the species of the activities of
minds of this type. This mental stability, then, is to be regarded as, in certain
important directions, a loss; and the nature of the loss resides in a limitation
of outlook, a relative intolerance of the new in thought, and a consequent
narrowing of the range of facts over which satisfactory intellectual activity
is possible. We may, therefore, for convenience, refer to this type as the
resistive, a name which serves as a reminder of the exceedingly important
fact that, however “normal” the type may be, it is one which falls far short
of the possibilities of the human mind.
If we now turn to a consideration of the mental char­ac­ter­is­tics of the
constituents of society other than those of the resistive type, we shall find a
common quality traceable, and another great type capable of broad
definition. We must at once, however, guard ourselves against being misled
by the name “normal” as applied to the resistant into the supposition that
this type is in a numerical majority in society. Intellectually unquestionably
of inferior value, there is good reason to suppose that in mere numbers it
has already passed its zenith, as may be gathered from the note of panic
which what is called the increase of degeneracy is beginning to excite.
Outside the comfortable and possibly diminishing ranks of the
“normal,” society is everywhere penetrated by a steadily increasing degree
of what we may call in the broadest possible way mental instability. All
observers of society, even the most optimistic, are agreed that the
prevalence of this mental quality is increasing, while those who are
competent to trace its less obtrusive manifestations find it to be very
widespread.
When the twenty years just past come to be looked back upon from the
distant future, it is probable that their chief claim to interest will be that they
saw the birth of the science of abnormal psychology. That science,
inconspicuous as has been its development, has already given us a few gen­‐
er­al­i­za­tions of the first importance. Amongst such, perhaps the most
valuable is that which has taught us that certain mental and physical
manifestations which have usually been regarded as disease in the ordinary
sense are due to the effects upon the mind of the failure to assimilate the
experience presented to it into a harmonious unitary personality. We have
seen that the stable-minded deal with an unsatisfactory piece of experience
by rejecting its significance. In certain minds such successful exclusion
does not occur, and the unwelcome experience persists as an irritant, so to
say, capable neither of assimilation nor rejection. Abnormal psychology
discloses the fact that such minds are apt to develop the supposed diseases
we have just referred to, and the fact that these and other manifestations of
what we have called mental instability are the consequences of mental
conflict.
Now, we have already seen that a gregarious animal, unless his society
is perfectly organized, must be subject to lasting and fierce conflict between
experience and herd suggestion.﻿14 It is natural, therefore, to assume that the
manifestations of mental instability are not diseases of the individual in the
ordinary sense at all, but inevitable consequences of man’s biological
history and exact measures of the stage now reached of his assimilation into
the gregarious life. The manifestations of mental instability and
disintegration were at first supposed to be of comparatively rare occurrence
and limited to certain well-known “diseases,” but they are coming to be
recognized over a larger and larger field, and in a great variety of
phenomena.
Conditions which at first sight give rise to no suspicion of being
acquired injuries to the mind, when they are looked at in the light of the
facts we have been considering, reveal themselves as being scars inflicted
by conflict as certainly as are some forms of insanity. Characteristics which
pass as vices, eccentricities, defects of temper, peculiarities of disposition,
come when critically examined to be explicable as minor grades of
defective mental stability, although, on account of their great frequency,
they have been looked upon as normal, or at any rate in the natural order of
things.
Few examples could be found to illustrate better such conditions than
alcoholism. Almost universally regarded as either, on the one hand, a sin or
vice, or on the other hand, as a disease, there can be little doubt that in fact
it is essentially a response to a psychological necessity. In the tragic conflict
between what he has been taught to desire and what he is allowed to get,
man has found in alcohol, as he has found in certain other drugs, a sinister
but effective peacemaker, a means of securing, for however short a time,
some way out of the prison house of reality back to the Golden Age. There
can be equally little doubt that it is but a comparatively small proportion of
the victims of conflict who find a solace in alcohol, and the prevalence of
alcoholism and the punishments entailed by the use of that dreadful remedy
cannot fail to impress upon us how great must be the number of those
whose need was just as great, but who were too ignorant, too cowardly, or
perhaps too brave to find a release there.
We have seen that mental instability must be regarded as a condition
extremely common, and produced by the mental conflict forced upon man
by his sensitiveness to herd suggestion on the one hand and to experience
on the other. It remains for us to estimate in some rough way the char­ac­ter­‐
is­tics of the unstable, in order that we may be able to judge of their value or
otherwise to the State and the species. Such an estimate must necessarily be
exaggerated, over-sharp in its outlines, omitting much, and therefore in
many respects false. The most prominent characteristic in which the
mentally unstable contrast with the “normal” is what we may vaguely call
motive. They tend to be weak in energy, and especially in persistence of
energy. Such weakness may translate itself into a vague scepticism as to the
value of things in general, or into a definite defect of what is popularly
called will power, or into many other forms, but it is always of the same
fundamental significance, for it is always the result of the thwarting of the
primary impulses to action resident in herd suggestion by the influence of
an experience which cannot be disregarded. Such minds cannot be
stimulated for long by objects adequate to normal ambition; they are apt to
be sceptical in such matters as patriotism, religion, politics, social success,
but the scepticism is incomplete, so that they are readily won to new causes,
new religions, new quacks, and as readily fall away therefrom.
We saw that the resistive gain in motive what they lose in adaptability;
we may add that in a sense the unstable gain in adaptability what they lose
in motive. Thus we see society cleft by the instinctive qualities of its
members into two great classes, each to a great extent possessing what the
other lacks, and each falling below the possibilities of human personality.
The effect of the gradual increase of the unstable in society can be seen to a
certain extent in history. We can watch it through the careers of the Jews
and of the Romans. At first, when the bulk of the citizens were of the stable
type, the nation was enterprising, energetic, indomitable, but hard, inelastic,
and fanatically convinced of its Divine mission. The inevitable effect of the
expansion of experience which followed success was that development of
the unstable and sceptical which ultimately allowed the nation, no longer
believing in itself or its gods, to become the almost passive prey of more
stable peoples.
In regard to the question of the fundamental significance of the two
great mental types found in society, a tempting field for speculation at once
opens up, and many questions immediately arise for discussion. Is, for
example, the stable normal type naturally in some special degree insensitive
to experience, and if so, is such a quality inborn or acquired? Again, may
the char­ac­ter­is­tics of the members of this class be the result of an
experience relatively easily dealt with by rationalization and exclusion?
Then again, are the unstable naturally hypersensitive to experience, or have
they met with an experience relatively difficult to assimilate? Into the
discussion of such questions we shall here make no attempt to enter, but
shall limit ourselves to reiterating that these two types divide society
between them, that they both must be regarded as seriously defective and as
evidence that civilization has not yet provided a medium in which the
average human mind can grow undeformed and to its full stature.
14. The word “experience” is used here in a special sense that perhaps renders necessary a word or
two of definition. The experience meant is everything that comes to the individual, not only his
experience of events in the external world, but also his experience of the instinctive and often
egoistic impulses at work within his own personality. 1915.
Gregariousness and the Future of Man
Table of Contents
Thus far we have attempted to apply biological conceptions to man and
society as they actually exist at present. We may now, very shortly, inquire
whether or not the same method can yield some hint as to the course which
human development will take in the future.
As we have already seen reason to believe, in the course of organic
development when the limits of size and efficiency in the unicellular
organism were reached, the only possible access of advantage to the
competing organism was gained by the appearance of combination. In the
scale of the metazoa we see the advantages of combination and division of
labour being more and more made use of, until the individual cells lose
completely the power of separate existence, and their functions come to be
useful only in the most indirect way and through the organisms of which the
cells are constituents. This complete submergence of the cell in the
organism indicates the attainment of the maximum advantages to be
obtained from this particular access in complexity, and it indicates to us the
direction in which development must proceed within the limits which are
produced by that other access of complexity—gre­gar­i­ous­ness.
The success and extent of such development clearly depend on the
relation of two series of activities in the individual which may in the most
general way be described as the capacity for varied reaction and the
capacity for communication. The process going on in the satisfactorily
developing gregarious animal is the moulding of the varied reactions of the
individual into functions beneficial to him only indirectly through the
welfare of the new unit—the herd. This moulding process is a consequence
of the power of inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion amongst the individual constituents of
the new unit. Inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion is thus seen to be of cardinal importance
to the gregarious, just as was the nervous system to the multicellular.
Moreover, in a given gregarious species the existence of a highly
developed power of reaction in the individual with a proportionately less
developed capacity for communication will mean that the species is not
deriving the advantages it might from the possession of gre­gar­i­ous­ness,
while the full advantages of the type will be attained only when the two sets
of activities are cor­res­pon­ding­ly strong.
Here we may see perhaps the explanation of the astounding success and
completeness of gre­gar­i­ous­ness in bees and ants. Their cycle of
development was early complete because the possibilities of reaction of the
individual were so small, and consequently the capacity for inter­com­mun­i­‐
ca­tion of the individual was relatively soon able to attain a corresponding
grade. The individual has become as completely merged in the hive as the
single cell in the multicellular animal, and consequently the whole of her
activities is available for the uses of the State. It is interesting to notice that,
considered from this aspect, the wonderful society of the bee, with its
perfect organization and its wonderful adaptability and elasticity, owes its
early attainment of success to the smallness of the brain power of the
individual.
For the mammals with their greater powers of varied reaction the path
to the consummation of their possibilities must be longer, more painful, and
more dangerous, and this applies in an altogether special degree to man.
The enormous power of varied reaction possessed by man must render
necessary for his attainment of the full advantages of the gregarious habit a
power of inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion of absolutely unprecedented fineness. It is
clear that scarcely a hint of such power has yet appeared, and it is equally
obvious that it is this defect which gives to society the char­ac­ter­is­tics which
are the contempt of the man of science and the disgust of the humanitarian.
We are now in a position to understand how momentous is the question
as to what society does with the raw material of its minds to encourage in
them the potential capacity for inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion which they undoubtedly
by nature possess. To that question there is but one answer. By providing its
members with a herd tradition which is constantly at war with feeling and
with experience, society, drives them inevitably into resistiveness on the
one hand, or into mental instability on the other, conditions which have this
in common, that they tend to exaggerate that isolation of the individual
which is shown us by the intellect to be unnatural and by the heart to be
cruel.
Another urgent question for the future is provided by the steady
increase, relative and absolute, of the mentally unstable. The danger to the
State constituted by a large unstable class is already generally recognized,
but unfortunately realization has so far only instigated a yet heavier blow at
the species. It is assumed that instability is a primary quality, and therefore
only to be dealt with by breeding it out. With that indifference to the mental
side of life which is characteristic of the mentally resistant class, the
question as to the real meaning of instability has been begged by the
invention of the disastrous word “degenerate.” The simplicity of the idea
has charmed modern speculation, and the only difficulty in the whole
problem has come to be the decision as to the most expeditious way of
getting rid of this troublesome flaw in an otherwise satisfactory world.
The conception that the natural environment of man must be modified if
the body is to survive has long been recognized, but the fact that the mind is
incomparably more delicate than the body has scarcely been noticed at all.
We assume that the disorderly environment with which we surround the
mind has no effect, and are ingenuously surprised when mental instability
arises apparently from nowhere; but although we know nothing of its origin
our temerity in applying the cure is in no sense daunted.
It has already been pointed out how dangerous it would be to breed man
for reason—that is, against suggestibility. The idea is a fit companion for
the device of breeding against “degeneracy.” The “degenerate”—that is, the
mentally unstable—have demonstrated by the mere fact of instability that
they possess the quality of sensitiveness to feeling and to experience, for it
is this which has prevented them from applying the remedy of
rationalization or exclusion when they have met with experience conflicting
with herd suggestion. There can be no doubt as to the value to the State of
such sensitiveness were it developed in a congruous environment. The
“degeneracy,” therefore, which we see developed as a secondary quality in
these sensitive minds is no evidence against the degenerate, but an
indictment of the disorderly environment which has ruined them, just as the
catchword associating insanity and genius tells us nothing about genius but
a great deal about the situation into which it has had the misfortune to be
born.
Sensitiveness to feeling and experience is undoubtedly the necessary
antecedent of any high grade of that power of inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion which
we have seen to be necessary to the satisfactory development of man. Such
sensitiveness, however, in society as it now is, inevitably leads merely to
mental instability. That such sensitiveness increases with civilization is
shown by the close association between civilization and mental instability.
There is no lack, therefore, of the mental quality of all others most
necessary to the gregarious animal. The pressing problem which in fact
faces man in the immediate future is how to readjust the mental
environment in such a way that sensitiveness may develop and confer on
man the enormous advantages which it holds for him, without being
transformed from a blessing into the curse and menace of instability. To the
biologist it is quite clear that this can be effected only by an extension of the
rational method to the whole field of experience, a process of the greatest
difficulty, but one which must be the next great variation in man’s
development if that development is to continue to be an evolution.
Outside this possibility the imagination can see nothing but grounds for
pessimism. It needs but little effort of foresight to realize that without some
totally revolutionary change in man’s attitude towards the mind, even his
very tenure of the earth may come to be threatened. Recent developments in
the study of disease have shown us how blind and fumbling have been our
efforts against the attacks of our immemorial enemies the unicellular
organisms. When we remember their capacities for variation and our fixity,
we can see that for the race effectually and permanently to guard itself
against even this one danger are necessary that fineness and complexity of
organization, that rendering available of the utmost capacity of its members,
against which the face of society seems at present to be so steadily set. We
see man to-day, instead of the frank and courageous recognition of his
status, the docile attention to his biological history, the determination to let
nothing stand in the way of the security and permanence of his future,
which alone can establish the safety and happiness of the race, substituting
blind confidence in his destiny, unclouded faith in the essentially respectful
attitude of the universe towards his moral code, and a belief no less firm
that his traditions and laws and institutions necessarily contain permanent
qualities of reality. Living as he does in a world where outside his race no
allowances are made for infirmity, and where figments however beautiful
never become facts, it needs but little imagination to see how great are the
probabilities that after all man will prove but one more of Nature’s failures,
ignominously to be swept from her work-table to make way for another
venture of her tireless curiosity and patience.
1909.
Speculations Upon the Human Mind in 1915
Table of Contents
Man’s Place in Nature and Nature’s Place in Man
Table of Contents
As the nineteenth century draws away into the past and it is possible to get a
comprehensive view of the intellectual legacies it has left to its successor,
certain of its ideas stand out from the general mass by reason of the
greatness of their scale and scope. Ideas of the first order of magnitude are
from their very greatness capable of full appreciation only in a
comparatively distant view. However much they have been admired and
studied by contemporary thought, it is with the passage of time only that all
their proportions come gradually into focus. The readjustments of thought
as to what used to be called man’s place in nature, which were so
characteristic a work of the latter half of the nineteenth century, embodied
an idea of this imperial type which, fruitful as it has proved, has even now
yielded far less than its full harvest of truth.
The conception of man as an animal, at first entertained only in a
narrow zoological sense, has gradually extended in significance, and is now
beginning to be understood as a guiding principle in the study of all the
activities of the individual and the species. In the early days such a
conception was regarded by non-scientific thought as degrading to man, and
as denying to him the possibility of moral progress and the reality of his
higher æsthetic and emotional capabilities; at the same time, men of science
found themselves compelled, however unwillingly, to deny that the moral
activities of man could be made consistent with his status as an animal. It
may still be remembered how even the evolutionary enthusiasm of Huxley
was baffled by the incompatibility he found to subsist between what he
called the ethical and the cosmical processes, and how he stood bewildered
by the sight of moral beauty blossoming incorrigibly amidst the cruelty,
lust, and bloodshed of the world.
The passage of time has tended more and more to clear up these
lingering confusions of an anthropocentric biology, and thought is gradually
gaining courage to explore, not merely the body of man but his mind and
his moral capacities, in the knowledge that these are not meaningless
intrusions into an otherwise orderly world, but are partakers in him and his
history just as are his vermiform appendix and his stomach, and are
elements in the complex structure of the universe as respectably established
there, and as racy of that soil as the oldest saurian or the newest gas.
Man is thus not merely, as it were, rescued from the inhuman loneliness
which he had been taught was his destiny and persuaded was his pride, but
he is relieved from perplexities and temptations which had so long proved
obstacles to his finding himself and setting out valiantly on an upward path.
Cut off from his history and regarded as an exile into a lower world, he can
scarcely fail to be appalled and crushed by the discrepancy between his
lofty pretensions and his lowly acts. If he but recognize that he himself and
his virtues and aspirations are integral strands in the fabric of life, he will
learn that the great tissue of reality loses none of its splendour by the fact
that near by where the pattern glows with his courage and his pride it burns
with the radiance of the tiger, and over against his intellect and his genius it
mocks in the grotesques of the ape.
The development of an objective attitude towards the status of man has
had, perhaps, its most significant effect in the influence it has exercised
upon the study of the human mind.
The desire to understand the modes of action of the mind, and to
formulate about them gen­er­al­i­za­tions which shall be of practical value, has
led to inquiries being pursued along three distinct paths. These several
methods may be conveniently distinguished as the primitive, the human,
and the comparative.
What I have called the primitive method of psychological inquiry is also
the obvious and natural one. It takes man as it finds him, accepts his mind
for what it professes to be, and examines into its processes by introspection
of a direct and simple kind. It is necessarily subject to the conditions that
the object of study is also the medium through which the observations are
made, and that there is no objective standard by which the accuracy of
transmission through this medium can be estimated and corrected. In the
result the materials collected are subjected to a very special and very
stringent kind of censorship. If an observation is acceptable and satisfactory
to the mind itself, it is reported as true; if it contains material which is
unwelcome to the mind, it is reported as false; and in both cases the failure
is in no sense due to any conscious dishonesty in the observing mind, but is
a fallacy necessarily inherent in the method. A fairly characteristic product
of inquiries of this type is the conception, which seems so obvious to
common sense, that introspection does give access to all mental processes,
so that a conscious motive must be discoverable for all the acts of the
subject. Experience with more objective methods has shown that when no
motive is found for a given act or no motive consistent with the mind’s
pretensions as to itself, there will always be a risk of a presentable one
being extemporized.
Psychology of this primitive type—the naïve psychology of common
sense—is always necessarily tainted with what may be called in a special
sense an­thro­po­mor­phism; it tells us, that is to say, not what man is but what
he thinks and feels himself to be. Judged by its fruits in enabling us to
foretell or to influence conduct, it is worthless. It has been studied for
thousands of years and infinite ingenuities have been expended on it, and
yet at its best it can only tell us how the average man thinks his mind works
—a body of information not sensibly superior in reality to the instructions
of a constitutional monarch addressed to an unruly parliament. It has
distracted thought with innumerable falsifications, but in all its secular
cultivation has produced no body of gen­er­al­i­za­tions of value in the practical
conduct of life.
Comments on an Objective System of Human
Psychology
Table of Contents
I
Until comparatively recent years the fact that what was called psychology
did not even pretend to be of any practical value in affairs was tolerated by
its professors and regarded as more or less in the nature of things. The
science, therefore, outside a small class of specialists was in very dismal
reputation. It had come to comprise two divergent schools, one which
busied itself with the apparatus of the experimental physiologist and frankly
studied the physiology of the nervous system, the other which occupied
itself with the faded abstractions of logic and metaphysics, while both
agreed in ignoring the study of the mind. This comparative sterility may in a
broad way be traced back to the one fundamental defect from which the
science suffered—the absence of an objective standard by which the value
of mental observations could be estimated. Failing such a standard, any
given mental phenomenon might be as much a product of the observing
mind as of the mind observed, or the varying degrees in which both of these
factors contributed might be inextricably mixed. Of late years the much-
needed objective standard has been sought and to some extent found in two
directions. What I have called “human” psychology has found it in the
study of diseases of the mind. In states of disease mental processes and
mechanisms which had eluded observation in the normal appear in an
exaggerated form which renders recognition less difficult. The
enlightenment coming from the understanding of such pathological material
has made it possible to argue back to the less obtrusive or more effectively
concealed phenomena of the normal and more or less to exclude the
fallacies of the observing mind, and, at any rate in part, to dissipate the
obscurity which for so long had successfully hidden the actual mental
phenomena themselves.
The most remarkable attack upon the problems of psychology which
has been made from the purely human standpoint is that in which the rich
genius of Sigmund Freud was and still is the pioneer. The school which his
work has founded was concerned at first wholly with the study of abnormal
mental states, and came into notice as a branch of medicine finding the
verification of its principles in the success it laid claim to in the treatment of
certain mental diseases. It now regards itself as possessing a body of
doctrine of general applicability to mental phenomena, normal or abnormal.
These principles are the product of laborious and minute inquiries into the
working of the mind, rendered possible by the use of a characteristic
method known as psycho-analysis. This method, which constitutes a
definite and elaborate technique of investigation, is looked upon by those
who practise it as the sole means by which access can be obtained to the
veritable phenomena of the mind, and as rendering possible a truly
objective view of the facts. It is no part of my purpose to examine the
validity of psycho-analysis as a scientific method. It is enough to notice that
the exponents of it completely repudiate the teachings of what I have called
“common-sense” psychology, that they maintain that objectivity in the
collection and collation of psychical facts is in no way to be obtained by the
light of nature but demands very special methods and precautions, and that
their claims to the possession of a truly objective method appear to be open
to verification or disproof by actual experiment in the treatment of disease.
Whatever value, then, psycho-analysis may ultimately prove to possess in
solving the peculiar difficulties of psychological research, the evolution of
it marks a very definite advance in principle and shows that it is the product
of a mind determined by whatever effort to get to close quarters with the
facts.
The body of doctrine enunciated by Freud concerns us more directly
than the peculiarities of his method. Some very general and summary
account may therefore be attempted as illustrating the char­ac­ter­is­tics of this
vigorous, aggressive, and essentially “human” school of research.
The Freudian psychology regards the mind of the adult as the outcome
of a process of development the stages of which are within limits, orderly
and inevitable. The trend of this development in each individual is
determined by forces which are capable of precise definition, and the final
product of it is capable of yielding to expert examination clear evidence of
the particular way in which these forces have acted and interacted during
the developmental process. The mind of the adult, then, is like the body in
bearing traces which betray to the skilled observer the events of its
developmental history. Inconspicuous and apparently insignificant
structures and peculiarities in the one no less than in the other prove to have
had a meaning and a function in the past, however little significance their
final form may seem to possess, and thus the psychologist is able to
reconstruct the history of a given subject’s mind, although the most
important stages of its development are hidden from direct observation as
effectively as is the prenatal growth of the body.
It seems to be a fundamental conception of the Freudian system that the
development of the mind is accompanied and conditioned by mental
conflict. The infant is regarded as being impelled by instinctive impulses
which at first are solely egoistic. From the earliest moments of its contact
with the world resistance to the full indulgence of these impulses is
encountered. With the growth and intensification of such impulses, the
resistance from external interference—the beginnings of social pressure—
becomes more formidable, until at a quite unexpectedly early age a
veritable condition of mental conflict is established—egoistic impulses
fatally pressing for indulgence regardless of their acceptability to the
environment, while environmental influences bear equally heavily against
any indulgence unwelcome to surrounding standards of discipline, taste, or
morality.
Of the two parties in this conflict—the instinctive impulse and the
repressive force—the first, according to Freud, is wholly the product of the
sex instinct. This instinct is conceived of as being much more active and
potent in the infant and child than had been suspected by any previous
investigator. The normal sexual interest and activity as manifested in the
adult are developed out of the sexual impulse of the child by a regular series
of modifications, which appear to be regarded as due partly to a process of
natural development and partly to the influence of external repressive
forces. In the infant the instinct is egocentric and the object of its interest is
the individual’s own body; with the increase of the mental field consequent
on enlarging experience the instinctive activity is externalized, and its
object of interest changes so that the child acquires a specific inclination
towards other individuals without distinction of sex; finally, as a last stage
of development the instinctive inclination is localized to members of the
opposite sex. This series of transformations is regarded as normal by Freud,
and as essential to the appearance of the “normal” adult type. The evolution
of this series is sensitive to interference by outside influences, and any
disturbance of it either by way of anticipation or delay will have profound
effects upon the ultimate character and temperament of the subject. The
psychical energy of an instinct so important as that of sex is very great, and
is not dissipated by the forces of repression brought to bear upon it, but
transformed into activities ostensibly quite different and directed into
channels having no obvious connection with their source. It is a
fundamental characteristic of the mind to be able to accept these substitutes
for the actual indulgence of the instinct, and to enjoy a symbolical
gratification in manifestations which have no overt sexual significance.
When development proceeds normally the surplus energy of the sex instinct
finds an outlet in activities of social value—æsthetic, poetic, altruistic;
when development is interfered with the outflow of energy is apt to result in
definite disease of the mind or in peculiarities of character scarcely to be
distinguished therefrom.
Thus the mind of the adult, according to Freud, in addition to activities
which are conscious and fully accessible to the subject, carries on activities
and holds memories which are unconscious and totally inaccessible to the
subject by any ordinary method of introspection. Between these two fields
there is a barrier sedulously guarded by certain repressive forces. The
unconscious is the realm of all the experiences, memories, impulses, and
inclinations which during the subject’s life have been condemned by the
standards of the conscious, have proved incompatible with it and have
therefore been outlawed from it. This banishment in no way deprives these
excluded mental processes of their energy, and they constantly influence the
feelings and behaviour of the subject. So strict, however, is the guard
between them and the conscious that they are never allowed to pass the
barrier between one sphere and the other except in disguised and
fantastically distorted forms by which their true meaning is closely
concealed. It has been perhaps Freud’s most remarkable thesis that dreams
are manifestations of this emergence of desires and memories from the
unconscious into the conscious field. During sleep the repressing force
which guards the frontier between conscious and unconscious is weakened.
Even then, however, such ideas as emerge into the conscious can do so only
in a worked up and distorted form, so that their significance can be
disengaged from the grotesque jumble of the actual dream only by a minute
inquiry according to a difficult and highly technical method. By this
method, however, is to be obtained a deep insight into the otherwise
irrecoverable emotional history of the individual, the structure of his
temperament, and, if he is mentally abnormal, the meaning of his
symptoms.
II
The foregoing enumeration of the chief doctrines of the Freudian
psychology is intended to be no more than a mere outline to serve as a basis
for certain comments which seem to be relevant to the general argument of
this essay. The point of view from which this slight sketch is made, that of
an interested but detached observer, is naturally somewhat different from
that of the actual authorities themselves. Here it is desired to get the
broadest possible view in the most general terms, and as we have no
concern with immediate problems of practical therapeutics—which remain
at least the chief preoccupation of writers of the psycho-analytic school—an
effort has been made to avoid the use of the rich and rather forbidding
technical vocabulary in which the writings of the school abound. It may
well be that this generalized method of description has yielded an ill-
proportioned or distorted picture. The subject has proved to be so much at
the mercy of prejudice that the least impassioned spectator, however
completely he may believe himself to be free from advocacy or detraction,
is far from being able to claim immunity from these influences.
Keeping constantly in mind this general caution, which is at least as
necessary in the field of criticism as in that of mere description, we may
pass on to make certain comments on the psychology of Freud which are
relevant to the general argument being followed out here.
A discussion in any way detailed of this immense subject is very
obviously impossible here, but it is desirable to say a few words as to the
general validity of Freud’s chief thesis. However much one may be
impressed by his power as a psychologist and his almost fierce resolution to
get at the actual facts of mental processes, one can scarcely fail to
experience in reading Freud’s works that there is a certain harshness in his
grasp of facts and even a trace of narrowness in his outlook which tend to
repel the least resistant mind and make one feel that his guidance in many
matters—perhaps chiefly of detail—is open to suspicion. He seems to have
an inclination for the enumeration of absolute rules, a confidence in his
hypotheses which might be called superb if that were not in science a term
of reproach, and a tendency to state his least acceptable propositions with
the heaviest emphasis as if to force belief upon an unwilling and shrinking
mind were an especial gratification. All these traits of manner—at the worst
mere foibles of a distinguished and successful investigator—appear to
exercise some considerable effect on the acceptance his writings meet with,
and are perhaps indications in which direction, if he is open to fallacy, such
might be looked for.
Nevertheless with regard to the main propositions of his system there
can be little doubt that their general validity will be increasingly accepted.
Among such propositions must be put the conception of the significance of
mental conflict, the importance of the emotional experiences of infancy and
childhood in the determination of character and the causing of mental
disease, and his conception of the general structure of the mind as
comprising conscious and unconscious fields.
The comments which I shall venture to make upon the work of Freud
will be such as are suggested by the biological point of view of which this
essay is intended to be an exposition. The standard of interest upon which
they are based will therefore necessarily differ to some extent from that
which is usually adopted in writings of the psycho-analytic school.
To the biologist perhaps the most striking characteristic of the work of
this school is its complete acceptance of what one may call the human point
of view. It seems to be satisfied that no useful contribution to psychology is
to be obtained outside the limits of human feeling and behaviour, and to feel
no impatience to expand its inquiries into a still larger field. It is not that the
school has failed to show an extremely vigorous movement of expansion.
Beginning as a mere province of medicine, and while its foothold there was
still far from general recognition, it invaded the regions of general
psychology, of æsthetics, ethnology, the study of folklore and myth, and
indeed of all matters in which it could find its essential material—the
records of human feeling and conduct. Beyond the human species it has
shown remarkably little of this aggressive spirit, and it seems to feel no
need of bringing its principles into relation with what little is known of the
mental activities of the non-human animals.
The absence of any strong pressure in the direction of establishing a
correlation of all mental phenomena, whether human or not, is not a matter
of merely theoretical interest. The actual practical success to be obtained to-
day in such an attempt might possibly be insignificant and yet of great value
in moulding the whole attitude of mind of the investigator towards matters
lying wholly within the sphere of human psychology. However much one
may be impressed by the greatness of the edifice which Freud has built up
and by the soundness of his architecture, one can scarcely fail, on coming
into it from the bracing atmosphere of the biological sciences, to be
oppressed by the odour of humanity with which it is pervaded. One finds
everywhere a tendency to the acceptance of human standards and even
sometimes of human pretensions which cannot fail to produce a certain
uneasiness as to the validity, if not of his doctrines, at any rate of the forms
in which they are expounded. The quality I am trying to describe is
extremely difficult to express in concrete terms without exaggeration or
distortion. To those who have approached Freud’s work solely by the path
of medicine the idea that it can give any one the feeling of a certain
conventionality of standard and outlook and of a certain over-estimation of
the objectivity of man’s moral values will seem perhaps merely absurd.
That this is an impression which I have not been able altogether to escape I
record with a good deal of hesitation and diffidence and without any wish to
lay stress upon it.
Psycho-analytic psychology has grown up under conditions which may
very well have encouraged the persistence of the human point of view.
Originally its whole activity was concentrated upon the investigation and
treatment of disease. Many of its early disciples were those who had
received proof of its value in their own persons, those, that is to say, who
had been sufferers from their very susceptibility to the influence of human
standards. The objective standard of validity by which the system was
judged was necessarily that of the physician, namely the capacity to restore
the abnormal mind to the “normal.” Normal in this sense is of course no
more than a statistical expression implying the condition of the average
man. It could scarcely fail, however, to acquire the significance of
“healthy.” If once the statistically normal mind is accepted as being
synonymous with the psychologically healthy mind (that is, the mind in
which the full capacities are available for use), a standard is set up which
has a most fallacious appearance of objectivity. The statistically normal
mind can be regarded only as a mind which has responded in the usual way
to the moulding and deforming influence of its environment—that is, to
human standards of discipline, taste, and morality. If it is to be looked upon
as typically healthy also, the current human standards of whose influence it
is a product must necessarily be accepted as qualified to call forth the best
in the developing mind they mould. Writers of the psycho-analytic school
seem in general to make some such assumption as this.
III
The conception of mental conflict is the central feature of the Freudian
system. Of its importance and validity there can be no doubt. In a general
way the idea is familiar and even commonplace, but Freud had developed it
and shown how deeply the principle penetrates the structure and
development of the mind from the earliest period and to an extent quite
unsuspected by earlier psychologists.
From an early period of life the child finds the gratification of its
instinctive impulses checked or even prevented by the pressure of its
environment. Conflict is thus set up between the two forces of instinctive
pressure within and social pressure from without. Instinctive impulses
which thus come into conflict with the repressing force are not destroyed
but are deflected from their natural outlet, are repressed within the mind and
ultimately prevented from rising into the conscious field at all except in
disguised or symbolic forms. To the adult his childhood seems to have been
altogether free from any kind of sexual activity or interest, not because, as
is generally supposed, such has never existed, but because it proved
incapable of persisting in the conscious field and was suppressed into the
unconscious with the increase of the social repressing forces. Similarly
impulses experienced in adult life which are for the same reason
incompatible with conscious recognition do not become conscious, but live
their life in the unconscious, though they may exercise the profoundest
influence on the happiness and health of the subject.
The work of Freud has been concentrated chiefly upon the one party in
these conflicts—the instinctive impulse of which the only considerable one
according to him is the sexual. To the other party—the repressing forces—
he has given very much less attention, and in them has found apparently
much less interest. By most writers of his school also they seem to be taken
very much as a matter of course.
When we consider, however, what they can accomplish—how they can
take the immensely powerful instinct of sex and mould and deform its
prodigious mental energy—it is clear that the repressing forces are no less
important than the antagonist with which they contend.
It is desirable, perhaps, to discuss a little more closely the nature of
mental conflict, and especially first to define the precise meaning of the
conception.
It may readily be granted that the young child’s mind is wholly
egocentric, though the proposition is not without a certain element of
assumption which it is not wise altogether to ignore. He experiences certain
desires and impulses which he assumes with the blandest unconsciousness
of any other desires but his own are there to be gratified. The failure to
gratify such an impulse may come about in several ways, not all of which
are equally significant in establishing mental conflict. The gratification may
be physically impossible. Here there is no basis for internal conflict. The
resistance is wholly external; the whole child still desires its pleasure and its
whole resources, mental and physical, are directed to gain the object. Mere
failure may be painful and may lead to an outburst of rage which possibly
even discharges some of the mental energy of the wish, but the situation
psychically is simple and the incident tends of itself to go no farther.
The gratification may prove to be physically painful in itself. This
seems to promise certain elements of mental conflict in balancing the
pleasure of the gratification against the remembered pain it involves. We are
assuming that the pain is the immediate consequence of the act, as when,
for example, a child makes the immemorial scientific discovery that fire
burns fingers. Such a direct experience without the interposition of a second
person or the pointing of a moral does not in fact involve any real mental
conflict. The source of the pain is external, its only emotional quality is that
of its simple unpleasantness, and this cannot, as it were, enter into the
child’s mind and divide it against itself.
True conflict, the conflict which moulds and deforms, must be actually
within the mind—must be endopsychic to use a term invented by Freud,
though not used by him in this exact application. In order that a desire may
set up conflict it must be thwarted, not by a plain impossibility or by a mere
physical pain, but by another impulse within the mind antagonizing it. It
seems clear that the counter-impulse to be strong enough to contend with an
impulse having in it the energy of the sex instinct must itself derive its force
from some potent instinctive mechanism. We cannot suppose that the
immense power of the sex impulse can be controlled, moulded, and directed
by any influence except such as have access to the stores of psychical
energy which the instinctive activities alone possess.
We are thus led to the proposition that the essence of mental conflict is
the antagonism of two impulses which both have instinct behind them, and
are both, as it were, intimate constituents in the personality of the subject.
Thus only can the mind become, in the worn but still infinitely appropriate
metaphor, a house divided against itself. The counter-impulses to the
developing sexual interest and activity of the child are, as we have seen, the
result of social pressure—that is to say, the result of the influence of the
human environment. This influence is manifested, not merely in direct
precept, in warning, in punishment, in expressions of disapproval or
disgust, but in the whole system of secrecy, of significant silences, of
suppressions, of nods and winks and surreptitious signallings, of sudden
causeless snubs and patently lame explanations amid which such sexual
interest as the child possesses has to find a modus vivendi and an intelligible
meaning.
Whence does this environmental pressure obtain the power which
enables it to exercise in the child’s mind the regal functions of instinct?
Clearly it can do so only if the mind possesses a specific sensitiveness to
external opinion and the capacity to confer on its precepts the sanction of
instinctive force. In the two earlier essays of this book I attempted to show
that the essential specific characteristic of the mind of the gregarious animal
is this very capacity to confer upon herd opinion the psychical energy of
instinct. It is this sensitiveness, then, which lays the child’s mind open to
the influence of his environment and endows for him the mental attitude of
that environment with all the sanction of instinct. Thus do the repressing
forces become actually constituent in the child’s personality, and as much a
part of his being as the egoistic desires with which they are now able to
contend on equal terms.
The specific sensitiveness of the gregarious mind seems, then, to be a
necessary condition for the establishment of true mental conflict, and a
character which must be taken into account if we are to develop a complete
theory of the evolution of the individual mind.
Assuming the validity of the proposition that there are two primary
factors in the development of the mind in each individual—the egoistic
impulses of the child and his specific sensitiveness to environing influences
—it may well be asked why it is that the product, the “normal” adult mind,
is so uniform in its characters. It is true that this uniformity may very easily
be exaggerated, for in a very considerable number of cases gross
“abnormalities” are the result of the process of development, but, as I
pointed out in an earlier essay, the result on the whole is to produce two
broadly distinguishable types of mind—the unstable and the stable—the
latter on account of its numerical superiority being also dignified as normal.
A considerable uniformity in the final products must therefore be accepted.
If, however, environmental influences are an essential factor in the
production of this result, there seems no little difficulty in accounting for
the uniformity seeing that environments vary so much from class to class,
nation to nation, and race to race. Where, we may ask, is the constant in the
environmental factors which the uniformity of the outcome leads us to
expect? Assuming with Freud that of the egoistic impulses of the child, the
sexual alone seriously counts in the formation of character, can it be shown
that the influences which surround the child are uniform in their general
direction against this? At first sight it would seem certainly not. Even in the
same country the variations in taste, reticence, modesty, and morality
towards matters of sex interest vary greatly from class to class, and
presumably are accompanied by corresponding variations in the type of
influence exercised by the environment of the child.
Adequately to deal with this difficulty would involve examining in
detail the actual mental attitude of the adult towards the young, especially in
regard to matters directly or indirectly touching upon interests of sex. The
subject is a difficult one, and if we limit ourselves to the purely human
standpoint, ugly and depressing. The biologist, however, need not confine
himself to so cramped an outlook, and by means of collecting his
observations over a much larger field is able to some extent to escape the
distorting effects of natural human prejudice. Viewed in a broad way, it is
neither surprising nor portentous that there should naturally exist a strong
and persistent jealousy between the adult and the young. Indeed, many of
the superficial consequences of this fact are mere commonplaces.
Throughout most of the lower animals the relation is obvious and frankly
manifested. Indeed, it may be regarded as a more or less inevitable
consequence of any form of social life among animals. As such, therefore, it
may be expected to appear in some form or other in the human mind. The
manifestations of it, however, will by no means necessarily take easily
recognizable forms. The social pressure to which the mind is subject will
tend to exclude such a feeling from at any rate full consciousness, and such
manifestations as are allowed it will be in disguised and distorted forms.
It seems difficult to avoid the conclusion that some dim and unrealized
offshoot of such a jealousy between adult and young is responsible for the
unanimity with which man combines to suppress and delay the
development of any evidence of sexual interest by the young. The intensity
of the dislike which is felt for admitting the young to share any part of the
knowledge of the adult about the physiology of sex is well illustrated by the
difficulty parents feel in communicating to their children some of the
elementary facts which they may feel very strongly it is their duty to impart.
A parent may find himself under these circumstances trying to quiet his
conscience with all sorts of excuses and subterfuges while he postpones
making the explanations which duty and affection urge upon him as
necessary for the health and happiness of his child. An unwillingness so
strong and irrational as this must have its root in subconscious processes
charged with strong feeling.
The tendency to guard children from sexual knowledge and experience
seems to be truly universal in civilized man and to surpass all differences of
morals, discipline, or taste. Amongst primitive savages the principle has not
acquired the altruistic signification which civilized man has given it, but
operates as a definite exclusion to be overcome only by solemn ceremonies
of initiation and at the price of submission to painful and sometimes
mutilating rites.
The constancy of attitude of the adult towards the young, which is thus
seen to be so general, evidently gives to the environmental influences which
surround the child a fundamental uniformity, and as we have seen, the
theory of the development of the individual mind demands that such a
uniformity of environmental influence should be shown to be in action.
This is no place to follow out the practical consequences of the fact that
every adult necessarily possesses a primary bias in his attitude towards the
young, and a bias which is connected with instinctive impulses of great
mental energy. However much this tendency is overlaid by moral principles,
by altruism, by natural affection, as long as its true nature is unrecognized
and excluded from full consciousness its influence upon conduct must be
excessive and full of dangerous possibilities. To it must ultimately be traced
the scarcely veiled distrust and dislike with which comparative youth is
always apt to be met where matters of importance are concerned. The
attitude of the adult and elderly towards the enthusiasms of youth is
stereotyped in a way which can scarcely fail to strike the psychologist as
remarkable and illuminating in its commonplaceness. The youthful
revolutionary, who after all is no more essentially absurd than the elderly
conservative, is commonly told by the latter that he too at the same age felt
the same aspirations, burnt with the same zeal, and yearned with the same
hope until he learnt wisdom with experience—“as you will have, my boy,
by the time you are my age.” To the psychologist the kindly contempt of
such pronouncements cannot conceal the pathetic jealousy of declining
power. Herd instinct, inevitably siding with the majority and the ruling
powers, has always added its influence to the side of age and given a very
distinctly perceptible bias to history, proverbial wisdom, and folklore
against youth and confidence and enterprise and in favour of age and
caution, the immemorial wisdom of the past, and even the toothless
mumblings of senile decay.
Any comprehensive survey of modern civilized life cannot fail to yield
abundant instances of the disproportionate influence in the conduct of
affairs which has been acquired by mere age. When we remember how little
in actual practice man proves himself capable of the use of reason, how
very little he actually does profit by experience though the phrase is always
in his mouth, it must be obvious that there is some strong psychological
reason for the predominance of age, something which must be
determinative in its favour quite apart from its merits and capacity when
competing with youth. The “monstrous regiment” of old men—and to the
biologist it is almost as “monstrous” as the regiment of Mary Stuart was to
poor indignant Knox—extends into every branch of man’s activity. We
prefer old judges, old lawyers, old politicians, old doctors, old generals, and
when their functions involve any immediacy of cause and effect and are not
merely concerned with abstractions, we contentedly pay the price which the
inelasticity of these ripe minds is sometimes apt to incur.
IV
If the propositions already laid down prove to be sound, we must regard the
personality of the adult as the resultant of three groups of forces to which
the mind from infancy onwards is subject; first the egoistic instincts of the
individual pressing for gratification and possessing the intense mental
energy characteristic of instinctive processes, secondly the specific
sensitiveness to environmental influences which the mind as that of a
gregarious animal necessarily possesses, a quality capable of endowing
outside influences with the energy of instinct and, thirdly the environmental
influences which act upon the growing mind and are also essentially
determined in their intensity and uniformity by instinctive mechanisms.
The work of Freud has been directed mainly to the elucidation of the
processes included in the first group—that is to say, to the study of the
primarily egoistic impulses and the modifications they develop under
restraint. He has worked out, in fact, a veritable embryology of the mind.
The embryology of the body is to those who have had no biological
training far from being a gratifying subject of contemplation. The stages
through which the body passes before reaching its familiar form have a
superficial aspect of ugly and repulsive caricature with which only a
knowledge of the great compressed pageant of nature they represent can
reconcile the mind. The stages through which, according to the doctrines of
Freud, the developing mind passes are not less repulsive when judged from
the purely human point of view than are the phases of the body, which
betray its cousinship with the fish and the frog, the lemur and the ape. The
works of Nature give no support to the social convention that to be truly
respectable one must always have been respectable. All her most elaborate
creations have “risen in the world” and are descended in the direct line from
creatures of the mud and dust. It is characteristic of her method to work
with the humblest materials and to patch and compromise at every step.
Any given structure of her making is thus not by any means necessarily the
best that could conceivably be contrived, but a workable modification of
something else, always more or less conditioned in its functioning by the
limitations of the thing from which it was made.
To the biologist, therefore, the fact that Freud’s investigations of the
development of the mind have shown it passing through stages anything but
gratifying to self-esteem will not be either surprising or a ground for
disbelief. That Freud’s conclusions are decidedly unpalatable when judged
by a narrowly human standard is very obvious to any one who is at all
familiar with the kind of criticism they have received. It must be
acknowledged, moreover, that his methods of exposition have not always
tended to disguise the nauseousness of the dose he attempts to administer.
Such matters, however, lie altogether apart from the question whether his
conclusions are or are not just, though it is perhaps justifiable to say that
had these conclusions been immediately acceptable, the fact would be
presumptive evidence that they were either not new or were false.
The work of Freud embodies the most determined, thorough, and
scientific attempt which has been made to penetrate the mysteries of the
mind by the direct human method of approach, making use of introspection
—guided and guarded, it is true, by an elaborate technique—as its essential
instrument. To have shaped so awkward and fallacious an instrument into
an apparatus for which accuracy and fruitfulness can be claimed is in itself
a notable triumph of psychological skill.
The doctrines of Freud seem to be regarded by his school as covering all
the activities of the mind and making a complete, though of course not
necessarily exhaustive, survey of the whole field. I have already pointed out
directions in which it appears to me that inquiries by other methods than
those of the psycho-analytic school can be pursued with success. Regarded
in a broad way, the Freudian body of doctrine which I have already
ventured to describe as essentially an embryology of the mind gives one the
impression of being mainly descriptive and systematic rather than dynamic,
if one may with due caution use such words. It is able to tell us how such
and such a state of affairs has arisen, what is its true significance, and to
describe in minute detail the factors into which it can be analysed. When the
question of acting upon the mind is raised its resources seem less striking.
In this direction its chief activities have been in the treatment of abnormal
mental states, and these are dealt with by a laborious process of analysis in
which the subject’s whole mental development is retraced, and the
numerous significant experiences which have become excluded from the
conscious field are brought back into it.
When the unconscious processes which underlie the symptoms have
been assimilated to the conscious life of the patient, the symptoms
necessarily disappear, and the patient’s mind gains or regains the “normal”
condition. However precious such a cure may be to the patient, and
however interesting to the physician, its value to the species has to be
judged in relation to the value of the “normal” to which the patient has been
restored—that is, in relation to the question as to whether any move,
however small, in the direction of an enlargement of the human mind has
been made. Until some clearer evidence has been furnished of a capacity for
development in this direction the Freudian system should, perhaps, be
regarded as more notably a psychology of knowledge than a psychology of
power.
It is interesting to notice that in discussing the mechanism of psycho-
analysis in liberating the “abnormal” patient from his symptoms, Freud
repeatedly lays stress on the fact that the efficient factor in the process is not
the actual introduction of the suppressed experiences into the conscious
field, but the overcoming of the resistances to such an endeavour. I have
attempted to show that these resistances or counter-impulses are of
environmental origin, and owe their strength to the specific sensitiveness of
the gregarious mind. Resistances of similar type and identical origin are
responsible for the formation of the so-called normal type of mind. It is a
principal thesis of an earlier essay in this book that this normal type is far
from being psychologically healthy, is far from rendering available the full
capacity of the mind for foresight and progress, and being in exclusive
command of directing power in the world, is a danger to civilization. An
investigation of the resistant forces that are encountered by the developing
mind is clearly, then, a matter of the utmost importance. They are now
allowed to come into being haphazard, and while they undoubtedly contain
elements of social value and necessary restraints, they are the products, not
of a courageous recognition of facts but of fears, prejudices, and repressed
instinctive impulses, and are consolidated by ignorance, indolence, and
tribal custom.
The interest of the psycho-analytic school has been turned remarkably
little into this field. The speculation may be hazarded that in this direction it
might find the sources of a directer power over the human mind, and at least
some attenuation of that atmosphere of the consulting-room and the mad-
house which does so much to detract from its pretensions to be a
psychological system of universal validity.
Some Principles of a Biological Psychology
Table of Contents
The third method by which it has been attempted to attack the problems of
psychology is that which I have called the comparative. Its characteristic
note is a distrust of that attitude towards phenomena which I have called the
human point of view. Man’s description and interpretation of his own
mental experience being so liable to distortion by prejudice, by self-esteem,
by his views as to his own nature and powers, as well as so incomplete by
reason of his incapacity to reach by ordinary introspection the deeper strata
of his mind, it becomes necessary to make action as far as possible the
subject of observation rather than speech, and to regard it as a touchstone of
motive more important than the actor’s own views. The principle may be
exemplified in a simple and concrete form. If a given piece of human
behaviour bears the closest resemblance to behaviour which is characteristic
of the ape, the sheep, or the wolf, the biologist in attempting to arrive at the
actual cause will ascribe an importance to this resemblance at least no less
than that he will give to any explanation of the action as rational and
deliberate which may be furnished by the actor or by his own intelligence.
A second principle of the method will be by a study of the whole range
of animal life, and especially of forms whose conduct presents obvious
resemblances to that of man, to discover what instinctive impulses may be
expected to operate in him.
A third principle will be to search for criteria, whereby instinctive
impulses or their derivatives arising in the mind can be distinguished from
rational motives, or at any rate motives in which the instinctive factor is
minimal. Thus will be furnished for the method the objective standard for
the judgment of mental observations which is the one indispensable
requirement in all psychological inquiries.
When it is known what types of instinctive mechanisms are to be
expected, and under what aspects they will appear in the mind, it is possible
to press inquiry into many of the obscurer regions of human behaviour and
thought, and to arrive at conclusions which, while they are in harmony with
the general body of biological science, have the additional value of being
immediately useful in the conduct of affairs.
At the very outset of such researches we are met by an objection which
illustrates how different the biological conception of the mind is from that
current amongst those whose training has been literary and philosophic. The
objection I am thinking of is that of the ordinary intellectualist view of man.
According to this we must regard him as essentially a rational creature,
subject, it is true, to certain feeble relics of instinctive impulsion, but able to
control such without any great expense of will power, irrational at times in
an amiable and rather “nice” way, but fundamentally always independent,
responsible, and captain of his soul. Most holders of this opinion will of
course admit that in a distant and vague enough past man must have been
much more definitely an instinctive being, but they regard attempts to trace
in modern man any considerable residue of instinctive activities as a tissue
of fallacious and superficial analogies, based upon a shallow materialism
and an ignorance of the great principles of philosophy or a crudeness which
cannot assimilate them.
This objection is an expression of the very characteristic way in which
mankind over-estimates the practical functioning of reason in his mind and
the influence of civilization on his development. In an earlier essay I have
tried to show to how great an extent the average educated man is willing to
pronounce decided judgments, all of which he believes himself to have
arrived at by the exercise of pure reason, upon the innumerable complex
questions of the day. Almost all of them concern highly technical matters
upon none of which has he the slightest qualification to pronounce. This
characteristic, always obvious enough, has naturally during the war shown
the exaggeration so apt to occur in all non-rational processes at a time of
general stress. It is not necessary to catalogue the various public functions
in regard to which the common citizen finds himself in these days moved to
advise and exhort. They are numerous, and for the most part highly
technical. Generally the more technical a given matter is, the more
vehement and dogmatic is the counsel of the utterly uninstructed counsellor.
Even when the questions involved are not especially such as can be dealt
with only by the expert, the fact that the essential data are withheld from the
public by the authorities renders all this amateur statecraft and generalship
more than usually ridiculous. Nevertheless, those who find the materials
insufficient for dogmatism and feel compelled to a suspense of judgment
are apt to fall under suspicion of the crime of failing to “realize” the
seriousness of the war. When it is remembered that the duty of the civilian
is in no way concerned with these matters of high technique, while he has
very important functions to carry out in maintaining the nation’s strength if
he could be brought to take an interest in them, it seems scarcely possible to
argue that such conduct is that of a very highly rational being. In reality the
objective examination of man’s behaviour, if attention is directed to the
facts and not to what the actors think of them, yields at once in every field
example after example of similar irrational features.
When the influence of civilization is looked upon as having rendered
man’s instincts of altogether secondary importance in modern life, it is plain
that such a conclusion involves a misconception of the nature of instinct.
This well-worn term has come to have so vague a connotation that some
definition of it is necessary. The word “instinct” is used here to denote
inherited modes of reaction to bodily need or external stimulus. It is
difficult to draw a sharp distinction between instinct and mere reflex action,
and an attempt to do so with exact precision is of no particular value. In
general we may say that the reactions which should be classed under the
head of instinct are delayed (that is, not necessarily carried out with fatal
promptitude immediately upon the stimulus), complex (that is, consist of
acts rather than mere movements), and may be accompanied by quite
elaborate mental processes. In a broad way also it may be said that the
mental accompaniments of an instinctive process are for the most part
matters of feeling. During the growth of the need or stimulus there will be a
desire or inclination which may be quite intense, and yet not definitely
focused on any object that is consciously realized; the act itself will be
distinguished to the actor by its rightness, obviousness, necessity, or
inevitableness, and the sequel of the act will be satisfaction. This mere hint
of the psychical manifestations of instinctive activity leaves quite out of
account the complex effects which may ensue when two instinctive
impulses that have come to be antagonistic reach the mind at the same time.
The actual amount of mental activity which accompanies an instinctive
process is very variable; it may be quite small, and then the subject of it is
reduced to a mere automaton, possessed, as we say, by an ungovernable
passion such as panic, lust, or rage; it may be quite large, and sometimes the
subject, deceived by his own rationalizations and suppressions, may
suppose himself to be a fully rational being in undisputed possession of free
will and the mastery of his fate at the very moment when he is showing
himself to be a mere puppet dancing to the strings which Nature,
unimpressed by his valiant airs, relentlessly and impassively pulls.
The extent of the psychical accompaniments of instinctive activity in
civilized man should not, therefore, be allowed to obscure the fact that the
instincts are tendencies deeply ingrained in the very structure of his being.
They are as necessarily inherited, as much a part of himself, and as essential
a condition for the survival of himself and his race, as are the vital organs of
his body. Their persistence in him is established and enforced by the effects
of millions of years of selection, so that it can scarcely be supposed that a
few thousand years of civilized life which have been accompanied by no
steady selection against any single instinct can have had any effect
whatever in weakening them. The common expression that such an effect
has been produced is doubtless due to the great development in civilized
man of the mental accompaniments of instinctive processes. These mental
phenomena surround the naked reality of the impulse with a cloud of
rationalized comment and illusory explanation. The capacity which man
possesses for free and rational thought in matters untainted by instinctive
inclination is of course indubitable, but he has not realized that there is no
obvious mental character attached to propositions having an instinctive
basis which should expose them to suspicion. As a matter of fact, it is just
those fundamental propositions which owe their origin to instinct which
appear to the subject the most obvious, the most axiomatic, and the least
liable to doubt by any one but an eccentric or a madman.
It has been customary with certain authors—perhaps especially such as
have interested themselves in sociological subjects—to ascribe quite a large
number of man’s activities to separate instincts. Very little consideration of
most of these propositions shows that they are based upon too lax a
definition or a want of analysis, for most of the activities referred to special
instincts prove to be derivatives of the great primal instincts which are
common to or very widely distributed over the animal kingdom. Man and a
very large number of all animals inherit the capacity to respond to physical
need or emergency according to the demands which we classify, as the three
primary instincts of self-preservation, nutrition, and reproduction. If a series
of animals of increasing brain power be examined, it will be found that a
growth of intelligence, while it does nothing to enfeeble the instinctive
impulse, modifies the appearances of it by increasing the number of modes
of reaction it may use. Intelligence, that is to say, leaves its possessor no
less impelled by instinct than his simpler ancestor, but endows him with the
capacity to respond in a larger variety of ways. The response is now no
longer directly and narrowly confined to a single path, but may follow a
number of indirect and intricate ways; there is no reason, however, to
suppose that the impulse is any the weaker for that. To mistake indirectness
of response for enfeeblement of impulse is a fundamental error to which all
inquiry into the psychology of instinct is liable.
To man his big brain has given a maximal power of various response
which enables him to indulge his instinctive impulses in indirect and
symbolic activities to a greater extent than any other animal. It is for this
reason that the instincts of man are not always obvious in his conduct and
have come to be regarded by some as practically no more than vestigial.
Indirect modes of response may indeed become so involved as to assume
the appearance of the negation of the very instincts of which they are the
expression. Thus it comes to be no paradox to say that monks and nuns,
ascetics and martyrs, prove the strength of the great primary instincts their
existence seems to deny.
Man and a certain number of other species widely distributed
throughout the animal kingdom show, in addition to the instincts of self-
preservation, nutrition, and sex, specialized inherited modes of response to
the needs, not directly of the individual but of the herd to which he belongs.
These responses, which are perfectly well marked and characteristic, are
those of the herd instinct. It is important to grasp clearly the relation of this
instinct to the individual. It must be understood that each separate member
of a gregarious species inherits characters deeply rooted in his being which
effectually differentiate him from any non-gregarious animal. These
characters are such that in presence of certain stimuli they will ensure his
responding in a specialized way which will be quite different from the
response of a solitary animal. The response when examined will be found
not necessarily to favour the survival of the individual as such, but to favour
his survival as a member of a herd. A very simple example will make this
plain. The dog and the cat are our two most familiar examples of the social
and the solitary animal respectively. Their different attitudes towards
feeding must have been observed by all. The cat takes her food leisurely,
without great appearance of appetite and in small amounts at a time; the dog
is voracious and will eat hurriedly as much as he can get, growling
anxiously if he is approached. In doing so he is expressing a deeply
ingrained characteristic. His attitude towards food was built up when he
hunted in packs and to get a share of the common kill had to snatch what
came in his way and gulp it down before it could be taken from him. In
slang which has a sound biological basis we say he “wolfs” his food. When
in domestication his food supply is no longer limited in the primitive way,
his instinctive tendency persists; he is typically greedy and will kill himself
by overeating if he is allowed to. Here we have a perfect instance of an
instinctive response being disadvantageous to the survival of the individual
as such, and favouring his survival only as a member of a herd. This
example, trivial as it may seem, is worthy of close study. It shows that the
individual of the gregarious species, as an individual and in isolation,
possesses indelible marks of character which effectually distinguish him
from all solitary animals.
The same principle applies with equal force to man. Whether he is alone
or in company, a hermit philosopher or a mere unit of a mob, his responses
will bear the same stamp of being regulated by the existence and influence
of his fellows.
The foregoing considerations, elementary and incomplete as they are,
suggest that there is a strong prima facie case for rejecting the common
conceptions that man is among animals the least endowed with an
inheritance of instinct, and that civilization has produced in him profound
modifications in his primitive instinctive impulses. If the conception which
I have put forward be correct, namely, that man is not at all less subject to
instinctive impulsions than any other animal but disguises the fact from the
observer and from himself by the multiplicity of the lines of response his
mental capacity enables him to take, it should follow that his conduct is
much less truly variable and much more open to generalization than has
generally been supposed. Should this be possible, it would enable the
biologist to study the actual affairs of mankind in a really practical way, to
analyse the tendencies of social development, to discover how deeply or
superficially they were based in the necessity of things, and above all, to
foretell their course. Thus might be founded a true science of politics which
would be of direct service to the statesman.
Many attempts have been made to apply biological principles to the
interpretation of history and the guidance of statecraft, especially since the
popularization of the principles associated with the name of Darwin. Such
attempts have generally been undertaken less in the spirit of the scientific
investigator than in that of the politician; the point of departure has been a
political conviction and not a biological truth; and as might be expected,
when there has been any conflict between political conviction and
biological truth it is the latter that has had to give way. Work of this kind
has brought the method into deserved contempt by its crudity, its obvious
subservience to prejudice, and its pretentious gestures of the doctrinaire.
England has not been without her examples of these scientific politicians
and historians, but they cannot be said to have flourished here as they have
in the more scholastic air of Germany. The names of several such are now
notorious in this country and their works are sufficiently familiar for it to be
obvious that their claims to scientific value do not admit of discussion. It is
not necessary to consider their conclusions, they are condemned by their
manner; and however interesting their political vociferation may be to
fellow-patriots, it plainly has no meaning whatsoever as science. In face of
the spectacle presented by these leather-lunged doctrinaires, it needs some
little hardihood to maintain that it is possible profitably to apply biological
principle to the consideration of human affairs; nevertheless, that is an
essential thesis of this essay.
In attempting to illuminate the records of history by the principles of
biology, an essential difficulty is the difference of scale in time upon which
these two departments of knowledge work. Historical events are confined
within a few thousands of years, the biological record covers many
millions; it is scarcely to be expected, therefore, that even a gross
movement on the cramped historical scale will be capable of detection in
the vast gulf of time the biological series represents. A minor difficulty is
the fact that the data of history come to us through a dense and reduplicated
veil of human interpretation, whereas the biological facts are comparatively
free from this kind of obscuration. The former obstacle is undoubtedly
serious. It is to be remarked, however, that there is strong reason to suppose
that the process of organic evolution has not been and is not always
infinitely slow and gradual. It is more than suspected that, perhaps as the
result of slowly accumulated tendency or perhaps as the result of a sudden
variation of structure or capacity, there have been periods of rapid change
which might have been perceptible to direct observation. The infinitely long
road still tending upwards comes to where it branches and meets another
path, tending perhaps downwards or even upwards at a different slope. May
not the meeting or branching form, as it were, a node in the infinite line, a
resting place for the eye, a point in the vast extension capable of recognition
by a finite mind and of expression in terms of human affairs? It is the belief
of the writer that the human race stands at such a nodal point to-day.
The Biology of Gregariousness
Table of Contents
In order to set forth the evidence on which is based the conclusion that the
present juncture of affairs is not merely, as it very obviously is, a meeting-
place of epochs in the historical series, but also marks a stage in the
biological series which will prove to have been a moment of destiny in the
evolution of the human species, it will be necessary to inquire somewhat
closely into the biological meaning of the social habit in animals. In an
earlier essay certain speculations in the same subject were indulged, and a
certain amount of repetition will be necessary. The point of view then taken
up, however, was different from that from which I shall now attempt to
review the facts. Then the main interest lay in an examination of the
meaning of gre­gar­i­ous­ness for the individual mind, and although reasons
enough were found for uneasiness at the course of events, and at the
instability of civilization which any radical examination displayed, the
inquiry was not pursued under any immediate imminence of disaster to the
social fabric as it must be now. Naturally, therefore, at the present time
certain aspects of the subject which before were of no special relevance
become of great importance and demand close examination.
In a general view of the social habit in animals certain outstanding facts
are readily to be observed. It is of wide distribution and sporadic
occurrence, it varies much in the completeness of its development, and
there seems to be an inverse relation between its completeness and the brain
power of the animal concerned.
From the wideness of its distribution the social habit may be supposed
to represent a forward step in complexity which comes about readily. It has
the appearance of being upon a path which species have a natural tendency
to follow, a line of evolution which is perhaps rendered possible by
constantly occurring small variations common to all animals and taken
advantage of only under certain circumstances of pressure or increase. It
seems not to depend on any sudden large variation of type, and such is not
necessary to account for it. It differs from many other modifications which
we know animal life to have undergone in being immediately useful to the
species from its very beginning and in its least perfect forms. Once started,
however imperfectly, the new habit will have a natural tendency to progress
towards fuller forms of sociality by reason of special selective forces which
it inevitably sets going. The fact that it is valuable to the species in which it
develops even in its most larval forms, combined with its tendency to
progress, no doubt accounts for the wonderful series of all degrees of gre­‐
gar­i­ous­ness which the field of natural history presents.
I have pointed out elsewhere that the fundamental biological meaning of
gre­gar­i­ous­ness is that it allows of an indefinite enlargement of the unit upon
which the undifferentiated influence of natural selection is allowed to act,
so that the individual merged in the larger unit is shielded from the
immediate effects of natural selection and is exposed directly only to the
special form of selection which obtains within the new unit.
There seems little doubt that this sheltering of the individual allows him
to vary and to undergo modifications with a freedom which would have
been dangerous to him as an isolated being, but is safe under the new
conditions and valuable to the new unit of which he now is a part.
In essence the significance of the passage from the solitary to the
gregarious seems to be closely similar to that of the passage from the
unicellular to the multicellular organism—an enlargement of the unit
exposed to natural selection, a shielding of the individual cell from that
pressure, an endowment of it with freedom to vary and specialize in safety.
Nature has thus made two great experiments of the same type, and if
one be reasonably careful to avoid arguing from analogy, it is possible to
use one case to illuminate the other by furnishing hints as to what
mechanisms may be looked for and in what directions inquiry may
profitably be pursued.
The sporadic occurrence of gre­gar­i­ous­ness at widely separated points of
the animal field—in man and sheep, in ant and elephant—inclines one to
suppose that multi­cel­lu­lar­ity must have arisen also at multiple points, and
that the metazoa did not arise from the protozoa by a single line of descent.
It suggests also that there is some inherent property in mobile living
organisms that makes combination of individuals into larger units a more or
less inevitable course of development under certain circumstances and
without any gross variation being necessary to initiate it. The complex
evolution which multi­cel­lu­lar­ity made possible, and perhaps enforced, can
scarcely fail to make one wonder whether the gregarious animal has not
entered upon a path which must of necessity lead to increasing complexity
and co-ordination, to a more and more stringent intensity of integration or
to extinction.
The varying degrees to which the social habit has developed among
different animals provide a very interesting branch of study. The class of
insects is remarkable in furnishing an almost inexhaustible variety of stages
to which the instinct is developed. Of these that reached by the humble bee,
with its small, weak families, is a familiar example of a low grade; that of
the wasp, with its colonies large and strong, but unable to survive the
winter, is another of more developed type; while that of the honey bee
represents a very high grade of development in which the instinct seems to
have completed its cycle and yielded to the hive the maximum advantages
of which it is capable. In the honey bee, then, the social instinct may be said
to be complete.
It is necessary to examine somewhat closely into what is denoted by the
completeness or otherwise of the social habit in a given species.
To return for a moment to the case of the change from the unicellular to
the multicellular, it is obvious that in the new unit, to get the full advantage
of the change there must be specialization involving both loss and gain to
the individual cell; one loses power of digestion and gains a special
sensitiveness to stimulation, another loses locomotion to gain digestion, and
so forth in innumerable series as the new unit becomes more complex.
Inherent, however, in the new mechanism is the need for co-ordination if
the advantages of specialization are to be obtained. The necessity of a
nervous system—if progress is to be maintained—early becomes obvious,
and it is equally clear that the primary function of the nervous system is to
facilitate co-ordination. Thus it would seem that the individual cell
incorporated in a larger unit must possess a capacity for specialization, the
ability to originate new methods of activity, and a capacity for response—
that is, the ability to limit itself to action co-ordinated suitably to the
interests of the new unit rather than to those that would have been its own if
it had been a free unit in itself. Specialization and co-ordination will be the
two necessary conditions for success of the larger unit, and advance in
complexity will be possible as long only as these two are unexhausted.
Neither, of course, will be of avail without the other. The richest
specialization will be of no good if it cannot be controlled to the uses of the
whole organism, and the most perfect control of the individual cells will be
incapable of ensuring progress if it has no material of original variation to
work on.
The analogy is helpful in the consideration of the mechanisms brought
into play by the social habit. The community of the honey bee bears a close
resemblance to the body of a complex animal. The capacity for actual
structural specialization of the individuals in the interests of the hive has
been remarkable and has gone far, while at the same time co-ordination has
been stringently enforced, so that each individual is actually absorbed into
the community, expends all its activities therein, and when excluded from it
is almost as helpless as a part of the naked flesh of an animal detached from
its body. The hive may, in fact, without any very undue stretch of fantasy,
be described as an animal of which all the individual cells have retained the
power of locomotion. When one watches the flight of a swarm of bees its
unanimity and directness very easily produce the illusion that one is
witnessing the migration of a single animal usually sedentary but at times
capable of undertaking journeys with a formidable and successful energy.
This new animal differs from the other animals of the metazoa which it has
outdistanced in the race of evolution, not merely in its immense power,
energy, and flexibility, but also in the almost startling fact that it has
recovered the gift of immortality which seemed to have been lost with its
protozoal ancestors.
The extent to which the hive makes use of the powers of its individuals
is the measure of the completeness with which the social habit is developed
in it. The worker bee has practically no activities which are not directly
devoted to the hive, and yet she goes about her ceaseless tasks in a way that
never fails to impress the observer with its exuberant energy and even its
appearance of joyfulness. It is thought that the average worker bee works
herself to death in about two months. That is a fact which can scarcely fail
to arouse, even in the least imaginative, at any rate a moment of profound
contemplation.
If we could suppose her to be conscious in the human sense, we must
imagine the bee to be possessed by an enthusiasm for the hive more intense
than a mother’s devotion to her son, without personal ambitions, or doubts
or fears, and if we are to judge by the imperfect experience man has yet had
of the same lofty passion, we must think of her consciousness, insignificant
spark as it is, as a little fire ablaze with altruistic feeling. Doubtless, such an
attribution of emotion to the bee is a quite unjustified fallacy of an­thro­po­‐
mor­phism. Nevertheless, it is not altogether valueless as a hint of what
social unity might effect in an animal of larger mental life. There can be
little doubt that the perfection to which the communal life of the bee has
attained is dependent on the very smallness of the mental development of
which the individuals are capable. Their capacity to assimilate experience is
necessarily from their structure, and is known by experience to be, small
and their path is marked out so plainly by actual physical modifications that
the almost miraculous absorption of the worker in the hive is after all
perhaps natural enough. If she were able to assimilate general experience on
a larger scale, to react freely and appropriately to stimuli external to the
hive, there can be little doubt that the community would show a less
concentrated efficiency than it does to-day. The standing miracle of the bee
—her sensitiveness to the voice of the hive and her capacity to
communicate with her fellows—would undoubtedly be less marvellously
perfect if she were not at the same time deaf to all other voices.
When we come to consider animals in which the anatomist can
recognize a brain and the psychologist an individual mind, the types of gre­‐
gar­i­ous­ness we meet with are found to have lost the magnificent intensity of
the bee. This decline in intensity seems to be due to the greatly increased
variety of reaction of which the individual is capable. The gregarious
mammalia are most of them relatively intelligent, they are capable of
assimilating experience to a certain extent and have a definite capacity for
individual existence. In them the social habit shows comparatively little
tendency to a gradual intensification, but is a more static condition.
Doubtless, there are other conditions which also limit it. For example, the
slowness of multiplication and fixity of structure in the mammalia
obviously deprive them of the possibility of undergoing a continuous social
integration as the insects have. Be this as it may, we find in them the social
habit but little or scarcely at all expressed in physical specialization but
shown as a deeply ingrained mental character which profoundly influences
their habits and their modes of reaction to bodily and external impressions.
Among the mammalia other than man and possibly apes and monkeys, gre­‐
gar­i­ous­ness is found in two broadly distinguishable types according to the
function it subserves. It may be either protective as in the sheep, the deer,
the ox, and the horse, or aggressive as in the wolf and allied animals. In
both forms it will involve certain common types of capacity, while the
distinguishing characteristic of each will be a special kind of reaction to
certain stimuli. It is important to understand that these peculiarities are
possessed by each individual of the larger unit, and will be displayed by
him in a characteristic way whether he is in the company of his fellows or
not. It is not necessary to repeat here in any detail the characters of the
gregarious mammal. They have been dealt with in an earlier essay, but it is
desirable to emphasize here certain features of exceptional importance and
some which were but little discussed before.
The quite fundamental characteristic of the social mammal, as of the
bee, is sensitiveness to the voice of his fellows. He must have the capacity
to react fatally and without hesitation to an impression coming to him from
the herd, and he must react in a totally different way to impressions coming
to him from without. In the presence of danger his first motion must be, not
to fly or to attack as the case may be, but to notify the herd. This
characteristic is beautifully demonstrated in the low growl a dog will give at
the approach of a stranger. This is obviously in no way part of the dog’s
programme of attack upon his enemy—when his object is intimidation he
bursts into barking—but his first duty is to put the pack on its guard.
Similarly the start of the sheep is a notification and precedes any motion of
flight.
In order that the individual shall be sensitive in a special degree to the
voice of the herd, he must have developed in him an infallible capacity for
recognizing his fellow-members. In the lower mammalia this seems almost
exclusively a function of the sense of smell, as is natural enough since that
sense is as a general rule highly developed in them. The domestic dog
shows admirably the importance of the function of recognition in his
species. Comparatively few recognize even their masters at any distance by
sight or sound, while obviously with their fellows they are practically
dependent on smell. The extent to which the ceremonial of recognition has
developed in the dog is, of course, very familiar to every one. It shows
unmistakable evidence of the rudiments of social organization, and is not
the less illuminating to the student of human society for having a bodily
orientation and technique which at first sight obscures its resemblance to
similar, and it is supposed more dignified, mechanisms in man.
Specialization fitting the animal for social life is obviously in certain
directions restrictive; that is, it denies him certain capacities and immunities
which the solitary animal possesses; equally obviously is it in certain
directions expansive and does it confer qualities on the social which the
solitary does not possess. Among qualities of restrictive specialization are
inability to live satisfactorily apart from the herd or some substitute for it,
the liability to loneliness, a dependence on leadership, custom, and
tradition, a credulity towards the dogmas of the herd and an unbelief
towards external experience, a standard of conduct no longer determined by
personal needs but influenced by a power outside the ego—a conscience, in
fact, and a sense of sin—a weakness of personal initiative and a distrust of
its promptings. Expansive specialization, on the other hand, gives the
gregarious animal the sense of power and security in the herd, the capacity
to respond to the call of the herd with a maximum output of energy and
endurance, a deep-seated mental satisfaction in unity with the herd, and a
solution in it of personal doubts and fears.
All these characters can be traced in an animal such as the dog. The
mere statement of them, necessarily in mental terms, involves the liability
to a certain inexactitude if it is not recognized that no hypothesis as to the
consciousness of the dog is assumed but that the description in mental terms
is given because of its convenient brevity. An objective description of the
actual conduct on which such summarized statements are founded would be
impossibly voluminous.
The advantage the new unit obtains by aggressive gre­gar­i­ous­ness is
chiefly its immense accession of strength as a hunting and fighting
organism. Protective gre­gar­i­ous­ness confers on the flock or herd advantages
perhaps less obvious but certainly not less important. A very valuable gain
is the increased efficiency of vigilance which is possible. Such efficiency
depends on the available number of actual watchers and the exquisite
sensitiveness of the herd and all its members to the signals of such sentries.
No one can have watched a herd of sheep for long without being impressed
with the delicacy with which a supposed danger is detected, transmitted
throughout the herd, and met by an appropriate movement. Another
advantage enjoyed by the new unit is a practical solution of the difficulties
incident upon the emotion of fear. Fear is essentially an enfeebling passion,
yet in the sheep and such animals it is necessarily developed to a high
degree in the interests of safety. The danger of this specialization is
neutralized by the implication of so large a part of the individual’s
personality in the herd and outside of himself. Alarm becomes a passion, as
it were, of the herd rather than of the individual, and the appropriate
response by the individual is to an impulse received from the herd and not
directly from the actual object of alarm. It seems to be in this way that the
paralysing emotion of fear is held back from the individual, while its effect
can reach him only as the active and formidable passion of panic. The
gregarious herbivora are in fact timid but not fearful animals. All the
various mechanisms in which the social habit shows itself apparently have
as their general function a maximal sensitiveness to danger of the herd as a
whole, combined with maintaining with as little interruption as possible an
atmosphere of calm within the herd, so that the individual members can
occupy themselves in the serious business of grazing. It must be doubted
whether a truly herbivorous animal of a solitary habit could ever flourish
when we remember how incessant must be his industry in feeding if he is to
be properly nourished, and how much such an occupation will be interfered
with by the constant alarms he must be subject to if he is to escape the
attacks of carnivorous enemies. The evidence suggests that protective gre­‐
gar­i­ous­ness is a more elaborate manifestation of the social habit than the
aggressive form. It is clear that the security of the higher herbivora, such as
the ox and especially the horse and their allies, is considerable in relation to
the carnivora. One may permissibly perhaps indulge the speculation that in
the absence of man the horse possibly might have developed a greater
complexity of organization than it has actually been able to attain; that the
facts should seem to contain this hint is a curious testimony to the
wonderful constructive imagination of Swift.
Setting aside such guesses and confining ourselves to the facts, we may
say in summary that we find the infrahuman mammalia to present two
distinctly separable strains of the social habit. Both are of great value to the
species in which they appear, and both are associated with certain
fundamentally similar types of reactive capacity which give a general
resemblance of character to all gregarious animals. Of the two forms the
protective is perhaps capable of absorbing more fully the personality of the
individual than is the aggressive, but both seem to have reached the limit of
their intensification at a grade far lower than that which has been attained in
the insects.
Characters of the Gregarious Animal Displayed
by Man
Table of Contents
When we come to consider man we find ourselves faced at once by some of
the most interesting problems in the biology of the social habit. It is
probably not necessary now to labour the proof of the fact that man is a
gregarious animal in literal fact, that he is as essentially gregarious as the
bee and the ant, the sheep, the ox, and the horse. The tissue of char­ac­ter­is­ti­‐
cal­ly gregarious reactions which his conduct presents furnishes
incontestable proof of this thesis, which is thus an indispensable clue to an
inquiry into the intricate problems of human society.
It is desirable perhaps to enumerate in a summary way the more obvious
gregarious characters which man displays.
1. He is intolerant and fearful of solitude, physical or mental. This
intolerance is the cause of the mental fixity and intellectual incuriousness
which, to a remarkable degree for an animal with so capacious a brain, he
constantly displays. As is well known, the resistance to a new idea is always
primarily a matter of prejudice, the development of intellectual objections,
just or otherwise, being a secondary process in spite of the common
delusion to the contrary. This intimate dependence on the herd is traceable
not merely in matters physical and intellectual, but also betrays itself in the
deepest recesses of personality as a sense of incompleteness which compels
the individual to reach out towards some larger existence than his own,
some encompassing being in whom his perplexities may find a solution and
his longings peace. Physical loneliness and intellectual isolation are
effectually solaced by the nearness and agreement of the herd. The deeper
personal necessities cannot be met—at any rate, in such society as has so
far been evolved—by so superficial a union; the capacity for inter­com­mun­i­‐
ca­tion is still too feebly developed to bring the individual into complete and
soul-satisfying harmony with his fellows, to convey from one to another
Thoughts hardly to be packed
Into a narrow act,
Fancies that broke through language and escaped.
Religious feeling is therefore a character inherent in the very structure of
the human mind, and is the expression of a need which must be recognized
by the biologist as neither superficial nor transitory. It must be admitted that
some philosophers and men of science have at times denied to the religious
impulses of man their true dignity and importance. Impelled perhaps by a
desire to close the circle of a materialistic conception of the universe, they
have tended to belittle the significance of such phenomena as they were
unable to reconcile with their principles and bring within the iron circle of
their doctrine. To deal with religion in this way has not only been an
outrage upon true scientific method, but has always led to a strong reaction
in general opinion against any radical inquiry by science into the deeper
problems of man’s nature and status. A large and energetic reaction of this
kind prevails to-day. There can be little doubt that it was precipitated, if not
provoked, by attempts to force a harsh and dogmatic materialism into the
status of a general philosophy. As long as such a system is compelled to
ignore, to depreciate, or to deny the reality of such manifestly important
phenomena as the altruistic emotions, the religious needs and feelings, the
experiences of awe and wonder and beauty, the illumination of the mystic,
the rapture of the prophet, the unconquerable endurance of the martyr, so
long must it fail in its claims to universality. It is therefore necessary to lay
down with the strongest emphasis the proposition that the religious needs
and feelings of man are a direct and necessary manifestation of the
inheritance of instinct with which he is born, and therefore deserve
consideration as respectful and observation as minute as any other
biological phenomenon.
2. He is more sensitive to the voice of the herd than to any other
influence. It can inhibit or stimulate his thought and conduct. It is the source
of his moral codes, of the sanctions of his ethics and philosophy. It can
endow him with energy, courage, and endurance, and can as easily take
these away. It can make him acquiese in his own punishment and embrace
his executioner, submit to poverty, bow to tyranny, and sink without
complaint under starvation. Not merely can it make him accept hardship
and suffering unresistingly, but it can make him accept as truth the
explanation that his perfectly preventable afflictions are sublimely just and
gentle. It is in this acme of the power of herd suggestion that is perhaps the
most absolutely incontestable proof of the profoundly gregarious nature of
man. That a creature of strong appetites and luxurious desires should come
to tolerate uncomplainingly his empty belly, his chattering teeth, his naked
limbs, and his hard bed is miracle enough. What are we to say of a force
which, when he is told by the full-fed and well-warmed that his state is the
more blessed can make him answer, “How beautiful! How true!” In the face
of so effectual a negation, not merely of experience and common sense but
also of actual hunger and privation, it is not possible to set any limits to the
power of the herd over the individual.
3. He is subject to the passions of the pack in his mob violence and the
passions of the herd in his panics. These activities are by no means limited
to the outbursts of actual crowds, but are to be seen equally clearly in the
hue and cry of newspapers and public after some notorious criminal or
scapegoat, and in the success of scaremongering by the same agencies.
4. He is remarkably susceptible to leadership. This quality in man may
very naturally be thought to have a basis essentially rational rather than
instinctive if its manifestations are not regarded with a special effort to
attain an objective attitude. How thoroughly reasonable it appears that a
body of men seeking a common object should put themselves under the
guidance of some strong and expert personality who can point out the path
most profitably to be pursued, who can hearten his followers and bring all
their various powers into a harmonious pursuit of the common object. The
rational basis of the relation is, however, seen to be at any rate open to
discussion when we consider the qualities in a leader upon which his
authority so often rests, for there can be little doubt that their appeal is more
generally to instinct than to reason. In ordinary politics it must be admitted
that the gift of public speaking is of more decisive value than anything else.
If a man is fluent, dextrous, and ready on the platform, he possesses the one
indispensable requisite for statesmanship; if in addition he has the gift of
moving deeply the emotions of his hearers, his capacity for guiding the
infinite complexities of national life becomes undeniable. Experience has
shown that no exceptional degree of any other capacity is necessary to
make a successful leader. There need be no specially arduous training, no
great weight of knowledge either of affairs or the human heart, no
receptiveness to new ideas, no outlook into reality. Indeed, the mere
absence of such seems to be an advantage; for originality is apt to appear to
the people as flightiness, scepticism as feebleness, caution as doubt of the
great political principles that may happen at the moment to be immutable.
The successful shepherd thinks like his sheep, and can lead his flock only if
he keeps no more than the shortest distance in advance. He must remain, in
fact, recognizable as one of the flock, magnified no doubt, louder, coarser,
above all with more urgent wants and ways of expression than the common
sheep, but in essence to their feeling of the same flesh with them. In the
human herd the necessity of the leader bearing unmistakable marks of
identification is equally essential. Variations from the normal standard in
intellectual matters are tolerated if they are not very conspicuous, for man
has never yet taken reason very seriously, and can still look upon
intellectuality as not more than a peccadillo if it is not paraded
conspicuously; variations from the moral standard are, however, of a much
greater significance as marks of identification, and when they become
obvious, can at once change a great and successful leader into a stranger
and an outcast, however little they may seem to be relevant to the adequate
execution of his public work. If a leader’s marks of identity with the herd
are of the right kind, the more they are paraded the better. We like to see
photographs of him nursing his little grand-daughter, we like to know that
he plays golf badly, and rides the bicycle like our common selves, we enjoy
hearing of “pretty incidents” in which he has given the blind crossing-
sweeper a penny or begged a glass of water at a wayside cottage—and there
are excellent biological reasons for our gratification.
In times of war leadership is not less obviously based on instinct,
though naturally, since the herd is exposed to a special series of stresses,
manifestations of it are also somewhat special. A people at war feels the
need of direction much more intensely than a people at peace, and as
always they want some one who appeals to their instinctive feeling of being
directed, comparatively regardless of whether he is able in fact to direct.
This instinctive feeling inclines them to the choice of a man who presents at
any rate the appearance and manners of authority and power rather than to
one who possesses the substance of capacity but is denied the shadow. They
have their conventional pictures of the desired type—the strong, silent,
relentless, the bold, outspoken, hard, and energetic—but at all costs he must
be a “man,” a “leader who can lead,” a shepherd, in fact, who, by his
gesticulations and his shouts, leaves his flock in no doubt as to his presence
and his activity. It is touching to remember how often a people in pursuit of
this ideal has obtained and accepted in response to its prayers nothing but
melodramatic bombast, impatience, rashness, and foolish, boasting
truculence; and to remember how often a great statesman in his country’s
need has had to contend not merely with her foreign enemies, but with
those at home whose vociferous malignity has declared his magnanimous
composure to be sluggishness, his cautious scepticism to be feebleness, and
his unostentatious resolution to be stupidity.
5. His relations with his fellows are dependent upon the recognition of
him as a member of the herd. It is important to the success of a gregarious
species that individuals should be able to move freely within the large unit
while strangers are excluded. Mechanisms to secure such personal
recognition are therefore a characteristic feature of the social habit. The
primitive olfactory greeting common to so many of the lower animals was
doubtless rendered impossible for man by his comparative loss of the sense
of smell long before it ceased to accord with his pretensions, yet in a
thriving active species the function of recognition was as necessary as ever.
Recognition by vision could be of only limited value, and it seems probable
that speech very early became the accepted medium. Possibly the necessity
to distinguish friend from foe was one of the conditions which favoured the
development of articulate speech. Be this as it may, speech at the present
time retains strong evidence of the survival in it of the function of herd
recognition. As is usual with instinctive activities in man, the actual state of
affairs is concealed by a deposit of rationalized explanation which is apt to
discourage merely superficial inquiry. The function of conversation is, it is
to be supposed, ordinarily regarded as being the exchange of ideas and
information. Doubtless it has come to have such a function, but an objective
examination of ordinary conversation shows that the actual conveyance of
ideas takes a very small part in it. As a rule the exchange seems to consist of
ideas which are necessarily common to the two speakers, and are known to
be so by each. The process, however, is none the less satisfactory for this;
indeed, it seems even to derive its satisfactoriness therefrom. The
interchange of the conventional lead and return is obviously very far from
being tedious or meaningless to the interlocutors. They can, however, have
derived nothing from it but the confirmation to one another of their
sympathy and of the class or classes to which they belong.
Conversations of greeting are naturally particularly rich in the exchange
of purely ceremonial remarks, ostensibly based on some subject like the
weather, in which there must necessarily be an absolute community of
knowledge. It is possible, however, for a long conversation to be made up
entirely of similar elements, and to contain no trace of any conveyance of
new ideas; such intercourse is probably that which on the whole is most
satisfactory to the “normal” man and leaves him more comfortably
stimulated than would originality or brilliance, or any other manifestation of
the strange and therefore of the disreputable.
Conversation between persons unknown to one another is also—when
satisfactory—apt to be rich in the ritual of recognition. When one hears or
takes part in these elaborate evolutions, gingerly proffering one after
another of one’s marks of identity, one’s views on the weather, on fresh air
and draughts, on the Government and on uric acid, watching intently for the
first low hint of a growl, which will show one belongs to the wrong pack
and must withdraw, it is impossible not to be reminded of the similar
manœuvres of the dog, and to be thankful that Nature has provided us with
a less direct, though perhaps a more tedious, code.
It may appear that we have been dealing here with a far-fetched and
laboured analogy, and making much of a comparison of trivialities merely
for the sake of compromising, if that could be done, human pretensions to
reason. To show that the marvel of human communion began, perhaps, as a
very humble function, and yet retains traces of its origin, is in no way to
minimize the value or dignity of the more fully developed power. The
capacity for free inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion between individuals of the species has
meant so much in the evolution of man, and will certainly come in the
future to mean so incalculably more, that it cannot be regarded as anything
less than a master element in the shaping of his destiny.
Some Peculiarities of the Social Habit in Man
Table of Contents
It is apparent after very little consideration that the extent of man’s
individual mental development is a factor which has produced many novel
characters in his manifestations of the social habit, and has even concealed
to a great extent the profound influence this instinct has in regulating his
conduct, his thought, and his society.
Large mental capacity in the individual, as we have already seen, has
the effect of providing a wide freedom of response to instinctive impulses,
so that, while the individual is no less impelled by instinct than a more
primitive type, the manifestations of these impulses in his conduct are very
varied, and his conduct loses the appearance of a narrow concentration on
its instinctive object. It needs only to pursue this reasoning to a further stage
to reach the conclusion that mental capacity, while in no way limiting the
impulsive power of instinct, may, by providing an infinite number of
channels into which the impulse is free to flow, actually prevent the impulse
from attaining the goal of its normal object. In the ascetic the sex instinct is
defeated, in the martyr that of self-preservation, not because these instincts
have been abolished, but because the activity of the mind has found new
channels for them to flow in. As might be expected, the much more labile
herd instinct has been still more subject to this deflection and dissipation
without its potential impulsive strength being in any way impaired. It is this
process which has enabled primitive psychology so largely to ignore the
fact that man still is, as much as ever, endowed with a heritage of instinct
and incessantly subject to its influence. Man’s mental capacity, again, has
enabled him as a species to flourish enormously, and thereby to increase to
a prodigious extent the size of the unit in which the individual is merged.
The nation, if the term be used to describe every organization under a
completely independent, supreme government, must be regarded as the
smallest unit on which natural selection now unrestrictedly acts. Between
such units there is free competition, and the ultimate regulator of these
relations is physical force. This statement needs the qualification that the
delimitation between two given units may be much sharper than that
between two others, so that in the first case the resort to force is likely to
occur readily, while in the second case it will be brought about only by the
very ultimate necessity. The tendency to the enlargement of the social unit
has been going on with certain temporary relapses throughout human
history. Though repeatedly checked by the instability of the larger units, it
has always resumed its activity, so that it should probably be regarded as a
fundamental biological drift the existence of which is a factor which must
always be taken into account in dealing with the structure of human society.
The gregarious mind shows certain char­ac­ter­is­tics which throw some
light on this phenomenon of the progressively enlarging unit. The
gregarious animal is different from the solitary in the capacity to become
conscious in a special way of the existence of other creatures. This specific
consciousness of his fellows carries with it a characteristic element of
communion with them. The individual knows another individual of the
same herd as a partaker in an entity of which he himself is a part, so that the
second individual is in some way and to a certain extent identical with
himself and part of his own personality. He is able to feel with the other and
share his pleasures and sufferings as if they were an attenuated form of his
own personal experiences. The degree to which this assimilation of the
interests of another person is carried depends, in a general way, on the
extent of the inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion between the two. In human society a
man’s interest in his fellows is distributed about him concentrically
according to a compound of various relations they bear to him which we
may call in a broad way their nearness. The centrifugal fading of interest is
seen when we compare the man’s feeling towards one near to him with his
feeling towards one farther off. He will be disposed, other things being
equal, to sympathize with a relative as against a fellow-townsman, with a
fellow-townsman as against a mere inhabitant of the same county, with the
latter as against the rest of the country, with an Englishman as against a
European, with a European as against an Asiatic, and so on until a limit is
reached beyond which all human interest is lost. The distribution of interest
is of course never purely geographical, but is modified by, for example,
trade and professional sympathy, and by special cases of inter­com­mun­i­ca­‐
tion which bring topographically distant individuals into a closer grade of
feeling than their mere situation would demand. The essential principle,
however, is that the degree of sympathy with a given individual varies
directly with the amount of inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion with him. The capacity to
assimilate the interests of another individual with one’s own, to allow him,
as it were, to partake in one’s own personality, is what is called altruism,
and might equally well perhaps be called expansive egoism. It is a
characteristic of the gregarious animal, and is a perfectly normal and
necessary development in him of his instinctive inheritance.
Altruism is a quality the understanding of which has been much
obscured by its being regarded from the purely human point of view.
Judged from this standpoint, it has been apt to appear as a breach in the
supposedly “immutable” laws of “Nature red in tooth and claw,” as a virtue
breathed into man from some extra-human source, or as a weakness which
must be stamped out of any race which is to be strong, expanding, and
masterful. To the biologist these views are equally false, superfluous, and
romantic. He is aware that altruism occurs only in a medium specifically
protected from the unqualified influence of natural selection, that it is the
direct outcome of instinct, and that it is a source of strength because it is a
source of union.
In recent times, freedom of travel, and the development of the resources
rendered available by education, have increased the general mass of inter­‐
com­mun­i­ca­tion to an enormous extent. Side by side with this, altruism has
come more and more into recognition as a supreme moral law. There is
already a strong tendency to accept selfishness as a test of sin, and
consideration for others as a test of virtue, and this has influenced even
those who by public profession are compelled to maintain that right and
wrong are to be defined only in terms of an arbitrary extra-natural code.
Throughout the incalculable ages of man’s existence as a social animal,
Nature has been hinting to him in less and less ambiguous terms that
altruism must become the ultimate sanction of his moral code. Her whispers
have never gained more than grudging and reluctant notice from the
common man, and from those intensified forms of the common man, his
pastors and masters. Only to the alert senses of moral genius has the
message been at all intelligible, and when it has been interpreted to the
people it has always been received with obloquy and derision, with
persecution and martyrdom. Thus, as so often happens in human society,
has one manifestation of herd instinct been met and opposed by another.
As inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion tends constantly to widen the field of action of
altruism, a point is reached when the individual becomes capable of some
kind of sympathy, however attenuated, with beings outside the limits of the
biological unit within which the primitive function of altruism lies. This
extension is perhaps possible only in man. In a creature like the bee the
rigidly limited mental capacity of the individual and the closely organized
society of the hive combine to make the boundary of the hive correspond
closely with the uttermost limit of the field over which altruism is active.
The bee, capable of great sympathy and understanding in regard to her
fellow-members of the hive, is utterly callous and without understanding in
regard to any creature of external origin and existence. Man, however, with
his infinitely greater capacity for assimilating experience, has not been able
to maintain the rigid limitation of sympathy to the unit, the boundaries of
which tend to acquire a certain indefiniteness not seen in any of the lower
gregarious types.
Hence tends to appear a sense of international justice, a vague feeling of
being responsibly concerned in all human affairs and by a natural
consequence the ideas and impulses denoted under the term “pacifism.”
One of the most natural and obvious consequences of war is a hardening
of the boundaries of the social unit and a retraction of the vague feelings
towards international sympathy which are a characteristic product of peace
and inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion. Thus it comes about that pacifism and
internationalism are in great disgrace at the present time; they are regarded
as the vapourings of cranky windbags who have inevitably been punctured
at the first touch of the sword; they are, our political philosophers tell us,
but products of the miasm of sentimental fallacy which tends to be bred in
the relaxing atmosphere of peace. Perhaps no general expressions have been
more common since the beginning of the war, in the mouths of those who
have undertaken our instruction in the meaning of events, than the
propositions that pacifism is now finally exploded and shown always to
have been nonsense, that war is and always will be an inevitable necessity
in human affairs as man is what is called a fighting animal, and that not
only is the abolition of war an impossibility, but should the abolition of it
unhappily prove to be possible after all and be accomplished, the result
could only be degeneration and disaster.
Biological considerations would seem to suggest that these gen­er­al­i­za­‐
tions contain a large element of inexactitude. The doctrine of pacifism is a
perfectly natural development, and ultimately inevitable in an animal
having an unlimited appetite for experience and an indestructible
inheritance of social instinct. Like all moral discoveries made in the
haphazard, one-sided way which the lack of co-ordination in human society
forces upon its moral pioneers, it has necessarily an appearance of
crankiness, of sentimentality, of an inaptitude for the grasp of reality. This is
normal and does not in the least affect the value of the truth it contains.
Legal and religious torture were doubtless first attacked by cranks; slavery
was abolished by them. Advocacy by such types does not therefore
constitute an argument of any weight against their doctrines, which can
adequately be judged only by some purely objective standard. Judged by
such a standard, pacifism, as we have seen, appears to be a natural
development, and is directed towards a goal which unless man’s nature
undergoes a radical change will probably be attained. That its attainment
has so far been foreseen only by a class of men possessing more than the
usual impracticability of the minor prophet is hardly to be considered a
relevant fact.
It is impossible to leave this subject without some comment on the
famous doctrine that war is a biological necessity. Even if one knew nothing
of those who have enunciated this proposition, its character would enable
one to suspect it of being the utterance of a soldier rather than a biologist.
There is about it a confidence that the vital effects of war are simple and
easy to define and a cheerful contempt for the considerable biological
difficulties of the subject that remind one of the bracing military
atmosphere, in which a word of command is the supreme fact, rather than
that of the laboratory, where facts are the masters of all. It may be supposed
that even in the country of its birth the doctrine seemed more transcendently
true in times of peace amid a proud and brilliant regime than it does now
after more than twelve months of war. The whole conception is of a type to
arouse interest in its psychological origin rather than in a serious discussion
of its merits. It arose in a military State abounding in prosperity and
progress of very recent growth, and based upon three short wars which had
come closely one after another and formed an ascending series of brilliant
success. In such circumstances even grosser assumptions might very well
flourish and some such doctrine was a perfectly natural product. The
situation of the warrior-biologist was in some way that of the orthodox
expounder of ethics or political economy—his conclusions were ready-
made for him; all he had to do was to find the “reasons” for them. War and
war only had produced the best and greatest and strongest State—indeed,
the only State worthy of the name; therefore war is the great creative and
sustaining force of States, or the universe is a mere meaningless jumble of
accidents. If only wars would always conform to the original Prussian
pattern, as they did in the golden age from 1864 to 1870—the unready
adversary, the few pleasantly strenuous weeks or months, the thumping
indemnity! That is the sort of biological necessity one can understand. But
twelve months of agonizing, indecisive effort in Poland and Russia and
France, might have made the syllogism a little less perfect, the new law of
Nature not quite so absolute.
These matters, however, are quite apart from the practical question
whether war is a necessity to maintain the efficiency and energy of nations
and to prevent them sinking into sloth and degeneracy. The problem may be
stated in another form. When we take a comprehensive survey of the natural
history of man—using that term to include the whole of his capacities,
activities, and needs, physical, intellectual, moral—do we find that war is
the indispensable instrument whereby his survival and progress as a species
are maintained? We are assuming in this statement that progress or
increased elaboration is to continue to be a necessary tendency in his course
by which his fate, through the action of inherited needs, powers, and
weaknesses, and of external pressure is irrevocably conditioned. The
assumption, though commonly made, is by no means obviously true. Some
of the evidence justifying it will be dealt with later; it will not be necessary
here to do more than note that we are for the moment treating the doctrine
of human progress as a postulate.
Man is unique among gregarious animals in the size of the major unit
upon which natural selection and its supposedly chief instrument, war, is
open to act unchecked. There is no other animal in which the size of the
unit, however laxly held together, has reached anything even remotely
approaching the inclusion of one-fifth or one-quarter of the whole species.
It is plain that a mortal contest between two units of such a monstrous size
introduces an altogether new mechanism into the hypothetical “struggle for
existence” on which the conception of the biological necessity of war is
founded. It is clear that that doctrine, if it is to claim validity, must
contemplate at any rate the possibility of a war of extremity, even of
something like extermination, which shall implicate perhaps a third of the
whole human race. There is no parallel in biology for progress being
accomplished as the result of a racial impoverishment so extreme, even if it
were accompanied by a closely specific selection instead of a mere
indiscriminate destruction. Progress is undoubtedly dependent mainly on
the material that is available for selection being rich and varied. Any great
reduction in the amount and variety of what is to be regarded as the raw
material of elaboration necessarily must have as an infallible effect, the
arrest of progress. It may be objected, however, that anything approaching
extermination could obviously not be possible in a war between such
immense units as those of modern man. Nevertheless, the object of each of
the two adversaries would be to impose its will on the other, and to destroy
in it all that was especially individual, all the types of activity and capacity
which were the most characteristic in its civilization and therefore the cause
of hostility. The effect of success in such an endeavour would be an
enormous impoverishment of the variety of the race and a corresponding
effect on progress.
To this line of speculation it may perhaps further be objected that the
question is not of the necessity of war to the race as a whole, but to the
individual nation or major unit. The argument has been used that when a
nation is obviously the repository of all the highest gifts and tendencies of
civilization, the race must in the end benefit, if this nation, by force if
necessary, imposes its will and its principles on as much of the world as it
can. To the biologist the weakness of this proposition—apart from the plain
impossibility of a nation attaining an objective estimate of the value of its
own civilization—is that it embodies a course of action which tends to the
spread of uniformity and to limit that variety of material which is the
fundamental quality essential for progress. In certain cases of very gross
discrepancy between the value of two civilizations, it is quite possible that
the destruction of the simpler by the more elaborate does not result in any
great loss to the race through the suppression of valuable varieties. Even
this admission is, however, open to debate, and it may well be doubted
whether in some ways the wholesale extermination of “inferior” races has
not denied to the species the perpetuation of lines of variation which might
have been of great value.
It seems remarkable that among gregarious animals other than man
direct conflict between major units such as can lead to the suppression of
the less powerful is an inconspicuous phenomenon. They are, it may be
supposed, too busily engaged in maintaining themselves against external
enemies to have any opportunities for fighting within the species. Man’s
complete conquest of the grosser enemies of his race has allowed him
leisure for turning his restless pugnacity—a quality no longer fully
occupied upon his non-human environment—against his own species.
When the major units of humanity were small the results of such conflict
were not perhaps very serious to the race as a whole, except in prolonging
the twilight stages of civilization. It can scarcely be questioned that the
organization of a people for war tends to encourage unduly a type of
individual who is abnormally insensitive to doubt, to curiosity, and to the
development of original thought. With the enlargement of the unit and the
accompanying increase in knowledge and resources, war becomes much
more seriously expensive to the race. In the present war the immense size of
the units engaged and their comparative equality in power have furnished a
complete reductio ad absurdum of the proposition that war in itself is a
good thing even for the individual nation. It would seem, then, that in the
original proposition the word “war” must be qualified to mean a war against
a smaller and notably weaker adversary. The German Empire was founded
on such wars. The conception of the biological necessity of war may fairly
be expected to demonstrate its validity in the fate of that Empire if such a
demonstration is ever to be possible. Every condition for a crucial
experiment was present: a brilliant inauguration in the very atmosphere of
military triumph, a conscious realization of the value of the martial spirit, a
determination to keep the warrior ideal conspicuously foremost with a
people singularly able and willing to accept it. If this is the way in which an
ultimate world-power is to be founded and maintained, no single necessary
factor is lacking. And yet after a few years, in what should be the very first
youth of an Empire, we find it engaged against a combination of Powers of
fabulous strength, which, by a miracle of diplomacy no one else could have
accomplished, it has united against itself. It is an irrelevance to assert that
this combination is the result of malice, envy, treachery, barbarism; such
terms are by hypothesis not admissible. If the system of Empire-building is
not proof against those very elementary enemies, any further examination
of it is of course purely academic. To withstand those is just what the
Empire is there for; if it falls a victim to them, it fails in its first and
simplest function and displays a radical defect in its structure. To the
objectivist practice is the only test in human affairs, and he will not allow
his attention to be distracted from what did happen by the most perfectly
logical demonstration of what ought to have happened. It is the business of
an Empire not to encounter overwhelming enemies. Declaring itself to be
the most perfect example of its kind and the foreordained heir of the world
will remain no more than a pleasant—and dangerous—indulgence, and will
not prevent it showing by its fate that the fruits of perfection and the
promise of permanence are not demonstrated in the wholesale manufacture
of enemies and in the combination of them into an alliance of unparalleled
strength.
The doctrine of the biological necessity of war may, then, be regarded as
open to strong suspicion on theoretical grounds of being contrary to the
evolutionary tendency already plainly marked out for the human species.
The fact that the nation in which its truth was most generally accepted has
been led—and undoubtedly to some extent by it—into a war which can
scarcely fail to prove disastrous suggests that in the practical field it is
equally fallacious. It may well, therefore, be removed to the lumber-room of
speculation and stored among the other pseudo-scientific dogmas of
political “biologists”—the facile doctrines of degeneracy, the pragmatic
lecturings on national char­ac­ter­is­tics, on Teutons and Celts, on Latins and
Slavs, on pure races and mixed races, and all the other ethnological conceits
with which the ignorant have gulled the innocent so long.
Imperfections of the Social Habit in Man
Table of Contents
The study of man as a gregarious animal has not been pursued with the
thoroughness and objectivity it deserves and must receive if it is to yield its
full value in illuminating his status and in the management of society. The
explanation of this comparative neglect is to be found in the complex
irregularity which obscures the social habit as manifested by man. Thus it
comes to be believed that gre­gar­i­ous­ness is no longer a fully functional and
indispensable inheritance, but survives at the present day merely in a
vestigial form as an interesting but quite unimportant relic of primitive
activities. We have already shown that man is ruled by instinctive impulses
just as imperative and just as char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly social as those of any other
gregarious animal. A further argument that he is to-day as actively and
essentially a social animal as ever is furnished by the fact that he suffers
from the disadvantages of such an animal to a more marked degree perhaps
than any other. In physical matters he owes to his gre­gar­i­ous­ness and its
uncontrolled tendency to the formation of crowded communities with
enclosed dwellings, the seriousness of many of his worst diseases, such as
tuberculosis, typhus, and plague; there is no evidence that these diseases
effect anything but an absolutely indiscriminate destruction, killing the
strong and the weakly, the socially useful and the socially useless, with
equal readiness, so that they cannot be regarded as even of the least
selective value to man. The only other animal which is well known to suffer
seriously from disease as a direct consequence of its social habit is the
honey bee—as has been demonstrated by recent epidemics of exterminating
severity.
In mental affairs, as I have tried to show, man owes to the social habit
his inveterate resistiveness to new ideas, his submission to tradition and
precedent, and the very serious fact that governing power in his
communities tends to pass into the hands of what I have called the stable-
minded—a class the members of which are char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly insensitive to
experience, closed to the entry of new ideas, and obsessed with the
satisfactoriness of things as they are. At the time when this corollary of gre­‐
gar­i­ous­ness was first pointed out—some ten years ago—it was noted as a
serious flaw in the stability of civilization. The suggestion was made that as
long as the great expert tasks of government necessarily gravitated into the
hands of a class which char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly lacked the greater developments of
mental capacity and efficiency, the course of civilization must continue to
be at the mercy of accident and disaster. The present European war—
doubtless in the actual state of affairs a remedy no less necessary because of
its dreadfulness—is an example on the greatest possible scale of the kind of
price the race has to pay for the way in which minds and temperaments are
selected by its society.
When we see the great and serious drawbacks which gre­gar­i­ous­ness has
entailed on man, it cannot but be supposed that that course of evolution has
been imposed upon him by a real and deep-seated peculiarity of his nature
—a fatal inheritance which it is impossible for him to repudiate.
When we inquire why it is that the manifestations of gre­gar­i­ous­ness in
man are so ambiguous that their biological significance has been to a great
extent overlooked, the answer seems to be furnished by that capacity for
various reaction which is the result of his general mental development, and
which has tended almost equally to obscure his other instinctive activities.
It may be repeated once more that in a creature such as the bee the narrow
mental capacity of the individual limits reaction to a few and relatively
simple courses, so that the dominance of instinct in the species can to the
attentive observer never be long in doubt. In man the equal dominance of
instinct is obscured by the kaleidoscopic variety of the reactions by which it
is more or less effectually satisfied.
While to a superficial examination of society the evidences of man’s
gregarious inheritance are ambiguous and trivial, to the closer scrutiny of
the biologist it soon becomes obvious that in society as constituted to-day
the advantageous mechanisms rendered available by that inheritance are not
being made use of to anything approaching their full possibilities. To such
an extent is this the case that the situation of man as a species even is
probably a good deal more precarious than has usually been supposed by
those who have come to be in charge of its destinies. The species is
irrevocably committed to a certain evolutionary path by the inheritance of
instinct it possesses. This course brings with it inevitable and serious
disadvantages as well as enormously greater potential advantages. As long
as the spirit of the race is content to be submissive to the former and
indifferent to the discovery and development of the latter, it can scarcely
have a bare certainty of survival and much less of progressive enlargement
of its powers.
In the society of the bee two leading char­ac­ter­is­tics are evident—an
elaborate and exact specialization of the individual, and a perfect absorption
of the interests of the individual in those of the hive; these qualities seem to
be the source of the unique energy and power of the whole unit and of the
remarkable superiority of intelligence it possesses over the individual
member. It is a commonplace of human affairs that combined action is
almost invariably less intelligent than individual action, a fact which shows
how very little the members of the species are yet capable of combination
and co-ordination and how far inferior—on account, no doubt, of his greater
mental capacity—man is in this respect to the bee.
This combination of specialization and moral homogeneity should be
evident in human society if it is taking advantage of its biological resources.
Both are, in fact, rather conspicuously absent.
There is abundant specialization of a sort; but it is inexact, lax, wasteful
of energy, and often quite useless through being on the one hand
superfluous or on the other incomplete. We have large numbers of experts
in the various branches of science and the arts, but we insist upon their
adding to the practice of their specialisms the difficult task of earning their
living in an open competitive market. The result is that we tend to get at the
summit of our professions only those rare geniuses who combine real
specialist capacity with the arts of the bagman. An enormous proportion of
our experts have to earn their living by teaching—an exhausting and
exacting art for which they are not at all necessarily qualified, and one
which demands a great amount of time for the earning of a very exiguous
pittance.
The teaching of our best schools, a task so important that it should be
entrusted to none but those highly qualified by nature and instruction in the
art, is almost entirely in the hands of athletes and grammarians of dead
languages. We choose as our governors amateurs of whom we demand
fluency, invincible prejudice, and a resolute blindness to dissentient
opinion. In commerce we allow ourselves to be overrun by a multitude of
small and mostly inefficient traders struggling to make a living by the
supply of goods from the narrow and ageing stocks which are all they can
afford to keep. We allow the supply of our foodstuffs to be largely in the
hands of those who cannot afford to be clean, and submit out of mere
indifference to being fed on meat, bread, vegetables which have been for an
indefinite period at the mercy of dirty middlemen, the dust and mud and
flies of the street, and the light-hearted thumbing errand-boy. We allow a
large proportion of our skilled workers to waste skill and energy on the
manufacture of things which are neither useful nor beautiful, on elaborate
specialist valeting, cooking, gardening for those who are their inferiors in
social activity and value.
The moral homogeneity so plainly visible in the society of the bee is
replaced in man by a segregation into classes which tends always to obscure
the unity of the nation and often is directly antagonistic to it. The readiness
with which such segregation occurs seems to be due to the invincible
strength of the gregarious impulse in the individual man and to the immense
size and strength of the modern major unit of the species. It would appear
that in order that a given unit should develop the highest degree of
homogeneity within itself it must be subject to direct pressure from without.
A great abundance of food supply and consequent relaxed external pressure
may in the bee lead to indiscriminate swarming, while in man the size and
security of the modern State lead to a relaxation of the closer grades of
national unity—in the absence of deliberate encouragement of it or of the
stimulus of war. The need of the individual for homogeneity is none the less
present, and the result is segregation into classes which form, as it were,
minor herds in which homogeneity is maintained by the external pressure of
competition, of political or religious differences and so forth. Naturally
enough such segregations have come to correspond in a rough way with the
various types of imperfect specialization which exist. This tendency is
clearly of unfavourable effect on national unity, since it tends to obscure the
national value of specialization and to give it a merely local and class
significance. Segregation in itself is always dangerous in that it provides the
individual with a substitute for the true major unit—the nation—and in
times when there is an urgent need for national homogeneity may prove to
be a hostile force.
It has been characteristic of the governing classes to acquiesce in the
fullest developments of segregation and even to defend them by force and
to fail to realize in times of emergency that national homogeneity must
always be a partial and weakly passion as long as segregation actively
persists.
Class segregation has thus come to be regarded as a necessary and
inevitable part of the structure of society. Telling as it does much more in
the favour of certain classes than others, it has come to be defended by a
whole series of legal and moral principles invented for the purpose, and by
arguments that to objective examination are no more than rationalized
prejudice. The maintenance of the social system—that is, of the segregation
of power and prestige, of ease and leisure, and the corresponding
segregations of labour, privation, and poverty—depends upon an
enormously elaborate system of rationalization, tradition, and morals, and
upon almost innumerable indirect mechanisms ranging from the drugging
of society with alcohol to the distortion of religious principle in the interests
of the established order. To the biologist the whole immensely intricate
system is a means for combating the slow, almost imperceptible, pressure of
Nature in the direction of a true national homogeneity. That this must be
attained if human progress is to continue is, and has long been, obvious.
The further fact that it can be attained only by a radical change in the whole
human attitude towards society is but barely emerging from obscurity.
The fact that even the immense external stimulus of a great war now
fails to overcome the embattled forces of social segregation, and can bring
about only a very partial kind of national homogeneity in a society where
segregation is deeply ingrained, seems to show that simple gre­gar­i­ous­ness
has run its course in man and has been defeated of its full maturity by the
disruptive power of man’s capacity for varied reaction. No state of
equilibrium can be reached in a gregarious society short of complete
homogeneity, so that, failing the emergence of some new resource of
Nature, it might be suspected that man, as a species, has already begun to
decline from his meridian. Such a new principle is the conscious direction
of society by man, the refusal by him to submit indefinitely to the
dissipation of his energies and the disappointment of his ideals in inco-
ordination and confusion. Thus would appear a function for that individual
mental capacity of man which has so far, when limited to local and personal
ends, tended but to increase the social confusion.
A step of evolution such as this would have consequences as
momentous as the first appearance of the multicellular or of the gregarious
animal. Man, conscious as a species of his true status and destiny, realizing
the direction of the path to which he is irrevocably committed by Nature,
with a moral code based on the unshakable natural foundation of altruism,
could begin to draw on those stores of power which will be opened to him
by a true combination, and the rendering available in co-ordinated action of
the maximal energy of each individual.
Gregarious Species at War
Table of Contents
The occurrence of war between nations renders obvious certain
manifestations of the social instinct which are apt to escape notice at other
times. So marked is this that a certain faint interest in the biology of gre­gar­‐
i­ous­ness has been aroused during the present war, and has led to some
speculation but no very radical examination of the facts or explanation of
their meaning. Expression, of course, has been found for the usual view that
primitive instincts normally vestigial or dormant are aroused into activity
by the stress of war, and that there is a process of rejuvenation of “lower”
instincts at the expense of “higher.” All such views, apart from their
theoretical unsoundness, are uninteresting because they are of no practical
value.
It will be convenient to mention some of the more obvious
psychological phenomena of a state of war before dealing with the
underlying instinctive processes which produce them.
The war that began in August 1914 was of a kind peculiarly suitable to
produce the most marked and typical psychological effects. It had long been
foreseen as no more than a mere possibility of immense disaster—of
disaster so outrageous that by that very fact it had come to be regarded with
a passionate incredulity. It had loomed before the people, at any rate of
England, as an event almost equivalent to the ultimate overthrow of all
things. It had been led up to by years of doubt and anxiety, sometimes rising
to apprehension, sometimes lapsing into unbelief, and culminating in an
agonized period of suspense, while the avalanche tottered and muttered on
its base before the final and still incredible catastrophe. Such were the
circumstances which no doubt led to the actual outbreak producing a
remarkable series of typical psychological reactions.
The first feeling of the ordinary citizen was fear—an immense, vague,
aching anxiety, perhaps typically vague and unfocused, but naturally
tending soon to localize itself in channels customary to the individual and
leading to fears for his future, his food supply, his family, his trade, and so
forth. Side by side with fear there was a heightening of the normal
intolerance of isolation. Loneliness became an urgently unpleasant feeling,
and the individual experienced an intense and active desire for the company
and even physical contact of his fellows. In such company he was aware of
a great accession of confidence, courage, and moral power. It was possible
for an observant person to trace the actual influence of his circumstances
upon his judgment, and to notice that isolation tended to depress his
confidence while company fortified it. The necessity for companionship
was strong enough to break down the distinctions of class, and dissipate the
reserve between strangers which is to some extent a concomitant
mechanism. The change in the customary frigid atmosphere of the railway
train, the omnibus, and all such meeting-places was a most interesting
experience to the psychologist, and he could scarcely fail to be struck by its
obvious biological meaning. Perhaps the most striking of all these early
phenomena was the strength and vitality of rumour, probably because it
afforded by far the most startling evidence that some other and stronger
force than reason was at work in the formation of opinion. It was, of course,
in no sense an unusual fact that non-rational opinion should be so
widespread; the new feature was that such opinion should be able to spread
so rapidly and become established so firmly altogether regardless of the
limits within which a given opinion tends to remain localized in times of
peace. Non-rational opinion under normal conditions is as a rule limited in
its extent by a very strict kind of segregation; the successful rumours of the
early periods of the war invaded all classes and showed a capacity to
overcome prejudice, education, or scepticism. The observer, clearly
conscious as he might be of the mechanisms at work, found himself
irresistibly drawn to the acceptance of the more popular beliefs; and even
the most convinced believer in the normal prevalence of non-rational belief
could scarcely have exaggerated the actual state of affairs. Closely allied
with this accessibility to rumour was the readiness with which suspicions of
treachery and active hostility grew and flourished about any one of even
foreign appearance or origin. It is not intended to attempt to discuss the
origin and meaning of the various types of fable which have been epidemic
in opinion; the fact we are concerned with here is their immense vitality and
power of growth.
We may now turn to some consideration of the psychological
significance of these phenomena of a state of war.
The characteristic feature of a really dangerous national struggle for
existence is the intensity of the stimulus it applies to the social instinct. It is
not that it arouses “dormant” or decayed instincts, but simply that it applies
maximal stimulation to instinctive mechanisms which are more or less
constantly in action in normal times. In most of his reactions as a gregarious
animal in times of peace, man is acting as a member of one or another class
upon which the stimulus acts. War acts upon him as a member of the greater
herd, the nation, or, in other words, the true major unit. As I have repeatedly
pointed out, the cardinal mental characteristic of the gregarious animal is
his sensitiveness to his fellow-members of the herd. Without them his
personality is, so to say, incomplete; only in relation to them can he attain
satisfaction and personal stability. Corresponding with his dependence on
them is his openness towards them, his specific accessibility to stimuli
coming from the herd.
A threat directed towards the whole herd is the intensest stimulus to
these potentialities, and the individual reacts towards it in the most vigorous
way.﻿15 The first response is a thrill of alarm which passes through the herd
from one member to another with magic rapidity. It puts him on the alert,
sets him looking for guidance, prepares him to receive commands, but
above all draws him to the herd in the first instinctive concentration against
the enemy. In the presence of this stimulus even such partial and temporary
isolation as was possible without it becomes intolerable. The physical
presence of the herd, the actual contact and recognition of its members,
becomes indispensable. This is no mere functionless desire, for re-
embodiment in the herd at once fortifies courage and fills the individual
with moral power, enthusiasm, and fortitude. The meaning that mere
physical contact with his fellows still has for man is conclusively shown in
the use that has been made of attacks in close formation in the German
armies. It is perfectly clear that a densely crowded formation has
psychological advantages in the face of danger, which enable quite ordinary
beings to perform what are in fact prodigies of valour. Even undisciplined
civil mobs have, on occasion, proved wonderfully valorous, though their
absence of unity often causes their enterprise to alternate with panic. A
disciplined mob—if one may use that word merely as a physical expression,
without any derogatory meaning—has been shown in this war on
innumerable occasions to be capable of facing dangers the facing of which
by isolated individuals would be feats of fabulous bravery.
The psychological significance of the enormous activity of rumour in
this war is fairly plain. That rumours spread readily and are tenacious of life
is evidence of the sensitiveness to herd opinion which is so characteristic of
the social instinct. The gravity of a threat to the herd is shown by nothing
better than by the activity of rumour. The strong stimulus to herd instinct
produces the characteristic response in the individual of a maximal
sensitiveness to his fellows—to their presence or absence, their alarms and
braveries, and in no less degree to their opinions. With the establishment of
this state of mind the spread and survival of rumours become inevitable,
and will vary directly with the seriousness of the external danger. Into the
actual genesis of the individual rumours and the meaning of their tendency
to take a stereotyped form we cannot enter here.
The potency of rumour in bearing down rational scepticism displays
unmistakably the importance of the instinctive processes on which it rests.
It is also one of the many evidences that homogeneity within the herd is a
deeply rooted necessity for gregarious animals and is elaborately provided
for by char­ac­ter­is­tics of the gregarious mind.
The establishment of homogeneity in the herd is the basis of morale.
From homogeneity proceed moral power, enthusiasm, courage, endurance,
enterprise, and all the virtues of the warrior. The peace of mind, happiness,
and energy of the soldier come from his feeling himself to be a member in a
body solidly united for a single purpose. The impulse towards unity that
was so pronounced and universal at the beginning of the war was, then, a
true and sound instinctive movement of defence. It was prepared to
sacrifice all social distinctions and local prejudices if it could liberate by
doing so Nature’s inexhaustible stores of moral power for the defence of the
herd. Naturally enough its significance was misunderstood, and a great deal
of its beneficent magic was wasted by the good intentions which man is so
touchingly ready to accept as a substitute for knowledge. Even the
functional value of unity was, and still is, for the most part ignored. We are
told to weariness that the great objection to disunion is that it encourages
the enemy. According to this view, apparent disunion is as serious as real;
whereas it must be perfectly obvious that anything which leads our enemy
to under-estimate our strength, as does the belief that we are disunited when
we are not, is of much more service to us than is neutralized by any more or
less visionary disservice we do ourselves by fortifying his morale. The
morale of a nation at war proceeds from within itself, and the mere
pharisaism and conceit that come from the contemplation of another’s
misfortunes are of no moral value. Modern civilians in general are much too
self-conscious to conduct the grave tragedy of war with the high,
preoccupied composure it demands. They are apt to think too much of what
sort of a figure they are making before the world, to waste energy in
superfluous explanations of themselves, in flustered and voluble attempts to
make friends with bystanders, in posing to the enemy, and imagining they
can seriously influence him by grimaces and gesticulations. As a matter of
fact, it must be confessed that if such manœuvres could be conducted with a
deliberate and purposeful levity which few would now have the fortitude to
employ, there would be a certain satisfaction to be obtained in this
particular war by the knowledge of our adversary conscientiously, perhaps a
little heavily, and with immense resources of learning “investigating our
psychology” upon materials of a wholly fantastic kind. Such a design,
however, is very far from being the intention of our interpreters to the
world, and as long as they cannot keep the earnest and hysterical note out of
their exposition it were much better for us that they were totally dumb.
To the psychologist it is plain that the seriousness of disunion is the
discouragement to ourselves it necessarily involves. In this lies its single
and its immense importance. Every note of disunion is a loss of moral
power of incalculable influence; every evidence of union is an equally
incalculable gain of moral power. Both halves of this statement deserve
consideration, but the latter is incomparably the more important. If disunion
were the more potent influence, a great deal might be done for national
morale by the forcible control of opinion and expression. That, however,
could yield nothing positive, and we must rely upon voluntary unity as the
only source of all the higher developments of moral power.
It was towards this object that we dimly groped when we felt in the
early weeks of the war the impulses of friendliness, tolerance, and goodwill
towards our fellow-citizens, and the readiness to sacrifice what privileges
the social system had endowed us with in order to enjoy the power which a
perfect homogeneity of the herd would have given us.
A very small amount of conscious, authoritative direction at that time, a
very little actual sacrifice of privilege at that psychological moment, a
series of small, carefully selected concessions none of which need have
been actually subversive of prescriptive right, a slight relaxation in the vast
inhumanity of the social machine would have given the needed
readjustment out of which a true national homogeneity would necessarily
have grown.
The psychological moment was allowed to pass, and the country was
spared the shock of seeing its moral strength, which should of course be left
to luck, fortified by the hand of science. The history of England during the
first fourteen months of the war was thus left to pursue its char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly
English course. The social system of class segregation soon repented of its
momentary softness and resumed its customary rigidity. More than that, it
decided that, far from the war being a special occasion which should
penetrate with a transforming influence the whole of society from top to
bottom, as the common people were at first inclined to think, the proper
pose before the enemy was to be that it made no difference at all. We were
to continue imperturbably with the conduct of our business, and to awe the
Continent with a supreme exhibition of British phlegm. The national
consciousness of the working-man was to be stimulated by his continuing to
supply us with our dividends, and ours by continuing to receive them. It is
not necessary to pursue the history of this new substitute for unity. It is open
to doubt whether our enemies were greatly appalled by the spectacle, or
more so than our friends; it is certain that the stimulant supplied to the
working-man proved to be inadequate and had to be supplemented by
others. . . .
The problem of the function of the common citizen in war was of course
left unsolved. It was accepted that if a man were unfit for service and not a
skilled worker, he himself was a mere dead weight, and his intense longing
for direct service, of however humble a kind, a by-product of which the
State could make no use.
That the working classes have to a certain extent failed to develop a
complete sense of national unity is obvious enough. It is contended here
that what would have been easy in the early days of the war and actually
inexpensive to prescriptive right, has steadily become more and more costly
to effect and less and less efficiently done. We are already faced with the
possibility of having to make profound changes in the social system to
convince the working-man effectually that his interests and ours in this war
are one.
That a very large class of common citizens, incapable of direct military
work, has been left morally derelict during all these agonizing months of
war has probably not been any less serious a fact, although the recognition
of it has not been forced unavoidably on public notice. It must surely be
clear that in a nation engaged in an urgent struggle for existence, the
presence of a large class who are as sensitive as any to the call of the herd,
and yet cannot respond in any active way, contains very grave possibilities.
The only response to that relentless calling that can give peace is in service;
if that be denied, restlessness, uneasiness, and anxiety must necessarily
follow. To such a mental state are very easily added impatience, discontent,
exaggerated fears, pessimism, and irritability. It must be remembered that
large numbers of such individuals were persons of importance in peace time
and retain a great deal of their prestige under the social system we have
decided to maintain, although in war time they are obviously without
function. This group of idle and flustered parasites has formed a nucleus
from which have proceeded some of the many outbursts of disunion which
have done so much to prevent this country from developing her resources
with smoothness and continuity. It is not suggested that these eruptions of
discontent are due to any kind of disloyalty; they are the result of defective
morale, and bear all the evidences of coming from persons whose
instinctive response to the call of the herd has been frustrated and who,
therefore, lack the strength and composure of those whose souls are uplifted
by a satisfactory instinctive activity. Moral instability has been
characteristic of all the phenomena of disunion we are now considering,
such as recrudescences of political animus, attacks on individual members
of the Government, outbursts of spy mania, campaigns of incitement
against aliens and of blustering about reprisals. Similar though less
conspicuous manifestations are the delighted circulation of rumours, the
wild scandalmongering, the eager dissemination of pessimistic inventions
which are the pleasure of the smaller amongst these moral waifs. Of all the
evidences of defective morale, however, undoubtedly the most general has
yet to be mentioned, and that is the proffering of technical advice and
exhortation. If we are to judge by what we read, there are few more urgent
temptations than this, and yet it is easy to see that there are few enterprises
which demand a more complete abrogation of reason. It is almost always
the case that the subject of advice is one upon which all detailed knowledge
is withheld by the authorities. This restriction of materials, however, seems
generally to be regarded by the volunteer critic as giving him greater scope
and freedom rather than as a reason for silence or even modesty.
It is interesting to notice in this connection what those who have the ear
of the public have conceived to be their duty towards the nation and to try
to estimate its value from the point of view of morale. It is clear that they
have in general very rightly understood that one of their prime functions
should be to keep the Government working in the interests of the nation to
the fullest stretch of its energy and resources. Criticism is another function,
and advice and instruction a third which have also been regarded as
important.
The third of these activities is, no doubt, that which has been most
abused and is least important. It tends on the one hand to get involved in
technical military matters and consequent absurdity, and on the other hand,
in civil matters, to fall back into the bad old ways of politics. Criticism is
obviously a perfectly legitimate function, and one of value as long as it
keeps to the field of civil questions, and can free itself of the moral failure
of being acrimonious in tone. In a government machine engaged upon the
largest of tasks there will always be enough injustice and inhumanity, fraud
and foolishness to keep temperate critics beneficially employed.
It is in the matter of stimulating the energy and resolution of the
Government that the psychologist might perhaps differ to some extent from
the popular guides of opinion. In getting work out of a living organism it is
necessary to determine what is the most efficient stimulus. One can make a
man’s muscles contract by stimulating them with an electric battery, but one
can never get so energetic a contraction with however strong a current as
can be got by the natural stimulus sent out from the man’s brain. Rising to a
more complex level, we find that a man does not do work by order so well
or so thoroughly as he does work that he desires to do voluntarily. The best
way to get our work done is to get the worker to want to do it. The most
urgent and potent of all stimuli, then, are those that come from within the
man’s soul. It is plain, therefore, that the best way to extract the maximum
amount of work from members of a Government—and it is to yield this, at
whatever cost to themselves, that they are there—is not by the use of threats
and objurgations, by talk of impeachment or dismissal, or by hints of a day
of reckoning after the war, but by keeping their souls full of a burning
passion of service. Such a supply of mental energy can issue only from a
truly homogeneous herd, and it is therefore to the production of such a
homogeneity of feeling that we come once more as the one unmistakable
responsibility of the civilian.
We have seen reason to believe that there was a comparatively
favourable opportunity of establishing such a national unity in the early
phases of the war, and that the attainment of the same result at this late
period is likely to be less easy and more costly of disturbance to the social
structure.
The simplest basis of unity is equality, and this has been an important
factor in the unity which in the past has produced the classically successful
manifestations of moral and military power, as for example in the cases of
Puritan England and Revolutionary France. Such equality as obtained in
these cases was doubtless chiefly moral rather than material, and it can
scarcely be questioned that equality of consideration and of fundamental
moral estimation is a far more efficient factor than would be equality of
material possessions. The fact that it is difficult to persuade a man with
thirty shillings a week that he has as much to lose by the loss of national
independence as a man with thirty thousand a year, is merely evidence that
the imagination of the former is somewhat restricted by his type of
education, and that we habitually attach an absurd moral significance to
material advantages. It seems certain that it would still be possible to attain
a very fair approximation to a real moral equality without any necessary
disturbance of the extreme degree of material inequality which our
elaborate class segregation has imposed upon us.
A serious and practical attempt to secure a true moral unity of the nation
would render necessary a general understanding that the state to be striven
for was something different, not only in degree but also in quality, from
anything which has yet been regarded as satisfactory. A mere intellectual
unanimity in the need for prosecuting the war with all vigour, we may be
said actually to possess, but its moral value is not very great. A state of
mind directed more to the nation and less immediately to the war is what is
needed; the good soldier absorbed in his regiment has little inclination to
concern himself with the way the war is going, and the civilian should be
similarly absorbed in the nation. To attain this he must feel that he belongs
to the country and to his fellow-citizens, and that it and they also belong to
him. The established social system sets itself steadily to deny these
propositions, and not so much by its abounding material inequalities as by
the moral inequalities that correspond with them. The hierarchies of rank,
prestige, and consideration, at all times showing serious inconsistencies
with functional value, and in war doing so more than ever, are denials of the
essential propositions of perfect citizenship, not, curiously enough, through
their arbitrary distribution of wealth, comfort, and leisure, but through their
persistent, assured, and even unconscious assumption that there exists a
graduation of moral values equally real and, to men of inferior station,
equally arbitrary. To a gregarious species at war the only tolerable claim to
any kind of superiority must be based on leadership. Any other affectation
of superiority, whether it be based on prescriptive right, on tradition, on
custom, on wealth, on birth, or on mere age, arrogance, or fussiness, and not
on real functional value to the State, is, however much a matter of course it
may seem, however blandly it may be asserted or picturesquely displayed,
an obstacle to true national unity.
Psychological considerations thus appear to indicate a very plain duty
for a large class of civilians who have complained of and suffered
patriotically from the fact that the Government has found nothing for them
to do. Let all those of superior and assured station make it a point of honour
and duty to abrogate the privileges of consideration and prestige with which
they are arbitrarily endowed. Let them persuade the common man that they
also are, in the face of national necessity, common men. The searching test
of war has shown that a proportion of the population, serious enough in
mere numbers, but doubly serious in view of its power and influence, has
led an existence which may fairly be described as in some degree parasitic.
That is to say, what they have drawn from the common stock in wealth and
prestige has been immensely larger than what they have contributed of
useful activity in return. Now, in time of war, they have still less to give
proportionally to what they have received. Their deplorably good bargain
was in no way of their making; no one has the slightest right to attack their
honour or good faith; they are as patriotically minded as any class, and have
contributed their fighting men to the Army as generously as the day
labourer and the tradesman. It is therefore not altogether impossible that
they might come to understand the immense opportunity that is given them
by fate to promote a true, deep, and irresistibly potent national unity.
A further contribution to the establishment of a national unity of this
truly Utopian degree might come from a changed attitude of mind towards
his fellows in the individual. There would have to be an increased
kindliness, generosity, patience, and tolerance in all his relations with
others, a deliberate attempt to conquer prejudice, irritability, impatience,
and self-assertiveness, a deliberate encouragement of cheerfulness,
composure, and fortitude. All these would be tasks for the individual to
carry out for himself alone; there would be no campaign-making, no direct
exhortation, no appeals. Towards the Army and the Navy the central fact of
each man’s attitude would be the question, “Am I worth dying for?” and his
strongest effort would be the attempt to make himself so.
That question may perhaps make one wonder why it has not been heard
more often during the war as a text of the Church. There is little doubt that
very many men whose feeling towards the Church is in no way
disrespectful or hostile are conscious of a certain uneasiness in hearing her
vigorously defending the prosecution of the war and demonstrating its
righteousness. They feel, in spite of however conclusive demonstrations to
the contrary, that there is a deep-seated inconsistency between war for
whatever object and the Sermon on the Mount, and they cannot but
remember, when they are told that this is a holy war, that that also the
Germans say. They perhaps feel that the justification of the war is, after all,
a matter for politicians and statesmen, and that the Church would be more
appropriately employed in making it as far as she can a vehicle of good,
rather than trying to justify superfluously its existence. A people already
awed by the self-sacrifice of its armies may be supposed to be capable of
profiting by the exhortations of a Church whose cardinal doctrine is
concerned with the responsibility that attaches to those for whose sake life
has voluntarily been given up. One cannot imagine an institution more
perfectly qualified by its faith and its power to bring home to this people the
solemnity of the sanction under which they lie to make themselves worthy
of the price that is still being unreservedly paid. If it were consciously the
determination of every citizen to make himself worth dying for, who can
doubt that a national unity of the sublimest kind would be within reach?
Of all the influences which tend to rob the citizen of the sense of his
birthright, perhaps one of the strongest, and yet the most subtle, is that of
officialism. It seems inevitable that the enormously complex public services
which are necessary in the modern State should set up a barrier between the
private citizen and the official, whereby the true relation between them is
obscured. The official loses his grasp of the fact that the mechanism of the
State is established in the interests of the citizen; the citizen comes to regard
the State as a hostile institution, against which he has to defend himself,
although it was made for his defence. It is a crime for him to cheat the State
in the matter of tax-paying, it is no crime for the State to defraud him in
excessive charges. Considered in the light of the fundamental relation of
citizen and State, it seems incredible that in a democratic country it is
possible for flourishing establishments to exist the sole business of which is
to save the private individual from being defrauded by the tax-gathering
bureaucracy. This is but a single and rather extreme example of the far-
stretching segregation effected by the official machine. The slighter kinds of
aloofness, of inhuman etiquette, of legalism and senseless dignity, of
indifference to the individual, of devotion to formulæ and routine are no
less powerful agents in depriving the common man of the sense of intimate
reality in his citizenship which might be so valuable a source of national
unity. If the official machine through its utmost parts were animated by an
even moderately human spirit and used as a means of binding together the
people, instead of as an engine of moral disruption, it might be of
incalculable value in the strengthening of morale.
15. War in itself is by no means necessarily a maximal stimulus to herd instinct if it does not involve
a definite threat to the whole herd. This fact is well shown in the course of the South African
War of 1899–1901. This war was not and was not regarded as capable of becoming a direct
threat to the life of the nation. There was consequently no marked moral concentration of the
people, no massive energizing of the Government by a homogeneous nation, and therefore the
conduct of the war was in general languid, timid, and pessimistic. The morale of the people was
as a whole bad; there was an exaggerated hunger for good news, and an excessive satisfaction in
it; an exaggerated pessimism was excited by bad news, and public fortitude was shaken by
casualties which we should now regard as insignificant. Correspondingly the activity and
vitality of rumour were enormously less than they have been in the present war. The weaker
stimulus is betrayed throughout the whole series of events by the weakness of all the
characteristic gregarious responses.
England Against Germany—Germany
Table of Contents
In an earlier part of this book the statement was made that the present
juncture in human affairs probably forms one of those rare nodes of
circumstance in which the making of an epoch in history corresponds with a
perceptible change in the secular progress of biological evolution. It
remains to attempt some justification of this opinion.
England and Germany face one another as perhaps the two most typical
antagonists of the war. It may seem but a partial way of examining events if
we limit our consideration to them. Nevertheless, it is in this duel that the
material we are concerned with is chiefly to be found, and it may be added
Germany herself has abundantly distinguished this country as her typical
foe—an instinctive judgment not without value.
By the end of September 1914 it had become reasonably clear that the
war would be one of endurance, and the comparatively equal though
fluctuating strength of the two groups of adversaries has since shown that in
such endurance the main factor will be the moral factor rather than the
material. An examination of the moral strength of the two arch-enemies will
therefore have the interest of life and death behind it, as well as such as may
belong to the thesis which stands at the head of this chapter.
Germany affords a profoundly interesting study for the biological
psychologist, and it is very important that we should not allow what
clearness of representation we can get into our picture of her mind to be
clouded by the heated atmosphere of national feeling in which our work
must be done. As I have said elsewhere, it is merely to encourage fallacy to
allow oneself to believe that one is without prejudices. The most one can do
is to recognize what prejudices are likely to exist and liberally to allow for
them.
If I were to say that at the present moment I can induce myself to
believe that it will ever be possible for Europe to contain a strong Germany
of the current type and remain habitable by free peoples, the apparent
absence of national bias in the statement would be a mere affectation, and
by no means an evidence of freedom from prejudice. I am much more likely
to get into reasonable relations with the truth if I admit to myself, quite
frankly, my innermost conviction that the destruction of the German Empire
is an indispensable preliminary to the making of a civilization tolerable by
rational beings. Having recognized the existence of that belief as a
necessary obstacle to complete freedom of thought, it may be possible to
allow for it and to counteract what aberrations of judgment it may be likely
to produce.
In making an attempt to estimate the relative moral resources of
England and Germany at the present time it is necessary to consider them as
biological entities or major units of the human species in the sense of that
term we have already repeatedly used. We shall have to examine the
evolutionary tendencies which each of these units has shown, and if
possible to decide how far they have followed the lines of development
which psychological theory indicates to be those of healthy and progressive
development for a gregarious animal.
I have already tried to show that the acquirement of the social habit by
man—though in fact there is reason to believe that the social habit preceded
and made possible his distinctively human characters—has committed him
to an evolutionary process which is far from being completed yet, but which
nevertheless must be carried out to its consummation if he is to escape
increasingly severe disadvantages inherent in that biological type. In other
words, the gregarious habit in an animal of large individual mental capacity
is capable of becoming, and indeed must become a handicap rather than a
bounty unless the society of the species undergoes a continuously
progressive co-ordination which will enable it to attract and absorb the
energy and activities of its individual members. We have seen that in a
species such as man, owing to the freedom from the direct action of natural
selection within the major unit, the individual’s capacity for varied reaction
to his environment has undergone an enormous development, while at the
same time the capacity for inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion—upon which the co-
ordination of the major unit into a potent and frictionless mechanism
depends—has lagged far behind. The term “inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion” is here
used in the very widest sense to indicate the ties that bind the individual to
his fellows and them to him. It is not a very satisfactory word; but as might
be expected in attempting to express a series of functions so complex and so
unfamiliar to generalization, it is not easy to find an exact expression ready
made. Another phrase applicable to a slightly different aspect of the same
function is “herd accessibility,” which has the advantage of suggesting by
its first constituent the limitation, primitively at any rate, an essential part of
the capacities it is desired to denote. The conception of herd accessibility
includes the specific sensitiveness of the individual to the existence,
presence, thought, and feelings of his fellow-members of the major unit; the
power he possesses of reacting in an altruistic and social mode to stimuli
which would necessarily evoke a merely egoistic response from a non-
social animal—that is to say, the power to deflect and modify egoistic
impulses into a social form without emotional loss or dissatisfaction; the
capacity to derive from the impulses of the herd a moral power in excess of
any similar energy he may be able to develop from purely egoistic sources.
Inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion, the development of which of course depends upon
herd-accessibility, enables the herd to act as a single creature whose power
is greatly in excess of the sum of the powers of its individual members.
Inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion in the biological sense has, however, never been
systematically cultivated by man, but has been allowed to develop
haphazard and subject to all the hostile influences which must infest a
society in which unregulated competition and selection are allowed to
prevail. The extravagance of human life and labour, the indifference to
suffering, the harshness and the infinite class segregation of human society
are the result. The use of what I have called conscious direction is
apparently the only means whereby this chaos can be converted into
organized structure.
Outside the gregarious unit, the forms of organic life at any given time
seem to be to some considerable extent determined by the fact that the
pressure of environmental conditions and of competition tends to eliminate
selectively the types which are comparatively unsuited to the conditions in
which they find themselves. However much or little this process of natural
selection has decided the course which the general evolutionary process has
taken, there can be no doubt that it is a condition of animal life, and has an
active influence. The suggestion may be hazarded that under circumstances
natural selection tends rather to restrict variation instead of encouraging it
as it has sometimes been supposed to do. When the external pressure is very
severe it might be supposed that anything like free variation would be a
serious disadvantage to a species, and if it persisted might result in actual
extermination. It is conceivable, therefore, that natural selection is capable
of favouring stable and non-progressive types at the expense of the variable
and possibly “progressive,” if such a term can be applied to species
advancing towards extinction. Such a possible fixative action of natural
selection is suggested by the fact that the appearance of mechanisms
whereby the individual is protected from the direct action of natural
selection seems to have led to an outburst of variation. In the multicellular
animal the individual cells passing from under the direct pressure of natural
selection become variable, and so capable of a very great specialization. In
the gregarious unit the same thing happens, the individual member gaining
freedom to vary and to become specialized without the risk that would have
accompanied such an endowment in the solitary state.
Within the gregarious unit, then, natural selection in the strict sense is in
abeyance, and the consequent freedom has allowed of a rich variety among
the individual members. This variety provides the material from which an
elaborate and satisfactory society might be constructed if there were any
constant and discriminating influence acting upon it. Unfortunately, the
forces at work in human society to-day are not of this kind, but are irregular
in direction and fluctuating in strength, so that the material richness which
would have been so valuable, had it been subject to a systematic and co-
ordinate selection, has merely contributed to the confusion of the product.
The actual mechanism by which society, while it has grown in strength and
complexity, has also grown in confusion and disorder, is that peculiarity of
the gregarious mind which automatically brings into the monopoly of
power the mental type which I have called the stable and common opinion
calls normal. This type supplies our most trusted politicians and officials,
our bishops and headmasters, our successful lawyers and doctors, and all
their trusty deputies, assistants, retainers, and faithful servants. Mental
stability is their leading characteristic, they “know where they stand” as we
say, they have a confidence in the reality of their aims and their position, an
inaccessibility to new and strange phenomena, a belief in the established
and customary, a capacity for ignoring what they regard as the unpleasant,
the undesirable, and the improper, and a conviction that on the whole a
sound moral order is perceptible in the universe and manifested in the
progress of civilization. Such char­ac­ter­is­tics are not in the least inconsistent
with the highest intellectual capacity, great energy and perseverance as well
as kindliness, generosity, and patience, but they are in no way redeemed in
social value by them.
In the year 1915 it is, unfortunately, in no way necessary to enumerate
evidences of the confusion, the cruelty, the waste, and the weaknesses with
which human society, under the guidance of minds of this type, has been
brought to abound. Civilization through all its secular development under
their rule has never acquired an organic unity of structure; its defects have
received no rational treatment, but have been concealed, ignored, and
denied; instead of being drastically rebuilt, it has been kept presentable by
patches and buttresses, by paint, and putty, and whitewash. The building
was already insecure, and now the storm has burst upon it, threatens
incontinently to collapse.
The fact that European civilization, approaching what appeared to be
the very meridian of its strength, could culminate in a disaster so frightful
as the present war is proof that its development was radically unsound. This
is by no means to say that the war could have been avoided by those
immediately concerned. That is almost certainly not the case. The war was
the consequence of inherent defects in the evolution of civilized life; it was
the consequence of human progress being left to chance, and to the
interaction of the heterogeneous influences which necessarily arise within a
gregarious unit whose individual members have a large power of varied
reaction. In such an atmosphere minds essentially resistive alone can
flourish and attain to power, and they are by their very qualities incapable
of grasping the necessities of government or translating them into action.
The method of leaving the development of society to the confused
welter of forces which prevail within it is now at last reduced to absurdity
by the unmistakable teaching of events, and the conscious direction of
man’s destiny is plainly indicated by Nature as the only mechanism by
which the social life of so complex an animal can be guaranteed against
disaster and brought to yield its full possibilities.
A gregarious unit informed by conscious direction represents a
biological mechanism of a wholly new type, a stage of advance in the
evolutionary process capable of consolidating the supremacy of man and
carrying to its full extent the development of his social instincts.
Such a directing intelligence or group of intelligences would take into
account before all things the biological character of man, would understand
that his condition is necessarily progressive along the lines of his natural
endowments or downward to destruction. It would abandon the static view
of society as something merely to be maintained, and adopt a more dynamic
conception of statesmanship as something active, progressive, and
experimental, reaching out towards new powers for human activity and new
conquests for the human will. It would discover what natural inclinations in
man must be indulged, and would make them respectable, what inclinations
in him must be controlled for the advantage of the species, and make them
insignificant. It would cultivate inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion and altruism on the one
hand, and bravery, boldness, pride, and enterprise on the other. It would
develop national unity to a communion of interest and sympathy far closer
than anything yet dreamed of as possible, and by doing so would endow the
national unit with a self-control, fortitude, and moral power which would
make it so obviously unconquerable that war would cease to be a
possibility. To a people magnanimous, self-possessed, and open-eyed,
unanimous in sentiment and aware of its strength, the conquest of fellow-
nations would present its full futility. They would need for the acceptable
exercise of their powers some more difficult, more daring, and newer task,
something that stretches the human will and the human intellect to the limit
of their capacity; the mere occupation and re-occupation of the stale and
blood-drenched earth would be to them barbarians’ work; time and space
would be their quarry, destiny and the human soul the lands they would
invade; they would sail their ships into the gulfs of the ether and lay tribute
upon the sun and stars.
It is one of the features of the present crisis that gives to it its biological
significance, that one of the antagonists—Germany—has discovered the
necessity and value of conscious direction of the social unit. This is in itself
an epoch-making event. Like many other human discoveries of similar
importance, it has been incomplete, and it has not been accompanied by the
corresponding knowledge of man and his natural history which alone could
have given it full fertility and permanent value.
It seems to have been in no way a revelation of genius, and, indeed, the
absence of any great profundity and scope of speculation is rather
remarkable in the minds of the numerous German political philosophers.
The idea would appear rather to have been developed out of the
circumstances of the country, and to have been almost a habit before it
became a conception. At any rate, its appearance was greatly favoured by
the political conditions and history of the region in which it arose. If this
had not been the case, it is scarcely conceivable that the principle could
have been accepted so readily by the people, and in a form which was not
without its asperities and its hardships for them, or that it could have been
discovered without the necessary biological corollaries which are
indispensable to the successful application of it.
Germany in some ways resembles a son who has been educated at
home, and has taken up the responsibilities of the adult, and become bound
by them without ever tasting the free intercourse of the school and
university. She has never tasted the heady liquor of political liberty, she has
had no revolution, and the blood of no political martyrs calls to her
disturbingly from the ground. To such innocent and premature gravity the
reasonable claims of what, after all, had to her the appearance of no more
than an anxiously paternal Government could not fail to appeal.
Explain it how we may, there can be no doubt that to the German
peoples the theoretical aspects of life have long had a very special appeal.
Generalizations about national char­ac­ter­is­tics are notoriously fallacious, but
it seems that with a certain reserve one may fairly say that there is a definite
contrast in this particular between the Germans and, let us say, the English.
To minds of a theoretical bias the appeal of a closely regulative type of
Government, with all the advantages of organization which it possesses,
must be very strong, and there is reason to believe that this fact has had
influence in reconciling the people to the imposition upon it of the will of
the Government.
Between a docile and intelligent people and a strong, autocratic, and
intelligent Government the possibilities of conscious national direction
could scarcely fail to become increasingly obvious and to be increasingly
developed. A further and enormously potent factor in the progress of the
idea was an immense accession of national feeling, derived from three
almost bewilderingly successful wars, accomplished at surprisingly small
cost, and culminating in a grandiose and no less successful scheme of
unification. Before rulers and people an imperial destiny of unlimited
scope, and allowing of unbounded dreams, now inevitably opened itself up.
Alone, amongst the peoples of Europe, Germany saw herself a nation with a
career. No longer disunited and denationalized, she had come into her
inheritance. The circumstances of her rebirth were so splendid, the moral
exaltation of her new unity was so great that she could scarcely but suppose
that her state was the beginning of a career of further and unimagined
glories and triumphs. There were not lacking enthusiastic and prophetic
voices to tell her she was right.
The decade that followed the foundation of the Empire was, perhaps,
more pregnant with destiny than that which preceded it, for it saw the final
determination of the path which Germany was to follow. She had made the
immense stride in the biological scale of submitting herself to conscious
direction; would she also follow the path which alone leads to a perfect
concentration of national life and a permanent moral stability?
To a nation with a purpose and a consciously realized destiny some
principle of national unity is indispensable. Some strand of feeling which
all can share, and in sharing which all can come into communion with one
another, will be the framework on which is built up the structure of national
energy and effort.
The reactions in which the social instinct manifests itself are not all
equally developed in the different social species. It is true that there is a
certain group of char­ac­ter­is­tics common to all social animals; but it is also
found that in one example there is a special development of one aspect of
the instinct, while another example will show a characteristic development
of a different aspect. Taking a broad survey of all gregarious types, we are
able to distinguish three fairly distinct trends of evolution. We have the
aggressive gre­gar­i­ous­ness of the wolf and dog, the protective gre­gar­i­ous­‐
ness of the sheep and the ox, and, differing from both these, we have the
more complex social structure of the bee and the ant, which we may call
socialized gre­gar­i­ous­ness. The last-named is characterized by the complete
absorption of the individual in the major unit, and the fact that the function
of the social habit seems no longer to be the simple one of mere attack or
defence, but rather the establishment of a State which shall be, as a matter
of course, strong in defence and attack, but a great deal more than this as
well. The hive is no mere herd or pack, but an elaborate mechanism for
making use by co-ordinate and unified action of the utmost powers of the
individual members. It is something which appears to be a complete
substitute for individual existence, and as we have already said, seems like
a new creature rather than a congeries united for some comparatively few
and simple purposes. The hive and the ant’s nest stand to the flock and the
pack as the fully organized multicellular animal stands to the primitive
zooglœa which is its forerunner. The wolf is united for attack, the sheep is
united for defence, but the bee is united for all the activities and feelings of
its life.
Socialized gre­gar­i­ous­ness is the goal of man’s development. A
transcendental union with his fellows is the destiny of the human
individual, and it is the attainment of this towards which the constantly
growing altruism of man is directed. Poets and prophets have, at times,
dimly seen this inevitable trend of Nature, biology detects unmistakable
evidence of it, and explains the slowness of advance, which has been the
despair of those others, by the variety and power of man’s mind, and
consoles us for the delay these qualities still cause by the knowledge that
they are guarantees of the exactitude and completeness that the ultimate
union will attain.
When a nation takes to itself the idea of conscious direction, as by a
fortunate combination of circumstances Germany has been induced to do, it
is plain that some choice of a principle of national unity will be its first and
most important task. It is plain, also, from the considerations we have just
laid down, that such a principle of national unity must necessarily be a
manifestation of the social instinct, and that the choice is necessarily limited
to one of three types of social habit which alone Nature has fitted
gregarious animals to follow. No nation has ever made a conscious choice
amongst these three types, but circumstances have led to the adoption of
one or another of them often enough for history to furnish many suggestive
instances.
The more or less purely aggressive or protective form has been adopted
for the most part by primitive peoples. The history of the natives of North
America and Australia furnishes examples of almost pure types of both. The
aggressive type was illustrated very fully by the peoples who profited by
the disintegration of the Roman Empire. These northern barbarians showed
in the most perfect form the lupine type of society in action. The ideals and
feelings exemplified by their sagas are comprehensible only when one
understands the biological significance of them. It was a society of wolves
marvellously indomitable in aggression but fitted for no other activity in
any corresponding degree, and always liable to absorption by the peoples
they had conquered. They were physically brave beyond belief, and made a
religion of violence and brutality. To fight was for them man’s supreme
activity. They were restless travellers and explorers, less out of curiosity
than in search of prey, and they irresistibly overran Europe in the
missionary zeal of the sword and torch, each man asking nothing of Fate
but, after a career of unlimited outrage and destruction, to die gloriously
fighting. It is impossible not to recognize the psychological identity of these
ideals with those which we might suppose a highly developed breed of
wolves to entertain.
With all its startling energy, and all its magnificent enterprise, the lupine
type of society has not proved capable of prolonged survival. Probably its
inherent weakness is the very limited scope of interest it provides for active
and progressive minds, and the fact that it tends to engender a steadily
accumulating hostility in weaker but more mentally progressive peoples to
which it has no cor­res­pon­ding­ly steady resistiveness to oppose.
The history of the world has shown a gradual elimination of the lupine
type. It has recurred sporadically at intervals, but has always been
suppressed. Modern civilization has shown a constantly increasing
manifestation of the socialized type of gre­gar­i­ous­ness in spite of the
complexities and disorders which the slowness of its development towards
completeness has involved. It may be regarded now as the standard type
which has been established by countless experiments, as that which alone
can satisfy and absorb the moral as well as the intellectual desires of
modern man.
From the point of view of the statesman desiring to enforce an
immediate and energetic national unity, combined with an ideal of the State
as destined to expand into a larger and larger sphere, the socialized type of
gregarious evolution is extremely unsatisfactory. Its course towards the
production of a truly organized State is slow, and perplexed by a
multitudinous confusion of voices and ideals; its necessary development of
altruism gives the society it produces an aspect of sentimentality and
flabbiness; its tendency slowly to evolve towards the moral equality of its
members gives the State an appearance of structural insecurity.
If Germany was to be capable of a consistent aggressive external policy
as a primary aim, the peculiarity of her circumstances rendered her unable
to seek national inspiration by any development of the socialized type of
instinctive response, because that method can produce the necessary moral
power only through a true unity of its members, such as implies a moral, if
not a material, equality among them. That the type is capable of yielding a
passion of aggressive nationalism is shown by the early enterprise and
conquests of the first French Republic. But that outburst of power was
attained only because it was based on a true, though doubtless imperfect,
moral equality. Such a method was necessarily forbidden to the German
Empire by the intense rigidity of its social segregation, with its absolute
differentiation between the aristocracy and the common people. In such a
society there could be no thought of permitting the faintest hint of even
moral equality.
This is the reason, therefore, why the rulers of Germany, of course in
complete ignorance of how significant was their choice, were compelled to
abandon the ideals of standard civilization, to relapse upon the ideals of a
more primitive type of gre­gar­i­ous­ness, and to throw back their people into
the anachronism of a lupine society. In this connection it is interesting to
notice how persistently the political philosophers of Germany have sought
their chief inspiration in the remote past, and in times when the wolf society
and the wolf ideals were widespread and successful.
It is not intended to imply that there was here any conscious choice. It is
remarkable enough that the rulers of Germany recognized the need for
conscious direction of all the activities of a nation which proposes for itself
a career; it would have been a miracle if they had understood the biological
significance of the differentiation of themselves from other European
peoples that they were to bring about. To them it doubtless appeared merely
that they were discarding the effete and enfeebling ideals which made other
nations the fit victims of their conquests. They may be supposed to have
determined to eradicate such germs of degeneracy from themselves, to have
seen that an ambitious people must be strong and proud and hard,
enterprising, relentless, brave, and fierce, prepared to believe in the glory of
combat and conquest, in the supreme moral greatness of the warrior, in
force as the touchstone of right, honour, justice, and truth. Such changes in
moral orientation seem harmless enough, and it can scarcely be suspected
that their significance was patent to those who adopted them. They were
impressed upon the nation with all the immense power of suggestion at the
disposal of an organized State. The readiness with which they were received
and assimilated was more than could be accounted for by even the power of
the immense machine of officials, historians, theologians, professors,
teachers, and newspapers by which they were, in season and out of season,
enforced. The immense success that was attained owed much to the fact that
suggestion was following a natural, instinctive path. The wolf in man,
against which civilization has been fighting for so long, is still within call
and ready to respond to incantations much feebler than those the German
State could employ. The people were intoxicated with the glory of their
conquests and their imposing new confederation; if we are to trust the
reputation the Prussian soldier has had for a hundred years, they were
perhaps already less advanced in humanity than the other European peoples.
The fact is unquestionable that they followed their teachers with
enthusiasm.
It may be well for us, before proceeding farther, to define precisely the
psychological hypothesis we are advancing in explanation of the
peculiarities of the German national character as now manifested.
Herd instinct is manifested in three distinct types, the aggressive, the
protective, and the socialized, which are exemplified in Nature by the wolf,
the sheep, and the bee respectively. Either type can confer the advantages of
the social habit, but the socialized is that upon which modern civilized man
has developed. It is maintained here that the ambitious career consciously
planned for Germany by those who had taken command of her destinies,
and the maintenance at the same time of her social system, were
inconsistent with the further development of gre­gar­i­ous­ness of the
socialized type. New ideals, new motives, and new sources of moral power
had therefore to be sought. They were found in a recrudescence of the
aggressive type of gre­gar­i­ous­ness—in a reappearance of the society of the
wolf. It is conceivable that those who provided Germany with her new
ideals thought themselves to be exercising a free choice. The choice,
however, was forced upon them by Nature. They wanted some of the
characters of the wolf; they got them all. One may imagine that those who
have so industriously inculcated the national gospel have wondered at times
that while it has been easy to implant certain of the desired ideals, it has not
been possible to prevent the appearance of others which, though not so
desirable, belong to the same legacy and must be taken up with it.
Before examining the actual mental features of Germany to-day, it may
be desirable to consider a priori what would be the mental char­ac­ter­is­tics of
an aggressive gregarious animal were he to be self-conscious in the sense
that man is.
The functional value of herd instinct in the wolf is to make the pack
irresistible in attacking and perpetually aggressive in spirit. The individual
must, therefore, be especially sensitive to the leadership of the herd. The
herd must be to him, not merely as it is to the protectively gregarious
animal, a source of comfort, and stimulus, and general guidance, but must
be able to make him do things however difficult, however dangerous, even
however senseless, and must make him yield an absolute, immediate, and
slavish obedience. The carrying out of the commands of the herd must be in
itself an absolute satisfaction in which there can be no consideration of self.
Towards anything outside the herd he will necessarily be arrogant,
confident, and inaccessible to the appeals of reason or feeling. This tense
bond of instinct, constantly keyed up to the pitch of action, will give him a
certain simplicity of character and even ingenuousness, a coarseness and
brutality in his dealings with others, and a complete failure to understand
any motive unsanctioned by the pack. He will believe the pack to be
impregnable and irresistible, just and good, and will readily ascribe to it any
other attribute which may take his fancy however ludicrously inappropriate.
The strength of the wolf pack as a gregarious unit is undoubtedly, in
suitable circumstances, enormous. This strength would seem to depend on a
continuous possibility of attack and action. How far it can be maintained in
inactivity and mere defence is another matter. . . .
Since the beginning of this war attracted a really concentrated attention
to the psychology of the German people, it has been very obvious that one
of the most striking feelings amongst Englishmen has been bewilderment.
They have found an indescribable strangeness in the utterances of almost all
German personages and newspapers, in their diplomacy, in their
friendliness to such as they wished to propitiate, in their enmity to those
they wished to alarm and intimidate. This strange quality is very difficult to
define or even to attempt to describe, and has very evidently perplexed
almost all writers on the war. The only thing one can be sure of is that it is
there. It shows itself at times as a simplicity or even childishness, as a
boorish cunning, as an incredible ant-like activity, as a sudden blast of
maniacal boasting, a reckless savagery of gloating in blood, a simple-
minded sentimentality, as outbursts of idolatry, not of the pallid,
metaphorical, modern type, but the full-blooded African kind, with all the
apparatus of idol and fetish and tom-tom, and with it all a steady confidence
that these are the principles of civilization, of truth, of justice, and of Christ.
I have tried to put down at random some of the factors in this curious
impression as they occur to the memory, but the mere enumeration of them
is not possible without risking the objective composure of one’s attitude—
an excellent incidental evidence that the strangeness is a reality.
The incom­pre­hen­si­bil­ity to the English of the whole trend of German
feeling and expression suggests that there is some deeply rooted instinctive
conflict of attitude between them. One may risk the speculation that this
conflict is between socialized gre­gar­i­ous­ness and aggressive gre­gar­i­ous­‐
ness. As the result of the inculcation of national arrogance and aggression,
Germany has lapsed into a special type of social instinct which has opened
a gulf of separation in feeling between her and other civilized peoples. Such
an effect is natural enough. Nothing produces the sense of strangeness so
much as differences of instinctive reaction. A similar though wider gap in
instinctive reaction gives to us the appearance of strangeness and queerness
in the behaviour of the cat as contrasted with the dog, which is so much
more nearly allied in feeling to ourselves.
If, then, we desire to get any insight into the mind and moral power of
Germany, we must begin with the realization that the two peoples are
separated by a profound difference in instinctive feeling. Nature has
provided but few roads for gregarious species to follow. Between the path
England finds herself in and that which Germany has chosen there is a
divergence which almost amounts to a specific difference in the biological
scale. In this, perhaps, lies the cause of the desperate and unparalleled
ferocity of this war. It is a war not so much of contending nations as of
contending species. We are not taking part in a mere war, but in one of
Nature’s august experiments. It is as if she had set herself to try out in her
workshop the strength of the socialized and the aggressive types. To the
socialized peoples she has entrusted the task of proving that her old faith in
cruelty and blood is at last an anachronism. To try them, she has given
substance to the creation of a nightmare, and they must destroy this
werewolf or die.﻿16
In attempting to estimate the actual phenomena of the German mind at
the present time, we must remember that our sources of knowledge are
subject to a rigid selection. Those of us who are unable to give time to the
regular reading of German publications must depend on extracts which owe
their appearance in our papers to some striking characteristic which may be
supposed to be pleasing to the prejudices or hopes of the English reader.
The main facts, however, are clear enough to yield valuable conclusions, if
such are made on broad lines without undue insistence on minor points.
An intense but often ingenuous and even childish national arrogance is a
character that strikes one at once. It seems to be a serious and often a
solemn emotion impregnably armoured against the comic sense, and
expressed with a childlike confidence in its justness. It is usually associated
with a language of metaphor, which is almost always florid and banal, and
usually grandiose and strident. This fondness for metaphor and inability to
refer to common things by plain names affects all classes, from Emperor to
journalist, and gives an impression of peculiar childishness. It reminds one
of the primitive belief in the transcendental reality and value of names.
The national arrogance of the German is at the same time peculiarly
sensitive and peculiarly obtuse. It is readily moved by praise or blame,
though that be the most perfunctory and this the most mild, but it has no
sense of a public opinion outside the pack. It is easily aroused to rage by
external criticism, and when it finds its paroxysms make it ridiculous to the
spectator it cannot profit by the information but becomes, if possible, more
angry. It is quite unable to understand that to be moved to rage by an enemy
is as much a proof of slavish automatism as to be moved to fear by him.
The really extraordinary hatred for England is, quite apart from the obvious
association of its emotional basis with fear, a most interesting phenomenon.
The fact that it was possible to organize so unanimous a howl shows very
clearly how fully the psychological mechanisms of the wolf were in action.
It is most instructive to find eminent men of science and philosophers
bristling and baring their teeth with the rest, and would be another proof, if
such were needed, of the infinite insecurity of the hold of reason in the most
carefully cultivated minds when it is opposed by strong herd feeling.﻿17
It is important, however, not to judge the functional value of these
phenomena of herd arrogance and herd irritability and convulsive rage from
the point of view of nations of the socialized gregarious type such as
ourselves. To us they would be disturbants of judgment, and have no
corresponding emotional recompense. In the wolf pack, however, they are
indigenous, and represent a normal mechanism for inciting national
enthusiasm and unity. The wolf, whose existence depends on the daily
exercise of pursuit and slaughter, cannot afford to be open to external
appeals and criticisms, must be supremely convinced of his superiority and
that whoever dies he must live, and must be easily stimulated to the
murderous rages by which he wins his food.
Another difficulty in the understanding of the German mind is its
behaviour with regard to influencing non-German opinion. There can be no
doubt that it desires intensely to create impressions favourable to itself, not
merely for the sake of practical advantages in conducting the war, but also
because of the desire for sympathy. In considering the latter motive it is
important that one’s attention should not be too much attracted by the comic
aspects of the searchings of heart, publicly indulged by Germans, as to why
they are not regarded with a more general and sincere affection, and of the
answers which they themselves have furnished to this portentous problem.
That they are too modest, too true, too self-obliterating, too noble, too
brave, and too kind are answers the psychological significance of which
should not be altogether lost in laughter. That they are honest expressions of
belief cannot be doubted; indeed, there is strong theoretical reason to accept
them as such, when we remember the fabulous﻿18 impenetrability of lupine
herd suggestion. In default of such an explanation they seem to be utterly
in­com­pre­hen­sible.
In her negotiations with other peoples, and her estimates of national
character, Germany shows the characteristic features of her psychological
type in a remarkable way. It appears to be a principal thesis of hers that
altruism is, for the purposes of the statesman, non-existent, or if it exists is
an evidence of degeneracy and a source of weakness. The motives upon
which a nation acts are, according to her, self-interest and fear, and in no
particular has her “strangeness” been more fully shown than in the frank
way in which she appeals to both, either alternately or together.
This disbelief in altruism, and over-valuation of fear and self-interest,
seem to be regarded by her as evidence of a fearless and thorough grasp of
biological truth, and are often fondly referred to as “true German
objectivity” or the German “sense for reality.” How grossly, in fact, they
conflict with the biological theory of gre­gar­i­ous­ness is clear enough. It is
interesting that the German negotiators have been almost uniformly
unsuccessful in imposing their wishes on States in which the socialized type
of gre­gar­i­ous­ness is highly developed—Italy, the United States—and have
succeeded with barbarous peoples of the lupine type, with the Turk, whose
“objectivity” and appetite for massacre remain ever fresh, patriarch among
wolves as he is, with Bulgaria, the wolf of the second Balkan War.
There is strong reason to believe that defective insight into the minds of
others is one of the chief disadvantages of the aggressive as compared with
the socialized type of gre­gar­i­ous­ness. This disadvantage is so great, and yet
so deeply inherent, as to justify the belief that the type is the most primitive
of those now surviving, and that its present resuscitation in man is a
phenomenon which will prove to be no more than transient.
It would be of little value to enumerate the well-known instances in
which failure of insight, and ignorance of the psychology of the herd, has
been misleading or disadvantageous to Germany. It is relevant, however, to
note the superb illustration of psychological principle which is afforded by
the relations of Germany to England during the last fifteen years. That
England was the great obstacle to indefinite expansion was clearly
understood by those whom the conception of a consciously directed and
overwhelmingly powerful German Empire had inspired. I have tried to
show how great a conception this was, how truly in the line of natural
evolution, how it marks an epoch even on the biological scale.
Unfortunately for Germany, her social type was already fixed, with such
advantages and defects as it possessed, and amongst them the immense
defect of the lupine attitude towards an enemy—the over-mastering
temptation to intimidate him rather than to understand, and to accept the
easy and dangerous suggestions of hostility in estimating his strength.
There is in the whole of human history perhaps no more impressive
example of the omnipotence of instinct than that which is afforded by the
reactions of Germany towards England. An intelligent, educated, organized
people, directed consciously towards a definite ambition, finds its path
blocked by an enemy in chief. Surely there are two principles of action
which should at once be adopted: first, to estimate with complete
objectivity the true strength of the enemy, and to allow no national
prejudice, no liking for pleasant prophesying to distort the truth, and
secondly, to guard against exasperating the enemy, lest the inevitable
conflict should ultimately be precipitated by her at her moment.
Both these principles the instinctive impulsions to which Germany was
liable compelled her to violate. She allowed herself to accept opinions of
England’s strength, moral and physical, which were pleasant rather than
true. She listened eagerly to political philosophers and historians—the most
celebrated of whom was, by an ominous coincidence, deaf—who told her
that the Empire of England was founded in fraud and perpetuated in
feebleness, that it consisted of a mere loose congeries of disloyal peoples
who would fly asunder at the first touch of “reality,” that it was rotten with
insurgency, senile decay and satiety, and would not and could not fight.
Even if these things had been a full statement of the case, they must have
been dangerous doctrines. They were defective because the observers were
unaware that they were studying different instinctive reactions from their
own, and were, therefore, deaf to the notes which might have put them on
their guard.
At the same time, Germany allowed herself to indulge the equally
pleasant expression of her hostility with a freedom apparently unrestrained
by any knowledge that such indulgences cannot be enjoyed for nothing. She
produced in this country a great deal of alarm, and a great deal of irritation,
an effect she no doubt regarded as gratifying, but which made it quite
certain that sooner or later England would recognize her implacable enemy,
though, inarticulate as usual, she might not say much about it. . . .
Another feature of Germany’s social type, which has an important
bearing on her moral strength, is the relation of the individual citizens to
one another. The individual of the wolf pack is of necessity fierce,
aggressive, and irritable, otherwise he cannot adequately fulfil his part in
the major unit. Apparently it is beyond the power of Nature to confine the
ferocity of the wolf solely to the external activities of the pack, as would
obviously be in many ways advantageous, and to a certain extent therefore
it affects the relations of members of the pack to one another. This is seen
very well even in the habits of domesticated dogs, who are apt to show
more or less suppressed suspicion and irritability towards one another even
when well acquainted, an irritability moreover which is apt to blaze out into
hostility on very slight provocation.
Most external commentators on modern German life have called
attention to the harshness which is apt to pervade social relations. They tell
us of an atmosphere of fierce competition, of ruthless scandalmongering
and espionage, of insistence upon minute distinctions of rank and title, of a
rigid ceremonious politeness which obviously has little relation to courtesy,
of a deliberate cultivation by superiors of a domineering harshness towards
their inferiors, of habitual cruelty to animals, and indeed of the conscious,
deliberate encouragement of harshness and hardness of manner and feeling
as laudable evidences of virility. The statistics of crime, the manners of
officials, the tone of newspapers, the ferocious discipline of the Army, and
the general belief that personal honour is stained by endurance and purified
by brutality are similar phenomena.
Nothing in this category, however, is more illuminating than the
treatment by Germany of colonies and conquered territories. To the English
the normal method of treating a conquered country is to obliterate, as soon
as possible, every trace of conquest, and to assimilate the inhabitants to the
other citizens of the empire by every possible indulgence of liberty and self-
government. It is, therefore, difficult for him to believe that the German
actually likes to be reminded that a given province has been conquered, and
is not unwilling that a certain amount of discontent and restiveness in the
inhabitants should give him opportunities of forcibly exercising his
dominion and resuscitating the glories of conquest. Although this fact has
no doubt been demonstrated countless times, it was first displayed
unmistakably to the world in the famous Zabern incident. Those who have
studied the store of psychological material furnished by that affair, the trial
and judgments which followed it, and the ultimate verdict of the people
thereon, cannot fail to have reached the conclusion that here is exposed in a
crucial experiment a people which is either totally in­com­pre­hen­sible, or is
responding to the calls of herd instinct by a series of reactions almost totally
different from those we regard as normal. When the biological key to the
situation is discovered the series of events otherwise bizarre to the pitch of
incredibility becomes not only intelligible and consistent, but also
inevitable.
The differences in instinctive social type between Germany and
England are betrayed in many minor peculiarities of behaviour that cannot
be examined or even enumerated here. Some of them are of little
importance in themselves, though all of them are significant when the
whole bulk of evidence to which they contribute a share is considered.
Indeed, some of the less obviously important char­ac­ter­is­tics, by the very
nicety with which they fulfil the conditions demanded by the biological
necessities of the case, have a very special value as evidence in favour of
the gen­er­al­i­za­tions which I have suggested. I permit myself an illustration
of this point. The use of war cries and shibboleths doubtless seems in itself
an insignificant subject enough, yet I think an examination of it can be
shown to lead directly to the very central facts of the international situation.
Few phenomena have been more striking throughout the war than the
way in which the German people have been able to take up certain cries—
directed mostly against England—and bring them into hourly familiar and
unanimous use. The phrase “God punish England!” seems actually to have
attained a real and genuine currency, and to have been used by all classes
and all ages as a greeting with a solemnity and gusto which are in no way
the less genuine for being, to our unsympathetic eyes, so ludicrous. The
famous “Hymn of Hate” had, no doubt, a popularity equally wide, and was
used with a fervour which showed the same evidence of a mystic
satisfaction.
Attempts have been made to impose upon England similar watchwords
with the object of keeping some of the direst events of the war before our
eyes, and fortifying the intensity and scope of our horror. We have been
adjured to “remember” Belgium, Louvain, the Lusitania, and latterly the
name of an heroic and savagely murdered nurse. Horrible as has been the
crime to which we have been recalled by each of these phrases, there has
never been the slightest sign that the memory of it could acquire a general
currency of quotation, and by that mechanism become a stronger factor in
unity determination or endurance.
An allied phenomenon which may perhaps be mentioned here is the
difference in attitude of the German and the English soldier towards war
songs. To the German the war song is a serious matter; it is for the most part
a grave composition, exalted in feeling, and thrilling with the love of
country; he is taught to sing it, and he sings it well, with obvious and
touching sincerity and with equally obvious advantage to his morale.
The attempt to introduce similar songs and a similar attitude towards
them to the use of the English soldier has often been made, and exactly as
often lamentably failed. On the whole it has been, perhaps, the most purely
comic effort of the impulse to mimic Germany which has been in favour
until of late with certain people of excellent aims but inadequate biological
knowledge. The English soldier, consistently preferring the voice of Nature
to that of the most eminent doctrinaire, has, to the scandal of his lyrical
enemies, steadily drawn his inspiration from the music-hall and the gutter,
or from his own rich store of flippant and ironic realism.
The biological meaning of these peculiarities renders them intelligible
and consistent with one another. The predaceous social animals in attack or
pursuit are particularly sensitive to the encouragement afforded by one
another’s voices. The pack gives tongue because of the functional value of
the exercise, which is clearly of importance in keeping individuals in
contact with one another, and in stimulating in each the due degree of
aggressive rage. That serious and narrow passion tends naturally to
concentrate itself upon some external object or quarry, which becomes by
the very fact an object of hate to the exclusion of any other feeling, whether
of sympathy, self-possession, or a sense of the ludicrous. The curious
spectacle of Germans greeting one another with “God punish England!” and
the appropriate response is therefore no accidental or meaningless
phenomenon, but a manifestation of an instinctive necessity; and this
explanation is confirmed by the immensely wide currency of the
performance, and the almost simian gravity with which it could be carried
out. It succeeded because it had a functional value, just as similar
movements in England have failed because they have had no functional
value, and could have none in a people of the socialized type, with whom
unity depends on a different kind of bond.
The wolf, then, is the father of the war song, and it is among peoples of
the lupine type alone that the war song is used with real seriousness.
Animals of the socialized type are not dependent for their morale upon the
narrow intensities of aggressive rage. Towards such manifestations of it as
concerted cries and war songs they feel no strong instinctive impulsion, and
are therefore able to preserve a relatively objective attitude. Such cryings of
the pack, seeming thus to be mere functionless automatisms, naturally
enough come to be regarded as patently absurd.
Examples of behaviour illustrating these deep differences of reaction are
often to be met with in the stories of those who have described incidents of
the war. It is recorded that German soldiers in trenches within hearing of the
English, seeking to exasperate and appal the latter, have sung in an English
version their fondly valued “Hymn of Hate.” Whereupon the English,
eagerly listening and learning the words of the dreadful challenge, have
petrified their enemies by repeating it with equal energy and gusto, dwelling
no doubt with the appreciation of experts upon the curses of their native
land.
It would scarcely be possible to imagine a more significant
demonstration of the psychological differences of the two social types.
The peculiarities of a state of the wolfish type are admirably suited to
conditions of aggression and conquest, and readily yield for those purposes
a maximal output of moral strength. As long as such a nation is active and
victorious in war, its moral resources cannot fail, and it will be capable of
an indefinite amount of self-sacrifice, courage, and energy. Take away from
it, however, the opportunities of continued aggression, interrupt the
succession of victories by a few heavy defeats, and it must inevitably lose
the perfection of its working as an engine of moral power. The ultimate and
singular source of inexhaustible moral power in a gregarious unit is the
perfection of communion amongst its individual members. As we have
seen, this source is undeveloped in units of the aggressive type, and has
been deliberately ignored by Germany. As soon, if ever, as she has to
submit to a few unmistakable defeats in the field, as soon as, if it should
happen, all outlets for fresh aggression are closed, she will become aware of
how far she has staked her moral resources on continuous success, and will
not be able for long to conceal her knowledge from the world.
That she herself has always been dimly aware of the nature of her
strength—though not perhaps of her potential weakness—is shown by her
steady insistence upon the necessity of aggression, upon maintaining the
attack at whatever cost of life. This is a principle she has steadily acted
upon throughout the war. It is exemplified by the whole series of terrible
lunges at her enemies she has made. The strategic significance of these has,
perhaps, become less as the moral necessity for them has become greater.
France, Flanders, Russia, and the Balkans have in turn had to supply the
moral food of victory and attack without which she would soon have
starved. There is a quality at which the imagination cannot but be appalled
in this fate of a great and wonderful nation, however much her alienation of
herself from the instincts of mankind may have frozen the natural currents
of pity. Panting with the exhaustion of her frightful blow at Russia, she
must yet turn with who knows what weariness to yet another enterprise, in
which to find the moral necessities which the Russian campaign was
already ceasing to supply. It is to a similar mechanism that we must look to
trace the ultimate source of the submarine and aircraft campaigns against
England. Strategically, these proceedings may or may not have been
regarded hopefully; possibly they were based on a definite military plan,
though they do not to us have that appearance. Very probably they were
expected to disorganize English morale. Behind them both, however,
whether consciously or not, was the moral necessity to do something
against England. This is indicated by the circumstances and the periods of
the war at which they were seriously taken up. As both the submarine and
the Zeppelin campaigns involve no great expenditure or dissipation of
power, the fact that their value is moral rather than military, and concerned
with the morale of their inventors rather than that of their victims, is chiefly
of academic interest as throwing further light on the nature of Germany’s
strength and weakness.
Its attitude towards discipline displays the German mind in a relation
sufficiently instructive to merit some comment here. When Germany has
been reproached with being contented to remain in what is, by comparison
with other peoples, a condition of political infantilism, with allowing the
personal liberty of her citizens to be restricted on all hands, and their
political responsibility to be kept within the narrowest limits, the answer of
the political theorists has generally contained two distinct and contradictory
apologetic theses. It has been said that the German, recognizing the value of
State organization, and that strict discipline is a necessary preliminary to it,
consciously resigns the illusory privileges of the democrat in order to gain
power, and submits to a kind of social contract which is unquestionably
advantageous in the long run. The mere statement of such a proposition is
enough to refute it, and we need give no further attention to an
intellectualist fallacy so venerable and so completely inconsistent with
experience. It is also said, however, that the German has a natural aptitude
for discipline amounting to genius. In a sense a little less flattering than it is
intended to have, this proposition is as true as that of the social contract is
false. The aggressive social type lends itself naturally to discipline, and
shows it in its grossest forms. The socialized type is, of course, capable of
discipline, otherwise a State would be impossible, but the discipline that
prevails in it is apt to become indirect, less harshly compulsory and more
dependent on goodwill.
It is perhaps natural that units within which ferocity and hardness are
tolerated and encouraged should depend on a cor­res­pon­ding­ly savage
method of enforcing their will. The flock of sheep has its shepherd, but the
pack of hounds has its Whips. In human societies of the same type we
should expect to find, therefore, a general acquiescence in the value of
discipline, and a toleration of its enforcement, because, rather than in spite
of, its being harsh. This seems to be the mechanism which underlies what is
to the Englishman the mystery of German submission to direction and
discipline. That an able-bodied soldier should submit to being lashed across
the face by his officer for some trivial breach of etiquette—a type of
incident common and well witnessed to—is evidence of a state of mind in
both parties utterly in­com­pre­hen­sible to our feelings. The hypothesis I am
suggesting would explain it by comparison with the only available similar
phenomenon—the submission of a dog to a thrashing administered by his
master. The dog illustrates very well that in a predaceous social animal the
enforcement of a harsh and even brutal discipline is not only a possible but
also a perfectly satisfactory procedure in the psychological sense. That
other common victim of man’s brutality—the horse—provides an
interesting complement to the proposition by showing that in a protectively
social animal a savage enforcement of discipline is psychologically
unsatisfactory. It seems justifiable, therefore, to conclude that the
aggressive gre­gar­i­ous­ness of the Germans is the instinctive source of the
marvellous discipline of their soldiers, and the contribution it makes to their
amazing bravery. It must not be taken as any disrespect for that wonderful
quality, but as a desire to penetrate as far as possible into its meaning, that
compels one to point out that the theoretical considerations I have advanced
are confirmed by the generally admitted dependence of the German soldier
on his officers and the at least respectably attested liability he shows to the
indulgence of an inhuman savagery towards any one who is not his master
by suggestion or by force of arms.
In the attempt I have made to get some insight into the German mind,
and to define the meaning of its ideals, and needs, and impulses in
biological terms, I have had to contend with the constant bias one has
naturally been influenced by in discussing a people not only intensely
hostile, but also animated by what I have tried to show is an alien type of
the social habit. Nevertheless, there seem to be certain broad conclusions
which may be usefully recalled in summary here as constituting reasonable
probabilities. My purpose will have been effected if these are sufficiently
consistent to afford a point of view slightly different from the customary
one, and yielding some practical insight into the facts.
Germany presents to the biological psychologist the remarkable paradox
of being in the first place a State consciously directed towards a definite
series of ideals and ambitions, and deliberately organized to obtain them,
and in the second place a State in which prevails a primitive type of the
gregarious instinct—the aggressive—a type which shows the closest
resemblance in its needs, its ideals, and its reactions to the society of the
wolf pack. Thus she displays, in one respect, what I have shown to be the
summit of gregarious evolution, and in another its very antithesis—a type
of society which has always been transient, and has failed to satisfy the
needs of modern civilized man.
When I compare German society with the wolf pack, and the feelings,
desires, and impulses of the individual German with those of the wolf or
dog, I am not intending to use a vague analogy, but to call attention to a real
and gross identity. The aggressive social animal has a complete and
consistent series of psychical reactions, which will necessarily be traceable
in his feelings and his behaviour, whether he is a biped or a quadruped, a
man or an insect. The psychical necessity that makes the wolf brave in a
massed attack is the same as that which makes the German brave in a
massed attack; the psychical necessity which makes the dog submit to the
whip of his master and profit by it makes the German soldier submit to the
lash of his officer and profit by it. The instinctive process which makes the
dog among his fellows irritable, suspicious, ceremonious, sensitive about
his honour, and immediately ready to fight for it is identical in the German
and produces identical effects.
The number and minuteness of the coincidences of behaviour between
the German and other aggressive social species, the number and precision
of the differences between the German and the other types of social animals
make up together a body of evidence which is difficult to ignore.
Moreover, we see Germany compelled to submit to disadvantages,
consequent upon her social type, which, we may suppose, she would have
avoided had they not been too deeply ingrained for even her thoroughness
to remove. Thus she is unable to make or keep friends amongst nations of
the socialized type; her instinctive valuation of fear as a compelling
influence has allowed her to indulge the threatenings and warlike gestures
which have alienated all the strong nations, and intimidated successfully
only the weak—England, for example, is an enemy entirely of her own
making; she has been forced to conduct the war on a plan of ceaseless and
frightfully costly aggression, because her morale could have survived no
other method.
The ultimate object of science is foresight. It may fairly be asked,
therefore, supposing these speculations to have any scientific justification,
what light do they throw on the future? It would be foolish to suppose that
speculations so general can yield, in forecasting the future, a precision
which they do not pretend to possess. Keeping, however, to the level of
very general inference, two observations may be hazarded.
First, the ultimate destiny of Germany cannot be regarded as very much
in doubt. If we are content to look beyond this war, however it may issue,
and take in a longer stretch of time, we can say with quite a reasonable
degree of assurance that Germanic power, of the type we know and fear to-
day, is impermanent. Germany has left the path of natural evolution, or
rather, perhaps, has never found it. Unless, therefore, her civilization
undergoes a radical change, and comes to be founded on a different series
of instinctive impulses, it will disappear from the earth. All the advantages
she has derived from conscious direction and organization will not avail to
change her fate, because conscious direction is potent only when it works
hand in hand with Nature, and its first task—which the directors of
Germany have neglected—is to find out the path which man must follow.
Secondly, a word may be ventured about the war in so far as the
consideration of Germany alone can guide us. As I have tried to show, her
morale is more rigidly conditioned than that of her opponents. They have
merely to maintain their resistance, to do which they have certain
psychological advantages, and they must win. She must continue aggressive
efforts, and if these can be held by her enemies—not more—she must go on
galvanizing her weary nerves until they fail to respond. I am not for a
moment venturing to suppose myself competent to give the slightest hint
upon the conduct of the war; I am merely pointing out what I regard as a
psychological fact. Whether it has any practical military value is not in my
province to decide.
If one claimed the liberty of all free men, to have over and above
considered judgment a real guess, one would be inclined to venture the
opinion that, however well things go with the enemies of Germany, there
will not be much fighting on German soil.
The proposition that the strength and weakness of Germany are rigidly
conditioned by definite and ascertainable psychological necessities is, if it is
valid, chiefly of interest to the strategist and those who are responsible for
the general lines of the campaign against her. We may well, however, ask
whether psychological principle yields any hint of guidance in the solution
of the further and equally important problem of how her enemies are to
secure and render permanent the fruits of the victory upon which they are
resolved.
This problem has already been the subject of a good deal of controversy,
which is likely to increase as the matter comes more and more into the field
of practical affairs.
Two types of solution have been expounded which, apart from what
inessential agreement they may show in demanding the resurrection of such
small nations as Germany has been able to assassinate, differ profoundly in
the treatment they propose for the actual enemy herself. Both profess to be
based upon the desire for a really permanent peace, and the establishment of
a truly stable equilibrium between the antagonists. It is upon the means by
which this result is to be secured that differences arise.
The official solution, and that almost universally accepted by the bulk of
the people, insists that the “military domination of Prussia,” “German
militarism,” or the “German military system” as it is variously phrased,
must be wholly and finally destroyed. This doctrine has received many
interpretations. In spite, however, of criticism by moderates on the one hand
and by unpractically ferocious root-and-branch men on the other, it seems
to remain—significantly enough—an expression of policy which the
common man feels for the time to be adequate.
The most considerable criticism has come from the small class of
accomplished and intellectual writers who from their pacifist and
“international” tendencies have to some extent been accused, no doubt
falsely, of being pro-German in the sense of anti-English. The complaint of
this school against the official declaration of policy is, that it does not
disclose a sufficiently definite object or the means by which this object is to
be attained. We are told that as a nation we do not know what we are
fighting for, and, what amounts to the same thing, that we cannot attain the
object we profess to pursue by the exercise of military force however
drastically it may be applied. We are warned that we should seek a
“reasonable” peace and one which by its moderation would have an
educative effect upon the German people, that to crush and especially in
any way to dismember the German Empire would confirm its people in
their belief that this war is a war of aggression by envious neighbours, and
make revenge a national aspiration.
Such criticism has not always been very effectually answered, and the
generally current feeling has proved disconcertingly inarticulate in the
presence of its agile and well-equipped opponents. Indeed, upon the
ordinary assumptions of political debate, it is doubtful whether any quite
satisfactory answer can be produced. It is just, however, these very
assumptions which must be abandoned and replaced by more appropriate
psychological principles when we are trying to obtain light upon the
relations of two peoples of profoundly different social type and instinctive
reaction. The common man seems to be dimly aware of this difference
though he cannot define it; the intellectual of what, for want of a better
term, I may call the pacifist type in all its various grades, proceeds upon the
assumption that no such difference exists. Much as one must respect the
courage and capacity of many of these latter, one cannot but recognize that
their conceptions, however logical and however ingenious, lack the
invigorating contact with reality which the instinctive feelings of the
common man have not altogether failed to attain.
Let us now consider what guidance in the solution of the problem can
be got from a consideration of the peculiarities of the social type which the
Germans of the present day so char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly present.
Regarded from this point of view, the war is seen to be directed against
a social type which, when endowed with the technical resources of modern
civilization, is, and must continue to be, a dangerous anachronism. A people
of the aggressive social habit can never be in a state of stable equilibrium
with its neighbours. The constitution of its society presents a rigid barrier to
smooth and continuous internal integration; its energy, therefore, must be
occupied upon essentially, though not always superficially, external objects,
and its history will necessarily be made up of alternating periods of
aggression and periods of preparation. Such a people has no conception of
the benign use of power. It must regard war as an end in itself, as the
summit of its national activities, as the recurring apogee of its secular orbit;
it must regard peace as a necessary and somewhat irksome preparation for
war in which it may savour reminiscently the joys of conquest by
dragooning its new territories and drastically imposing upon them its
national type. This instinctive insistence upon uniformity makes every
conquest by such a people an impoverishment of the human race, and
makes the resistance of such aggression an elementary human duty.
In every particular Germany has proved true to her social type, and
every detail of her history for the last fifty years betrays the lupine quality
of her ideals and her morals.
We have seen that in all gregarious animals the social instinct must
follow one of three principal types, each of which will produce a herd
having special activities and reactions. The major units of the human
species appear limited to a similar number of categories, but it is probable
that the perpetuation of a given type in a given herd is not chiefly a matter
of heredity in the individual. The individual is gregarious by inheritance;
the type according to which his gregarious reactions are manifested is not
inherited, but will depend upon the form current in the herd to which he
belongs, and handed down in it from generation to generation. Thus it has
happened that nations have been able in the course of their history to pass
from the aggressive to the socialized type. The change has perhaps been
rendered possible by the existence of class segregation of a not too rigid
kind, and has doubtless depended upon a progressive inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion
and the consequently developing altruism. The extremely rigid Prussian
social system seems clearly to be associated with the persistence of the
aggressive form of society.
In considering the permanent deliverance of Europe from the elements
in Germany for which there can be no possible toleration, we therefore have
not to deal with characters which must be regarded as inherited in the
biological sense. We have to deal rather with a group of reactions which,
while owing their unity, coherence, and power to the inherited qualities of
the gregarious mind, owe their perpetuation to organized State suggestion,
to tradition, and to their past success as a national method.
There can be no doubt that the success of the German Empire has
consolidated the hold of the aggressive social type upon its people, and has
guarded it from the eroding effects of increasing communication with other
peoples and knowledge of the world. As I have already tried to show, the
moral power of such peoples is intimately associated with the continuance
of aggression and of success. The German Empire has had no experience of
failure, and for this reason has been able to maintain its ideals and
aspirations untouched by modern influences. It needs no psychological
insight to foretell that if the result of this war can be in any way regarded as
a success for Germany, she will be thereby confirmed in her present ideals,
however great her sufferings may have been, and however complete her
exhaustion. It must be remembered that this type of people is capable of
interpreting facts in accordance with its prejudices to an almost incredible
extent, as we have seen time and again in the course of the war. The proof
that the aggressive national type is intolerable in modern Europe, if it can
be afforded by force of arms, must therefore be made very plain, or it will
have no value as a lesson. Proof of failure adequate to convince a people of
the socialized type might be quite inadequate to convince a people of the
lupine type in whom, from the nature of the case, mental resistiveness is so
much more impenetrable. This is the psychological fact of which the
statesmen of Europe will have to be, above all things, aware when questions
of peace come seriously to be discussed, for otherwise they will risk the
loss of all the blood and treasure which have been expended without any
corresponding gain for civilization.
We have been warned that to “humiliate” Germany will merely be to set
her upon the preparation of vengeance, and to confirm her belief in the
supreme value of military strength. This opinion affects to be based on a
knowledge of human nature, but its pretensions are not very well founded.
The passion of revenge is habitually over-estimated as a motive—possibly
through the influence of the novelists and playwrights to whom it is so
useful. When we examine man’s behaviour objectively we find that
revenge, however deathless a passion it is vowed to be at emotional
moments, is in actual life constantly having to give way to more urgent and
more recent needs and feelings. Between nations there is no reason to
suppose that it has any more reality as a motive of policy, though it perhaps
has slightly more value as a consolatory pose.
It is curious that the naïve over-estimation of the revenge ideal should
have been uninfluenced by so obvious an example as the relations of France
and Germany. In 1870 the former was “humiliated” with brutal
completeness and every element of insult. She talked of revenge, as she
could scarcely fail to do, but she soon showed that her grasp on reality was
too firm to allow her policy to be moved by that childish passion. Char­ac­‐
ter­is­ti­cally, it was the victorious aggressor who believed in her longing for
revenge, and who at length attacked her again.
A psychological hint of great value may be obtained from our
knowledge of those animals whose gre­gar­i­ous­ness, like that of the
Germans, is of the aggressive type. When it is thought necessary to correct
a dog by corporal measures, it is found that the best effect is got by what is
rather callously called a “sound” thrashing. The animal must be left in no
doubt as to who is the master, and his punishment must not be diluted by
hesitation, nervousness, or compunction on the part of the punisher. The
experience then becomes one from which the dog is capable of learning,
and if the sense of mastery conveyed to him is unmistakable, he can
assimilate the lesson without reservation or the desire for revenge. However
repulsive the idea may be to creatures of the socialized type, no
sentimentalism and no pacifist theorizing can conceal the fact that the
respect of a dog can be won by violence. If there is any truth in the view I
have expressed that the moral reactions of Germany follow the gregarious
type which is illustrated by the wolf and the dog, it follows that her respect
is to be won by a thorough and drastic beating, and it is just that elementary
respect for other nations, of which she is now entirely free, which it is the
duty of Europe to teach her. If she is allowed to escape under conditions
which in any way can be sophisticated into a victory, or, at any rate, not a
defeat, she will continue to hate us as she continued to hate her victim
France.
To the politician, devoted as he necessarily is to the exclusively human
point of view, it may seem fantastic and scandalous to look for help in
international policy to the conduct of dogs. The gulf between the two fields
is not perhaps so impassably profound as he would like to think, but,
however that may be, the analogy I have drawn is not unsupported by
evidence of a more respectable kind. The susceptibility of the individual
German to a harsh and even brutally enforced discipline is well known. The
common soldier submits to be beaten by his sergeant, and is the better
soldier for it; both submit to the bullying of their officer apparently also
with profit; the common student is scarcely less completely subject to his
professor, and becomes thereby a model of scientific excellence; the
common citizen submits to the commands of his superiors, however
unreasonably conceived and insultingly conveyed, and becomes a model of
disciplined behaviour; finally the head of the State, combining the most
drastic methods of the sergeant, the professor, and the official, wins not
merely a slavish respect, but a veritable apotheosis.
Germany has shown unmistakably the way to her heart; it is for Europe
to take it.
16. It may be noted that the members of the small group of so-called “pro-German” writers and
propagandists for the most part make it a fundamental doctrine, either explicit or implicit, that
there is no psychological difference between the English and the Germans. They seem to
maintain that the latter are moved and are to be influenced by exactly the same series of feelings
and ideals as the former, and show in reality no observable “strangeness” in their expressions
and emotions. By arguments based on this assumption very striking conclusions are reached. All
moral advancement has been the work of unpopular minorities, the members of which have
been branded as cranks or criminals until time has justified their doctrine. Even the greatest of
such pioneers have not, however, been invariably right. Their genius has usually been shown
most clearly in matters with which they have been most familiar, while in matters less intimately
part of their experience their judgments have often not stood the test of time any better than
those of smaller men. If therefore our “pro-Germans” include amongst them men of moral
genius, we may expect that such of their psychological intuitions as deal with England are more
likely to prove true than those that deal with Germany. The importance of this reservation lies in
the probability that the chief psychological problems connected with the origin and prosecution
of this war relate to the Germans rather than to the English.
17. I have not included in these pages actual quotations from German authors illustrative of the
national char­ac­ter­is­tics they so richly display. Such material may be found in abundance in the
many books upon Germany which have appeared since the beginning of the war. The inclusion
of it here would therefore have been superfluous, and would have tended perhaps to distract
attention from the more general aspects of the subject which are the main objects of this study.
During the process of final revision I am, however, tempted to add a single illustration which
happens just to have caught my eye as being a representative and not at all an extreme example
of the national arrogance I refer to above.
In an article on “The German Mind” by Mr. John Buchan I find the following quotations
from a Professor Werner Sombart, of Berlin:—
“When the German stands leaning on his mighty sword, clad in steel from his sole to his
head, whatsoever will may, down below, dance around his feet, and the intellectuals and
the learned men of England, France, Russia, and Italy may rail at him and throw mud.
But in his lofty repose he will not allow himself to be disturbed, and he will reflect in
the sense of his old ancestors in Europe: Oderint dum metuant.”
“We must purge from our soul the last fragments of the old ideal of a progressive
development of humanity. . . . The ideal of humanity can only be understood in its
highest sense when it attains its highest and richest development in particular noble
nations. These for the time being are the representatives of God’s thought on earth. Such
were the Jews. Such were the Greeks. And the chosen people of these centuries is the
German people. . . . Now we understand why other peoples pursue us with their hatred.
They do not understand us, but they are sensible of our enormous spiritual superiority.
So the Jews were hated in antiquity because they were the representatives of God on
earth” (“The German Mind,” Land and Water, November 6, 1915).
These passages are almost too good to be true, and give one some of the pleasure of the
collector who finds a perfect specimen. Here we have the gusto in childish and banal metaphor,
the conception of the brutal conqueror’s state as permanently blissful—the colonizing principle
of Prussia—the naïve gen­er­al­i­za­tions from history, the confident assumption of any
characteristic which appears desirable in morals or religion, the impenetrable self-esteem, and I
think we should add the intense and honest conviction.
If we judge from the standpoint of our own feelings and ideals such utterances as these, we
cannot ignore the maniacal note in them, and we seem forced to assume some actually lunatic
condition in the German people. Indeed, this is a conclusion which Mr. Buchan in the article
from which I quote does not hesitate definitely and persuasively to draw.
When we remember, however, that the definition of insanity is necessarily a statistical one,
that in the last analysis we can but say that a madman is a man who behaves differently from the
great bulk of his neighbours, we find that to describe a nation as mad—true as it may be in a
certain sense—leaves us without much addition to our knowledge. In so far, however, as it
impresses upon us the fact that some of that nation’s mental processes are fundamentally
different from our own it is a useful conception. The statesman will do well to carry the analysis
a stage farther. The ravings of a maniac do not help us much in forecasting his behaviour, the
howlings of a pack of wolves, equally irrational, equally harsh, even, in the original sense,
equally lunatic, betray to us with whom we have to deal, betray their indispensable needs, their
uncontrollable passions, the narrow path of instinct in which they are held, enable us to foresee,
and, foreseeing, to lay our plans.
18. The use of this adjective may perhaps call to mind how often the wolf has appeared in fable in
just this mood. Usually, however, the fabulist—being of the unsympathetic socialized type—has
ascribed the poor creature’s yearnings to hypocrisy.
England Against Germany—England
Table of Contents
It is one of the most impressive facts about the war, that while Germany is
the very type of a perfected aggressive herd, England is perhaps the most
complete example of a socialized herd. Corresponding with this biological
difference is the striking difference in their history. Germany has modelled
her soul upon the wolf’s, and has rushed through the possibilities of her
archetype in fifty feverish years of development; already she is a finished
product, her moral ideal is fulfilled and leaves her nothing to strive for
except the imposition of it upon the world. England has taken as her model
the bee, and still lags infinitely far behind the fulfilment of her ideal. In the
unbroken security of her land, for near a thousand years, she has leisurely,
perhaps lazily, and with infinite slowness, pursued her path towards a social
integration of an ever closer and deeper kind. She has stolidly, even
stupidly, and always in a grossly practical spirit, held herself to the task of
shaping a society in which free men could live and yet be citizens. She has
had no theory of herself, no consciousness of her destiny, no will to power.
She has had almost no national heroes, and has always been constitutionally
frigid to her great men, grudging them the material for their
experimentations on her people, indifferent to their expositions of her duty
and her imperial destiny, granting them a chance to die for her with no more
encouragement than an impatient sigh. She has allowed an empire to be
won for her by her restless younger sons, has shown no gratification in their
conquests, and so far from thrilling with the exultation of the conqueror, has
always at the earliest moment set her new dominions at work upon the
problem in which her wholly unromantic absorption has never relaxed. And
after a thousand years she seems as far as ever from her goal. Her society is
irregular, disorganized, inco-ordinate, split into classes at war with one
another, weighted at one end with poverty, squalor, ignorance, and disease,
weighted at the other end by ignorance, prejudice, and corpulent self-
satisfaction. Nevertheless, her patience is no more shaken by what she is
lectured upon as failure than was her composure by what she was assured
was imperial success. She is no less bound by her fate than is Germany, and
must continue her path until she reaches its infinitely remoter goal. Nations
may model themselves on her expedients, and found the architecture of
their liberty on the tabernacles she has set up by the wayside to rest in for a
night—she will continue on her road unconscious of herself or her
greatness, absent-mindedly polite to genius, pleasantly tickled by prophets
with very loud voices, but apt to go to sleep under sermons, too awkward to
boast or bluster, too composed to seem strong, too dull to be flattered, too
patient to be flurried, and withal inflexibly practical and indifferent to
dreams.
No more perfect illustration of the char­ac­ter­is­tics of the two nations
could be found than their attitude before the war. England the empiric,
dimly conscious of trouble, was puzzled, restless, and uneasy in the face of
a problem she was threatened with some day having to study; Germany, the
theorist, cool, “objective,” conscious of herself, was convinced there was no
problem at all.
In studying the mind of England in the spirit of the biological
psychologist, it is necessary to keep in mind the society of the bee, just as in
studying the German mind it was necessary to keep in mind the society of
the wolf.
One of the most striking phenomena which observers of the bee have
noticed is the absence of any obvious means of direction or government in
the hive. The queen seems to be valued merely for her functions, which are
in no way directive. Decisions of policy of the greatest moment appear, as
far as we can detect, to arise spontaneously among the workers, and
whether the future is to prove them right or wrong, are carried out without
protest or disagreement. This capacity for unanimous decisions is obviously
connected with the limited mental development of the individual, as is
shown by the fact that in man it is very much more feeble. In spite of this,
the unanimity of the hive is wonderfully effective and surprisingly
successful. Speculators upon the physiology and psychology of bees have
been forced—very tentatively of course—to imagine that creatures living in
such intensely close communion are able to communicate to one another,
and, as it were, to a common stock, such extremely simple conceptions as
they can be supposed to entertain, and produce, so to say, a communal mind
which comes to have, at any rate in times of crisis, a quasi-independent
existence. The conception is difficult to express in concrete terms, and even
to grasp in more than an occasional intuitive flash. Whether we are to
entertain such a conception or are to reject it, the fact remains that societies
of a very closely communal habit are apt to give the appearance of being
ruled by a kind of common mind—a veritable spirit of the hive—although
no trace of any directive apparatus can be detected.
A close study of England gives the impression of some agency
comparable with a “spirit of the hive” being at work within it. The
impression is not perhaps to be taken as altogether fantastic, when we
remember how her insular station and her long history have forced upon her
a physical seclusion and unity resembling, though of course far less
complete than, that of the hive. I am of course not unaware that
disquisitions upon the national spirit are very familiar to us. These,
however, are so loosely conceived, so much concerned with purely
conventional personifications of quite imaginary qualities, that I cannot
regard them as referring to the phenomenon I am trying to describe.
The conception in my mind is that of an old and isolated people,
developing, by the slow mingling and attrition of their ideas, and needs, and
impulses, a certain deeply lying unity which becomes a kind of “instinct”
for national life, and gives to national policy, without the conscious
knowledge of any individual citizen, without the direction of statesmen, and
perhaps in spite of them all, a continuity of trend, and even an intelligence,
by which events may be influenced in a profoundly important way.
The making of some such assumption, helped as it is by the analogy of
the bee, seems to be necessary when we consider at all objectively the
history of England and her Empire. She has done so much without any
leading, so much in spite of her ostensible leaders, so often a great policy or
a successful stroke has been apparently accidental. So much of her work
that seemed, while it was doing, to be local and narrow in conception and
motive displays at a distance evidences of design on the great scale. Her
contests with Philip of Spain, with Louis XIV, with Napoleon, and the
foundation of her Colonial Empire, would seem to be the grandiose
conceptions of some supreme genius did we not know how they were
undertaken and in what spirit pursued.
It appears, then, that England has something with which to retort upon
the conscious direction to which Germany owes so much of her strength.
Among the number of embattled principles and counter principles which
this war has brought into the field, we must include as not the least
interesting the duel between conscious national direction on the one side
and unconscious national will and knowledge on the other.
It is quite outside my province to touch upon the diplomatic events
which led up to the war. They seem to me to be irrelevant to the biological
type of analysis we are trying to pursue. There can be no doubt at all that
the ordinary consciousness of the vast majority of citizens of this country
was intensely averse from the idea of war. Those who were in general
bellicose were for the moment decidedly out of influence. Can we suppose,
however, that the deep, still spirit of the hive that whispers unrecognized in
us all had failed to note that strange, gesticulating object across the North
Sea? In its vast, simple memory would come up other objects that had gone
on like that. It would remember a mailed fist that had been flourished across
the Bay of Biscay three hundred years ago, a little man in shining armour
who had strutted threateningly on the other shore of the Channel, and the
other little man who had stood there among his armies, and rattled his sabre
in the scabbard. It had marked them all down in their time, and it
remembered the old vocabulary. It would turn wearily and a little
impatiently to this new portent over the North Sea. . . . Wise with the
experience of a thousand years, it would know when to strike.
Such deeply buried combined national impulses as we are here glancing
at are far removed from the influence of pacifist or jingo. Any attempt to
define them must be a matter of guesswork and groping, in which the
element of speculation is far in excess of the element of ascertained fact. It
seems, however, that, as in the case of the bee, they concern chiefly actual
decisions of crucial matters of policy. To put this suggestion in another
form, we might say the spirit of the people makes the great wars, but it
leaves the statesman to conduct them. It may make, therefore, a decision of
incredible profundity, launch the people on the necessary course at the
necessary moment, and then leave them to flounder through the difficulties
of their journey as best they can. Herein is the contrast it presents with the
German resource of conscious direction—superficial, apt to blunder in all
the larger, deeper matters of human nature, but constant, alert, and
ingenious in making immediate use of every available means and
penetrating every department of activity.
During the conduct of war it is only in the simplest, broadest matters
that the spirit of the people can bring its wisdom to bear. One of the most
striking manifestations of it has, for example, been the way in which it has
shown a knowledge that the war would be long and hard. The bad news has
been, in general, received without complaint, reproach, or agitation, the
good news, such as it has been, with a resolute determination not to exult or
rejoice. That so many months of a deadly war have produced no popular
expression of exultation or dismay is a substantial evidence of moral power,
and not the less impressive for being so plainly the work of the common
man himself.
Such manifestations of the spirit of the people are rare, and meet with
very little encouragement from those who have access to the public. It is
astonishing how absent the gift of interpretation seems to be. A few, a very
few, stand out as being able to catch those whispers of immemorial wisdom;
many seem to be occupied in confusing them with a harsh and discordant
clamour of speech.
If we are correct in our analogy of the bee and the wolf, England has
one great moral advantage over Germany, namely, that there is in the
structure of her society no inherent obstacle to perfect unity among her
people. The utmost unity Germany can compass is that of the aggressive
type, which brings with it a harsh, non-altruistic relation among individuals,
and can yield its full moral value only during the maintenance of successful
attack. England, on the other hand, having followed the socialized type of
gre­gar­i­ous­ness, is free to integrate her society to an indefinite extent. The
development of the altruistic relation among her individuals lies in her
natural path. Her system of social segregation is not necessarily a rigid one,
and if she can bring about an adequate acceleration of the perfectly natural
consolidation towards which she is, and has slowly been, tending, she will
attain access to a store of moral power literally inexhaustible, and will reach
a moral cohesion which no hardship can shake, and an endurance which no
power on earth can overcome.
These are no figures of speech, but plain biological fact, capable of
immediate practical application and yielding an immediate result. It must be
admitted that she has made little progress towards this consummation since
the beginning of the war. Leaders, including not only governing politicians
but also those who in any way have access to public notice, tend to enjoin a
merely conventional unity, which is almost functionless in the promotion of
moral strength. It is not much more than an agreement to say we are united;
it produces no true unity of spirit and no power in the individual to deny
himself the indulgence of his egoistic impulses in action and in speech, and
is therefore as irritating as it is useless. It is unfortunate that the education
and circumstances of many public men deny them any opportunity of
learning the very elementary principles which are necessary for the
development of a nation’s moral resources. Occasionally one or another
catches an intuitive glimpse of some fragment of the required knowledge,
but never enough to enable him to develop any effective influence. For the
most part their impulses are as likely to be destructive of the desired effect
as favourable to it. In the past England’s wars have always been conducted
in an atmosphere of disunion, of acrimony, and of criticism designed to
embarrass the Government rather than, as it professes, to strengthen the
country. It is a testimony to the moral sturdiness of the people, and to the
power and subtlety of the spirit of the hive, that success has been possible in
such conditions. When one remembers how England has flourished on
domestic discord in critical times, one is tempted to believe that she derives
some mysterious power from such a state, and that the abolition of discord
might not be for her the advantageous change it appears so evidently to be.
Consideration, however, must show that this hypothesis is inadmissible, and
that England has won through on these occasions in spite of the handicap
discord has put upon her. In the present war, tough and hard as is her moral
fibre, she will need every element of her power to avoid the weariness and
enfeeblement that will otherwise come upon her before her task is done.
Throughout the months of warfare that have already passed no evidence
has become public of any recognition that the moral power of a nation
depends upon causes which can be identified, formulated, and controlled. It
seems to be unknown that that domination of egoistic impulses by social
impulses which we call a satisfactory morale is capable of direct cultivation
as such, that by it the resources of the nation are made completely available
to the nation’s leaders, that without it every demand upon the citizen is
liable to be grudgingly met or altogether repudiated.
We are told by physicians that uninstructed patients are apt to insist
upon the relief of their symptoms, and to care nothing for the cure of their
diseases, that a man will demand a bottle of medicine to stop the pain of an
ulcer in his stomach, but will refuse to allow the examination that would
establish the nature of his disease. The statesman embarrassed by the
manifestations of an imperfect morale seems to incline to a similar method.
When he finds he cannot get soldiers at the necessary rate, he would invent
a remedy for that particular symptom. When he has difficulties in getting
one or another industrial class to suspend its charters in the interests of the
State, he must have a new and special nostrum for that. When he would
relax the caution of the capitalist or restrain the wastefulness of the self-
indulgent, again other remedies must be found. And so he passes from crisis
to crisis, never knowing from moment to moment what trouble will break
out next, harassed, it is to be supposed, by the doubt whether his stock of
potions and pills will hold out, and how long their very moderate efficiency
will continue.
None of these troubles is a disease in itself; all are evidences of an
imperfect national morale, and any attempt to deal with them that does not
reach their common cause will necessarily therefore be unsatisfactory and
impermanent.
The sole basis of a satisfactory morale in a people of the social type that
obtains in England is a true national unity, which is therefore the singular
and complete remedy for all the civil difficulties incident upon a great and
dangerous war.
It is impossible to form any guess whether England will keep to her
traditional methods or will depart so far from them as to take a bold and
comprehensive view of her present and her growing moral needs. A
carefully conceived and daringly carried out organization of a real national
unity would have no great difficulty in a country so rich in practical genius;
it would make an end once for all of every internal difficulty of the State,
and would convert the nation into an engine of war which nothing could
resist.
The more probable and the characteristic event will be a mere
continuation in the old way. It will exemplify our usual and often admirable
enough contempt for theoretical considerations and dreams, our want of
interest in knowledge and foresight, our willingness to take any risk rather
than endure the horrid pains of thought.
When we remember how costly is our traditional method, how long and
painful it makes the way, how doubtful it even makes the goal, it is
impossible for the most philosophic to restrain a sigh for the needless
suffering it entails, and a thrill of alarm for the dangers it gives our path, the
darkness around us and ahead, the unimaginable end.
To the student, the end of the chapter is a chance to turn from the study of
detail and allow his mind to range through a larger atmosphere and over a
longer sequence. Closing our small chapter, we also may look at large over
the great expanse of the biological series in whose illimitable panorama the
war that covers our nearer skies with its blood-red cloud is no bigger than a
pin point. As we contemplate in imagination the first minute spot of living
jelly that crept and hungered in the mud, we can see the interplay of its
necessities and its powers already pushing it along the path at the end of
which we stand. Inherent in the dot of magic substance that was no longer
mere carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, and a little phosphorus,
was the capacity to combine with its fellows and to profit by the fellowship,
however loose. In the slow process of time combination brought freedom
which, just like ours, was freedom to vary and, varying, to specialize. So in
time great States of cells grew up, their individual citizen cells specialized
to the finest pitch, perfect in communion with one another, co-ordinate in
all their activities, incorporated with the State.
These new and splendid organizations, by the very fact of giving
freedom to the individual cells, had lost it themselves. Still, they retained
their capacity for combination, and where the need of freedom was greatest
they found it again in a new combination on a bigger scale. Thus again was
obtained freedom to vary, to specialize, to react. Over the world fellowships
of all grades and almost all types of creatures sprang up. Specialization,
communion, co-ordination again appeared on the new plane. It was as if
Nature, to protect her children against herself, was trying to crowd as much
living matter into one unit as she could. She had failed with her giant
lizards, with the mammoth and the mastodon. She would try a new method
which should dispense with gross physical aggregations, but should
minister to the same needs and afford the same powers. The body should be
left free, the mind alone should be incorporated in the new unit. The non-
material nexus proved as efficient as the physical one had been. The flock,
the herd, the pack, the swarm, new creatures all, flourished and ranged the
world. Their power depended on the capacity for inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion
amongst their members and expanded until the limits of this were reached.
As long as inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion was limited the full possibilities of the new
experiment were concealed, but at length appeared a creature in whom this
capacity could develop indefinitely. At once a power of a new magnitude
was manifest. Puny as were his individuals, man’s capacity for
communication soon made him master of the world. The very quality,
however, which gave him success introduced a new complication of his
fate. His brain power allowed him to speak and understand and so to
communicate and combine more effectively than any other animal; his brain
power gave him individuality and egoism, and the possibility of varied
reaction which enabled him to obey the voice of instinct after the fashion of
his own heart. All combination therefore was irregular, inco-ordinate, and
only very slowly progressive. He has even at times wandered into blind
paths where the possibility of progressive combination is lost.
Nevertheless the needs and capacities that were at work in the primeval
amœba are at work in him. In his very flesh and bones is the impulse
towards closer and closer union in larger and larger fellowships. To-day he
is fighting his way towards that goal, fighting for the perfect unit which
Nature has so long foreshadowed, in which there shall be a complete
communion of its members, unobstructed by egoism or hatred, by harshness
or arrogance or the wolfish lust for blood. That perfect unit will be a new
creature, recognizable as a single entity; to its million-minded power and
knowledge no barrier will be insurmountable, no gulf impassable, no task
too great.
Postscript of 1919
Table of Contents
Prejudice in Time of War
Table of Contents
With the exception of the two pre­lim­i­nary es­says, the fore­going chapters
were written in the autumn of 1915. As the chief purpose of the book was to
expound the conception that psychology is a science practically useful in
actual affairs, it was inevitable that a great deal of the exemplary matter by
which it was attempted to illustrate the theoretical discussion should be
related to the war of 1914–1918. Rich, however, as this subject was in
material with which to illustrate a psychological inquiry, it presented also
the great difficulty of being surrounded and permeated by prejudices of the
most deeply impassioned kind, prejudices, moreover, in one direction or
another from which no inhabitant of one of the belligerent countries could
have the least expectation of being free. To yield to the temptation offered
by the psychological richness of war themes might thus be to sacrifice the
detachment of mind and coolness of judgment without which scientific
investigation is impossible. It had to be admitted, in fact, that there were
strong grounds for such epistemological pessimism, and it will perhaps be
useful in a broad way to define some of these here.
In normal times a modern nation is made up of a society in which no
regard is paid to moral unity, and in which therefore common feeling is to a
great extent unorganized and inco-ordinate. In such a society the individual
citizen cannot derive from the nation as a whole the full satisfaction of the
needs special to him as a gregarious animal. The national feeling he
experiences when at home among his fellows is too vague and remote to
call forth the sense of moral vigour and security that his nature demands. As
has already been pointed out﻿19 the necessary consequence is the segregation
of society into innumerable minor groups, each constituting in itself a small
herd, and dispensing to its members the moral energy that in a fully
organized society would come from the nation as a whole. Of such minor
herds some are much more distinct from the common body than others.
Some engage a part only of the life of their members, so that the individual
citizen may belong to a number of groups and derive such moral energy as
he possesses from a variety of sources. Thus in a fully segregated society in
time of peace the moral support of the citizen comes from his social class
and his immediate circle, his professional associations, his church, his
chapel, his trade union and his clubs, rather than directly from the nation in
which he is a unit. Indeed, so far from looking to the nation at large for the
fulfilment of its natural function of providing “all hope, all sustainment, all
reward,” he is apt to regard it as embodied by the tax-gatherer, the
policeman, and the bureaucrat, at its best remote and indifferent, at its worst
hostile and oppressive.
The more distinct of these intra-national groups may not only be very
fully isolated from the common body, but may be the seat of an actual
corporate hostility to it, or rather to the aggregated minor groups which
have come officially to represent it. When war breaks upon a society thus
constituted the intense stimulation of herd instinct that results tends to break
down the moral restrictions set up by segregation, to throw back the
individual citizen on to the nation at large for the satisfaction of his moral
needs, and to replace class feeling by national feeling. The apprehended
danger of the given war is the measure of the completeness with which
occurs such a solution of minor groups into the national body. The extent of
such solution and the consequently increased homogeneity it effects in the
nation will determine the extent to which national feeling develops, the
degree to which it approaches unanimity, and consequently the vigour with
which the war is defended and conducted. If a minor group has already
developed a certain hostility to the common body and resists the solvent
effect of the outbreak of war, it becomes a potential source of anti-national
feeling and of opposition to the national policy. Surrounded as it necessarily
will be by an atmosphere of hostility, its character as a herd becomes
hardened and invigorated, and it can endow its members with all the gifts of
moral vigour and resistiveness a herd can give. Thus we may say, that in a
country at war every citizen is exposed to the extremely powerful
stimulation of herd instinct characteristic of that state. In the individual who
follows in feeling the general body of his fellows, and in him who belongs
to a dissentient minority, the reactions peculiar to the gregarious animal will
be energetically manifested. Of such reactions, that which interests us
particularly at the moment is the moulding of opinion in accordance with
instinctive pressure, and we arrive at the conclusion that our citizen of the
majority is no more—if no less—liable to the distortion of opinion than our
citizen of the minority. Whence we conclude that in a country at war all
opinion is necessarily more or less subject to prejudice, and that this
liability to bias is a herd mechanism, and owes its vigour to that potent
instinct.
It is undoubtedly depressing to have to recognize this universality of
prejudice and to have to abandon the opinion sometimes held that the char­‐
ac­ter­is­tics of herd belief are limited to the judgments of the vulgar. The
selectness of a minority in no way guarantees it against the fallacies of the
mob. A minority sufficiently unpopular is, in a sense, a mob in which
smallness is compensated for by density. The moral vigour and fortitude
which unpopular minorities enjoy are evidences of herd instinct in vigorous
action; the less admirable liability to prejudice being a part of the same
instinctive process is a necessary accompaniment. We may lay it down,
then, as fundamental that all opinion among the members of a nation at war
is liable to prejudice, and when we remember with what vehemence such
opinion is pronounced and with what fortitude it is defended we may regard
as at least highly probable that such opinion always actually is prejudiced—
rests, that is to say, on instinct rather than reason. Now, it is common
knowledge that in the present state of society opinion in a given country is
always divided as to the justice of an actual war. All of it sharing the
common characteristic of war opinion in being prejudiced, some will
pronounce more or less clearly that the war is just and necessary, some will
pronounce more or less clearly against that view; there will be a division
into what we may call pro-national and anti-national currents of opinion,
each accompanied respectively by its counterpart of what we may call anti-
hostile and pro-hostile opinion. It is a significant fact that the relative
development of pro-national and anti-national feeling varies according to
the degree in which the given war is apprehended as dangerous. A war
apprehended as dangerous produces a more complete solution of the minor
herds of society into the common body than does a war not so regarded; in
consequence there is a nearer approach to homogeneity, and pro-national
opinion is far in excess of anti-national opinion, which, if recognizable, is
confined to insignificant minorities. A war regarded as not dangerous
produces a less complete solution in the common body, a less degree of
homogeneity, and allows anti-national opinion, that is, doubt of the justice
of the war and opposition to the national policy, to develop on a large scale.
These phenomena have been clearly visible in the history of recent wars.
The South African War of 1899–1902 was not apprehended as dangerous in
this country, and in consequence, though pro-national opinion prevailed
among the majority, anti-national opinion was current in a large and
respectable minority. The war of 1914–1918, regarded from the first as of
the greatest gravity, gave to pro-national opinion an enormous
preponderance, and restricted anti-national opinion within very narrow
limits. The Russo-Japanese War provided an excellent double illustration of
these mechanisms. On the Russian side regarded as not dangerous, it left
national opinion greatly divided, and made the conduct of the war confused
and languid; on the Japanese side apprehended as highly dangerous, it
produced an enormous preponderance of pro-national opinion, and made
the conduct of the war cor­res­pon­ding­ly vigorous. In the Franco-Prussian
War of 1870–1871 a further point is illustrated. The essential factor in the
stimulation of herd instinct by war is not the actual danger of a given war,
but the apprehended danger of it. The Prussians were dangerous enough to
France, but were not generally regarded as such by the French, and in
consequence national homogeneity did not develop as it did on a later
occasion in face of the same menace.
If pro-national and anti-national opinion, if belief and doubt in the
justice of a given war, vary in relation to a single predominantly important
psychological factor—the apprehended danger to the nation of the war in
question—it is obvious that the ostensible and proclaimed grounds upon
which such opinion is founded are less decisive than is commonly
supposed. Finding, as we do, that the way in which a people responds to the
outbreak of war depends certainly in the main and probably altogether on a
condition not necessarily dependent on the causes of the war, it is obvious
that the moral justifications which are usually regarded as so important in
determining the people’s response are in fact comparatively insignificant.
This conclusion agrees with the observed fact that no nation at war ever
lacks the conviction that its cause is just. In the war of 1914–1918 each of
the belligerents was animated by a passion of certainty that its participation
was unavoidable and its purpose good and noble; each side defended its
cause with arguments perfectly convincing and unanswerable to itself and
wholly without effect on the enemy. Such passion, such certitude, such
impenetrability were obviously products of something other than reason,
and do not in themselves and directly give us any information as to the
objective realities of the distribution of justice between the two sides. The
sense of rectitude is in fact and manifestly a product of mere belligerency,
and one which a nation at war may confidently expect to possess, no matter
how nefarious its objects may ultimately appear to be in the eyes of general
justice. The fact that such a sense of rectitude is a universal and inevitable
accompaniment of war, and as strong in a predatory and criminal belligerent
as in a generally pacific one, gives us a convenient measure of the extent to
which prejudice must prevail in warfare.﻿20
We thus arrive at the discouraging conclusion that in a belligerent
country all opinion in any way connected with the war is subject to
prejudice, either pro-national or anti-national, and is very likely in
consequence to be of impaired validity. Must we then conclude further that
speculation upon war themes is so liable to distortion that reasoned
judgments of any practical value are impossible? Now, it is guidance in just
such a difficulty as this that a psychology having any pretensions to be
called practical may fairly be expected to yield, and psychology does in fact
provide certain broad precautionary principles, which, although by no
means infallible guides, do profess to be able to keep within bounds the
disturbing effects of prejudice on judgment and so render possible the not
wholly unprofitable discussion even of matters the most deeply implicated
by war-time passion.
First among such principles is the recognition of the fact that prejudice
does not display itself as such to direct introspection. One who is being
influenced by prejudice will never be able to detect his biassed judgments
by an apparent defect in their plausibility or by any characteristic logical
weakness. Agreement or disagreement with common opinion will as such
be no help, since prejudice infests minorities no less than majorities. To
suppose that when one has admitted the liability to prejudice one can free
oneself from it by a direct voluntary effort is a common belief and an
entirely fallacious one. Such a task is far beyond the powers of the most
fully instructed mind, and is not likely to be undertaken except by those
who have least chance of success. Prejudice, in fact, is for the individual
like the ether of the physicist, infinitely pervasive and potent, but
insusceptible of direct detection; its presence is to be assumed as general,
but it escapes before immediate search by introspection as the ether eludes
the balance and the test-tube.
Secondly, it is possible for the investigator, having admitted the
existence of prejudice as a condition of thought, to recognize the general
direction of its action in his own mind, to recognize, that is to say, whether
the tone of it is pro-national or anti-national, and thus to obtain a certain
orientation for his efforts to neutralize it. Having frankly recognized this
general tendency in his thinking, he will be able to do something towards
correcting it by making allowance for it in his conclusion as a whole. If his
tendency of feeling is pro-national, he will say to himself of any judgment
favourable to his country, “This is a conclusion likely to have been
influenced by prejudice, therefore for all the precautions I may have taken
in forming it, and whatever scientific care and caution I may have used, in
spite even of its agreeable appearance of self-evident truth, I must regard its
validity as subject to some subtraction before it can safely be made the basis
for further speculation.” If his tendency of feeling is anti-national, he will
have a similar task of attenuation to carry out upon the conclusions
unfavourable to his country that he may reach, and will be prudent to make
very drastic deductions in view of the supposed immunity to prejudice with
which minorities are rather apt to assume the absence of vulgar approval
endows them.﻿21
Finally, one who attempts to deal usefully with matters in which strong
feeling is inevitable will do well, however thoroughly he may try to guard
himself from the effects of prejudice, to bring his speculative conclusions
into such form that they are automatically tested by the progress of events.
Symmetry and internal consistency are unfortunately but too often accepted
as evidences of objective validity. That the items of a series of conclusions
fit into one another neatly and compose a system logically sound and
attractive to the intellect gives us practically no information of their truth.
For this a frequently repeated contact with external reality is necessary, and
of such contacts the most thoroughly satisfactory one is the power to
foretell the course of events. Foresight is the supreme test of scientific
validity, and the more a line of argument is liable to deflection by non-
rational processes the more urgent is the need for it constantly to be put into
forms which will allow its capacity for foresight to be tested. This was the
one great advantage amongst heavy handicaps enjoyed by those who
ventured into speculation upon the international situation during the late
war. Events were moving so quickly from crisis to crisis that it was possible
for the psychologist to see his judgments confirmed or corrected almost
from day to day, to see in the authentic fabric of reality as it left the loom
where he had had any kind of foreknowledge, where he had been altogether
unprepared, and where he had failed in foresight of some development that
should have been within his powers.
These three principles were those in accordance with which it was
attempted to conduct the discussion in this book of topics connected with
the war. The writer was aware that neither was he by nature or art immune
to prejudice nor able by some miracle of will power to lay down passion
when he took up the pen, and he admitted to himself with what frankness he
could command the liability under which his conclusions would lie of
having been arrived at under the influence of pro-national prejudice. He
hoped, however, that a liberal allowance for the direction of his instinctive
bias and a grateful use of the diurnal corrective of events might enable him
to reach at any rate some conclusions not altogether without a useful
tincture of validity.
It was possible, moreover, to put certain conclusions in a form which
the development of the war must confirm or disprove, and it may be
interesting as a test of what was put forward as an essay in an essentially
practical psychology briefly to review these theoretical anticipations in the
light of what actually has happened.
19. Pp. 137, 138 supra.
20. It is important that it should be quite clear that we have been speaking here of the reaction of the
general body of a nation to the occurrence of war, and not of the reasons for which a given war
was undertaken. In England and in Germany the feeling of the people that the late war was just
and necessary was equally intense and equally a direct consequence of the danger to the herd it
represented. It was therefore a non-rational instinctive response without reference to objective
justice in either case. Had the threat to the herd on either side seemed less grave, opinion as to
the justice of the war would in that country have been cor­res­pon­ding­ly more divided. By her
calculated truculence in the years before the war Germany—intending doubtless to intimidate a
decaying people—had made it certain that when the threat to this country did come it should be
apprehended at once as dangerous to the last degree, and had thus herself organized the practical
unanimity of her chief enemy. All such reactions upon the outbreak of war are instinctively
determined. It is the burden of the statesman that his decision in a crisis in favour of war
automatically renders impossible rational confirmation by the people.
21. It is perhaps of interest to note in passing that war-time opinion and prejudice are char­ac­ter­is­ti­‐
cal­ly pro-national and anti-national, rather than anti-hostile and pro-hostile respectively. The
impulse that might have led an isolated German to defend the English at the expense of his
countrymen, or an isolated Englishman to defend the Germans at the expense of his countrymen,
was in its psychological essence anti-national and animated by no love of the enemy; it was an
instinctive revolt against his country, or rather the groups which in the process of social
segregation had come to represent it. Such terms, therefore, as pro-German, and in another
association pro-Boer, though doubtless convenient implements of abuse, were inexactly
descriptive psychologically. “Anti-English” would have been more just, but immensely less
effective, as vituperation, for the prejudice it was desired to decry was for the most part a
hostility not to the nation, but to its official embodiment. Probably, however, it was the very
element of injustice in the term pro-German that made it so satisfactory a vehicle for
exasperated feeling.
Psychological Anticipations
Table of Contents
The hypothesis was put forward that in the German people the reactions in
which the herd instinct was manifesting itself were in accordance with the
type to be seen in the predaceous social animals rather than the type which
seems to be characteristic of modern Western civilizations. The next step
was naturally to inquire whether the known characters of what we called
aggressive gre­gar­i­ous­ness were able to account for the observed German
peculiarities in reaction, and then to indicate what special features we might
expect to appear in Germany under the developing stress of war if our
hypothesis was sound.
Under the guidance of the hypothesis we found reason to believe that
the morale of the German people was of a special kind, and essentially
dependent for the remarkable vigour it then showed upon the possibility of
continued successful aggression. This suggestion was borne out by the long
series of offensive movements, increasing in weight and culminating in the
spring of 1918, in the great attacks on which Germany broke herself. From
the way in which these movements were announced and expected it became
evident that during an enforced defensive the morale of Germany declined
more rapidly than did that of her opponents. This was the essential
confirmation of the psychological view we had put forward. Apart from all
question of the strategic and merely military advantages of the offensive it
was plain that Germany’s moral need for the posture of attack was
peculiarly and char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly great. That she continually and convincedly
—though perhaps injudiciously—declared the war to be one of defence
only, that she had everything to hope from disunion among her enemies and
little to fear from disunion among her friends, that she was in assured
possession of the most important industrial districts of France, that she had
successfully brought into something like equilibrium the resistance to the
effects of the blockade, and had proved like her animal prototypes only to
be more fierce and eager when she was hungry—all of these strong
objective reasons for fighting a defensive delaying war were over-whelmed
by the crucially important requirement of keeping the aggressive spirit
strung up to the highest pitch. The fighting spirit must be that of attack and
conquest, or it would break altogether. Our hypothesis, therefore, enabled
us to foresee that she would have to go on torturing her declining frame
with one great effort after another until she had fought herself to a standstill,
and then, if her enemies but just succeeded in holding her, her morale would
begin to decline, and to decline with terrible abruptness. We were even able
to regard it as probable that for all the talk of the war on the German side
being defensive only, for all the passionate devotion to the Fatherland and
the profound belief in the sanctity of its frontiers, as a matter of cold and
dry reality, if it came to invasion, Germany would not be defended by its
inhabitants.
Another subject upon which the psychological method of inquiry
professed to yield some degree of foresight was that—at that time—fruitful
cause of discussion, the objects for which the enemies of Germany were
fighting. Opinion at that time was much ruled by the conception of a
Germany gradually forced back upon and beyond her frontiers, grim,
implacable, irreconcilable, her national spirit energized and made resilient
by humiliation, and clinging unconquerably to the thought of a resurrection
of her glory through the faith of her sons. Under the influence of ideas of
this romantic type, it was not always possible for opinion to be very precise
upon what was to be made the object of the war in order to secure from
Germany the safety of the civilizations opposed to hers. Psychologically,
however, the moral condition of a beaten Germany seemed relatively easy
to foretell. If the behaviour of other predaceous types was of any value as a
guide, it was plain that a sound beating alone and in itself would produce all
the effect that was needful. There could be no fear of the national morale
being invigorated by defeat, but an enemy successfully invading Germany
would necessarily find the one essential condition on which any subsequent
security must be set up—the replacement of the aggressive and predaceous
morale by complete moral collapse. These were the considerations that
enabled one to say that considered psychologically the mere beating of
Germany was the single object of the war. The completeness of the moral
collapse which accompanied her beating seems to have been found
remarkable and astonishing by very many, but can have been so only to
those who had not interested themselves in the psychological aspects of the
problem.
In stating, in 1915, these conclusions as to the social type and moral
structure of Germany and in formulating the indications they seemed to
give of the course of future events, it was necessary to make considerable
deductions from the precision and detail with which one made one’s small
efforts at foresight in order to allow for the effects one’s pro-national bias
may have had in deflecting judgment. Enough, however, was stated
definitely to enable the progress of events very clearly to confirm or
disprove the conclusions arrived at. The not inconsiderable correspondences
between the theoretical considerations and the actual development of events
is perhaps enough to suggest that the method of speculation used has a
certain validity.
In considering the psychological case of England we came to the
conclusion that her morale depended on mechanisms different from those
which were in action in Germany, and indicating that social development
had in her followed a different type. We saw reason to suppose that this
social type would be very much more resistant to discouragement and
disaster than the aggressive type embodied in Germany, and that if England
won the war it would be by virtue of the toughness of her nerve. The form
of social organization represented by England was seen to contain a germ of
strength not possessed by her enemy, an intensely resistant nucleus of moral
power that underlay the immeasurable waste and the inextricable confusion
of her methods. If the moral structure of Germany was of its kind fully
developed, it was also primitive; if the moral structure of England was
embryonic, it was also integrative and still capable of growth. If it was very
obvious at that time how immensely responsive to intelligent and conscious
direction the moral powers of England would have been, if it was obvious
how largely such direction would have diminished the total cost of the war
in time and suffering, if it was obvious that such direction would not, and
almost certainly could not, be forthcoming, it was equally clear that the
muddle, the mediocrity, the vociferation with which the war was being
conducted were phenomena within the normal of the type and evolutionary
stage of our society, and were not much more than froth on the surface of an
invisible and unsounded stream.
If one had been content to estimate the moral condition of England at
that time by the utterance of all ordinary organs of expression—public
speeches, leading articles and so forth—one could scarcely have failed to
reach the gloomiest conclusions. So common were ill-will, acrimony,
suspicion and intrigue, so often was apparent self-possession mere languor,
and apparent energy mere querulousness, so strong, in fact, were all the
ordinary evidences of moral disintegration that an actual collapse might
have seemed almost within sight. As a matter of fact, from the very
necessities of her social type, in England the organs of public expression
were char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly not representative of the national mood; probably far
less than were those of Germany representative of the German mood. Thus
it came about that the actual driving force—the will of the common man, as
inflexible as it was inarticulate—remained intact behind all the ambiguous
manifestations which went forth as the voice of England. This is the
psychological secret of the socialized type of gregarious animal. As evolved
in England to-day, this type cannot attain to the conscious direction of its
destiny, and cannot submit to the fertilizing discipline of science; it cannot
select its agents or justly estimate their capacity, but it possesses the power
of evolving under pressure a common purpose of great stability. Such a
common purpose is necessarily simple, direct, and barely conscious; high-
flown imperialism and elaborate policies are altogether beyond its range,
and it can scarcely accomplish an intellectual process more complex than
the recognition of an enemy. The conviction that the hostility between
England and Germany was absolute and irreconcilable, and the war a matter
of national life and death, was just such a primitive judgment as could be
arrived at, and it gave rise to a common purpose as stable as it was
simple.﻿22
The relatively complex national consciousness that is necessary to
evolve a positive movement of national expansion or a definite policy of
colonization and aggrandisement seems to be hostile to the development of
a common purpose of the most powerful kind. Thus we find moral vigour
and stability attaining their greatest strength in a nation that has no definite
theory of its destiny, and that is content to allow confusion of thought and
vagueness of aim to be common and even characteristic in its public life. In
such a people national consciousness is of the most elementary kind, and
only the simplest conceptions can be effectively apprehended by it.
Negative judgments are in general simpler than positive ones, and the
simplest of all, perhaps, is the identification of an enemy. The history of
England seems to show with remarkable constancy that the national
consciousness has been in its most effective action limited to those
elementary conceptions which have been simple and broad enough to
manifest themselves in a common purpose of great strength and tenacity.
England has, in fact, been made by her enemies. Rightly or wrongly, Philip
of Spain, Louis XIV, Napoleon, Germany, impressed themselves on the
elementary consciousness of England as enemies, and excited in response a
unity of purpose that was char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly as immune from the effects of
discouragement, disaster and fatigue as it was independent of reasoned
political theory.
Each of these enemies, in contrast with England, had the definite
consciousness of a more or less elaborate political aim, and some of them
embodied principles or methods in advance of those which obtained in
England in corresponding fields. Whatever loftiness of aim they had availed
them no more than their respect for principle and the intellect, and they all
came to regret the mostly inadvertent effect of their pretensions in exciting
the hostility of a people capable of an essential moral cohesion. The power
of England would seem to have resided almost exclusively in this capacity
for developing under pressure a common purpose. The immense moral
energy she has been able to put forth in a crisis has enabled her to inspire
such leaders as she has needed for the moment, but she has been char­ac­ter­‐
is­ti­cal­ly infertile in the production of true leaders who could impose
themselves upon her efficiently. Thus among her great men, for one true
leader, such as Oliver Cromwell, who failed, there have been a score of
successful mouthpieces and instruments of her purpose, such as Pitt and
Wellington. The vigour of her great moments has always been the product
of moral unity induced by the pressure of a supposed enemy, and therefore
it has always tended to die down when the danger has passed. As the
greatness of her leaders has been less a product of their own genius than
that of the moral stimulus which has reached them from the nation at large,
when the stimulus has been withdrawn with the cessation of danger, these
men have almost invariably come to appear in times of peace of a less
dominating capacity than their performance during the stress of war might
have indicated. The great wars of England have usually, then, been the
affair of the common man; he has supplied the impulse that has made and
the moral vigour that has conducted them, he has created and inspired his
leaders and has endowed his representatives in the field and on the sea with
their stern and enduring pugnacity.
These conclusions have been confirmed by the way in which the war
progressed and came to an end. The war became more and more fully a
contest of moral forces until it ended in the unique event of a surrender
practically unconditional that was not preceded by a total physical defeat.
German morale proved throughout extremely sensitive to any suspension of
the aggressive posture, and showed the unsuitability of its type in modern
conditions by undergoing at the mere threat of disaster a disintegration so
absolute that it must remain a classical and perfect example in the records
of psychology. There can be no doubt that had there been among her
enemies the least understanding of her moral type and state, her collapse
could have been brought about with comparative ease at a much earlier
date. English morale, on the other hand, seemed actually to be invigorated
by defeat, and even remained untouched by the more serious trials of
uninspired and mediocre direction, of ill-will, petty tyranny, and confusion.
The confrontation in war of two types of social structure differing so
radically and by such clearly defined characters as did Germany and
England was, as has been already suggested, a remarkable instance of
statecraft being forced into a region of very much greater reality than that in
which it usually operates. The historical scale of events, with its narrow
range, its reckoning by dynasties and parliaments, its judgments in terms of
tribal censure and approbation, was found momentarily to march with the
biological scale where events are measured by the survival or extinction of
species, where time acquires a new meaning, and the individual man,
however conspicuous historically, takes on the insect-like sameness of his
fellows. Here was an experiment set out in Nature’s laboratory, and for the
first time the issues were so narrowly focussed as to be within the
apprehension of the very subjects of the research. The matter to be tested
concerned the whole validity of gre­gar­i­ous­ness. Two types were confronted.
In one the social habit had taken a form that limited the participation of the
individual in the social unit; a rigid segregation of the society made it
impossible to admit the moral equality of its members, and resulted in the
activities of the social instinct being available solely through leadership; it
was a led society where internal cohesion and integration were replaced by
what we may call external cohesion—a migratory society developing its
highest manifestations of the herd when it was being successfully led. In the
other type the social habit had tended, however slowly and incompletely,
towards the unlimited participation of the individual in the social unit. The
tendency of the society was towards integration and internal cohesion; it
was therefore unaggressive, refractory to leadership, and apt to develop its
highest herd manifestations when threatened and attacked. The former
enjoyed all the advantages of a led society. It was tractable, and its leaders
could impose upon it a relative uniformity of outlook and a high standard of
general training. The latter had no advantage save the potentiality—and it
was little more—of unlimited internal cohesion. It was intractable to
leadership, and in consequence knowledge and training were limited and
extremely localized within it; it had no approach to unity of outlook, and its
interests were necessarily concentrated on its internal rather than its
external relations.
If the former type proved the stronger, any progressive evolution of
society in a direction that promised the largest extension of human powers
would become very, improbable; the internal cohesion of social units would
have appeared to be subject to limits, and the most hopeful prospective
solution of human difficulties would have vanished. Conceivably accidental
factors might have decided the issue of the experiment and left the principle
still in doubt. As it happened, every element of chance that intruded went
against the type that ultimately proved the stronger, and in the final decision
the moral element was so conspicuously more significant than the physical
that the experiment has yielded a result which seems to be singularly
conclusive and unexceptionable.﻿23
The result of the experiment has been decisive, and it is still a
possibility that the progressive integration of society will ultimately yield a
medium in which the utmost needs of the individual and of the race will be
reconciled and satisfied. Had the more primitive social type—the migratory,
aggressive society of leadership and the pack—had this proved still the
master of the less primitive socialized and integrative type, the ultimate
outlook for the race would have indeed been black. This is by no means to
deny that German civilization had a vigour, a respect for knowledge, and
even a benignity within which comfortable life was possible. But it is to
assert that it was a regression, a choice of the easy path, a surrender to the
tamer platitudes of the spirit that no aggressive vigour could altogether
mask. To live dangerously was supposed to be its ideal, but dread was the
very atmosphere it breathed. Its armies could be thrown into hysterical
convulsions by the thought of the franc-tireur, and the flesh of its leaders
made to creep by such naïve and transpontine machinations as its enemies
ambitiously called propaganda. The minds that could make bugbears out of
such material were little likely to attempt or permit the life of arduous and
desperate spiritual adventure that was in the mind of the philosopher when
he called on his disciples to live dangerously.
This great experiment was conducted under the very eyes of humanity,
and the conditions were unique in this that they would have permitted the
effective intervention of the conscious human will. As it happened the
evolution of society had not reached a stage at which an informed and
scientific statecraft was possible. The experiment, therefore, went through
without any general view of the whole situation being attained. Had such
been possible, there can be no doubt at all that the war could have been
shortened enough to keep the world back from the neighbourhood of
spiritual and even material bankruptcy in which it finds itself to-day. The
armed confrontation of the two types, while it has yielded a result that may
well fill us with hope, took place at a moment of human evolution when it
was bound to be immensely expensive. Material development had far
exceeded social development, mankind, so to say, had become clever
without becoming wise, and the war had to be fought as a purely destructive
effort. Had it come at a later stage of evolution, so great a mobilization of
social power as the war caused might have been taken advantage of to unify
the nation to a completely coherent structure which the cessation of the
external stimulating pressure would have left firmly and nobly established.
22. There can be little doubt that national consciousness with regard to the war was very much less
developed in this country than in Germany. The theory of his country’s purpose in the war was
far less a matter of interest and speculation to the average Englishman than it was to the average
German. The German was far more fully aware of the relation the situation bore to general
politics and to history, and was much more preoccupied with the defence of his country’s case
by rational methods and accepted principles, and he displayed from the first great faith in the
value of a propaganda which should appeal to reason. Clumsy and futile as so much of this
intellectual effort was ultimately seen to be, it did show that the interest in national affairs was
more conscious and elaborate, and stood from the intellectual point of view at a higher level
than it did in England.
23. Anxiety has frequently been expressed since the arm­is­tice of Novem­ber, 1918, as to whether
Germany has properly assim­i­lat­ed the lesson of her defeat, and undergone the desired change of
heart. In the face of such doubts it is well to remember that there is another conclusion about the
assimilation of which there need be no anxiety. It is at any rate clearly proved that Germany’s
enemies were able to beat her in spite of all the disadvantages of exterior lines, divided counsels,
divergent points of view and inadequate preparation. The prestige of invulnerability need never
be allowed again to accumulate about a social group of the aggressive migratory type, and to sit
like an incubus upon a terrorized world.
After the War
Table of Contents
The psychological situation left by the conclusion of the war is likely to
attract an increasing amount of attention as time passes, and it may be of
interest to examine it in the light of the principles that we have been making
use of in dealing with the war.
It is a fact fundamental in psychology that the state of war furnishes the
most powerful of all stimuli to the social instinct. It sets in motion a tide of
common feeling by the power of which union and energy of purpose and
self-sacrifice for the good of the social unit become possible to a degree
unknown under any other circumstances. The war furnished many instances
of the almost miraculous efficacy of this stimulus. Perhaps the most
effective example of all, even by the side of the steely fortitude of France
and the adventurous desperation of England, was the fact that the dying
Austrian Empire could be galvanized for four years into aggressive gestures
lifelike beyond simulation.
The effect of this great liberation of feeling was to supersede the
precarious equilibrium of society by a state very much more stable. Before
the war moral power had come to the individual chiefly from the lesser
herds in which he took part, and but little from the nation as a whole.
Society had the appearance of stability because the forces at work were
relatively small in proportion to the inertia of the whole fabric. But the
actual firmness of the structure was small, and the individual led a life
emotionally thin and tame because the social feelings were localized and
faint. With the outbreak of war the national unit became the source of moral
power, social feeling became wide in its basis and strong in intensity. To the
individual life became more intense and more significant, and in essence, in
spite of horror and pain, better worth living; the social fabric, moreover,
displayed a new stability and a capacity for resisting disturbances that
would have effectually upset its equilibrium in time of peace. The art of
government, in fact, became actually easier to practise, though it had a
superficial appearance of being more difficult from the comparative rapidity
with which the progress of events unmasked the quack. Successful
practitioners were, it will be remembered, always ready to call attention to
the unprecedented difficulty of their labours, while shrewdly enough
profiting by the fact that in the actual tasks of government—the creation of
interest, the development of unity and the nourishing of impulse—their
difficulties had wholly disappeared.
With the cessation of war this great stream of moral power began
rapidly to dry up at its source. Thinly continuing to trickle for a time as it
were from habit, it is already almost dry. There is doubtless a tendency
among responsible personages to persuade themselves that it still flows
with all the power that made the war a veritable golden age of government.
Such a persuasion is natural and fully to be expected. It would be difficult
for those who have directed with whatever want of skill a power so great to
avoid coming in time to be a little confused between the direction of power
and the production of it, and to think that they still command the moral
resources which war gave so abundantly. Such a mistake is likely to prove
one of the elements of danger, though perhaps only a minor one, in the
present situation.
Western society, with perhaps even Western civilization, is in a situation
of great interest to the sociologist, and probably also of some considerable
danger. There are certain chief elements of danger which we may attempt to
define.
First, with the end of the war the mental orientation of the individual
has undergone a great change. National feeling is no longer able to supply
him with moral vigour and interest. He must turn once more to his class for
what the nation as a whole has been so much more efficiently supplying.
Life has regained for him much of its old tameness, the nation in which he
has lived vividly during the war is resuming its vagueness and becoming
once more merely the state, remote and quasi-hostile. But the war has
shown him what interest and moral vigour are in life, and he will not easily
accept the absence of these; he has acquired the appetite for them, he has,
so to speak, tasted blood. The tasteless social dietary of pre-war England is
not likely to satisfy his invigorated palate.
Secondly, the transition from war to peace is in an imperfectly
organized society a process necessarily dangerous because it involves the
change from a condition of relative moral stability to one of relative moral
instability. To get back to the precise state of delicately balanced but
essentially insecure equilibrium of society before the war would seem, in
fact, already shown to be impossible. The war ran its course without any
attempt being made to replace the system of class segregation, through
which the social instinct works in our society, by any more satisfactory
mechanism. Before the war class segregation had reached a condition in
which the individual had ceased to be conscious of the national unit as
possessing any practical significance for himself while his class was the
largest unit he was capable of recognizing as a source of moral power and
an object of effort. There was no class which as such and in relation to other
classes was capable of submitting to any restraint or self-sacrifice in the
interests of the nation as a whole. Of course, in each case it was possible for
a class by a very easy process of rationalization to show that its interests
were those of the nation at large, but this was merely the effect of the moral
blindness to which class segregation inevitably leads. Since every one of us
is classified somehow, it is not easy to grasp how completely class
segregation obtains throughout our society, and how fully in times of peace
it replaces national unity. Those occupying the lower social strata may be
very fully aware of the intensity of class feeling and how complete a
substitute for national feeling it affords at the upper end of the social scale,
just as those in the upper strata may be very much alive to the class
bitterness of their inferiors; but it is difficult for both to believe how
complete are segregation and its consequences throughout the whole social
gamut.
It is to this state of society that the return from the relative unity of war
must be. The few conventional restraints upon the extremity of class feeling
that were in any kind of activity before the war have been very greatly
weakened. Change has become familiar, violence has been glorified in
theory and shown to be effective in practice, the prestige of age has been
undermined, and the sanctity of established things defied.
It would, indeed, seem that to re-establish a society based solely on
class segregation, and relying upon the maintenance by it of a state of
equilibrium, will be a matter of some difficulty, and it will probably be a
mistake to depend altogether on fatigue, on the relaxation of feeling, and on
the celebration of victory as stabilizing forces.
Thirdly, there is no reason to suppose that the tendencies of society
which made possible so huge a disaster as the war have been in any way
corrected by it. Great efforts are being made at present to establish
conditions which will prevent future wars. Such efforts are entirely
admirable, but it must be remembered that after all war is no more than a
symptom of social defects. If, therefore, war as a symptom is merely
suppressed, valuable as that will be in controlling the waste and destruction
of life and effort, indeed indispensable to any kind of vigorous mental life,
it may leave untouched potentialities of disaster comparable even with war
itself.
It was pointed out many years ago in the essays incorporated in this
book that human society tends to restrict influence and leadership to minds
of a certain type, and that these minds tend to have special and
characteristic defects. Thus human affairs are in general under the direction
of a class of thought that is not merely not the best of which the mind is
capable, but tends to certain characteristic fallacies and to certain
characteristic kinds of blindness and incapacity. The class of mind to which
power in society gravitates I have ventured to describe as the stable type. Its
characteristic virtues and deficiencies have been described more than once
in this book, and we need do no more here than recall its vigour and
resistiveness, its accessibility to the voice of the herd and its resistiveness to
and even horror of the new in feeling and experience. The predominance of
this type has been rigorously maintained throughout the war. This is why
the war has been fought with a mere modicum of help from the human
intellect, and why the result must be regarded as a triumph for the common
man rather than for the ruling classes. The war was won by the inflexible
resolution of the common citizen and the common soldier. No country has
shown itself to be directed by the higher powers of the intellect, and
nowhere has the continued action of clear, temperate, vigorous, and
comprehensive thought made itself manifest, because even the utmost
urgency of warfare failed to dislodge the stable-minded type from its
monopoly of prestige and power. What the necessities of war could not do
there is certainly no magic in peace to bring about. Society, therefore, is
setting out upon what is generally regarded as a new era of hope without the
defect that made the war possible having in any degree been corrected.
Certain supposedly immutable principles such as democracy and national
self-determination are regarded by some as being mankind’s guarantees
against disaster. To the psychologist such principles represent mere vague
and fluctuating drifts of feeling, arising out of deep instinctive needs, but
not fully and powerfully embodying such; as automatic safeguards of
society their claims are altogether bogus, and cannot be ranked as
perceptibly higher than those of the ordinary run of political nostrums and
doctrinaire specifics. Society can never be safe until the direction of it is
entrusted only to those who possess high capacity rigorously trained and
acute sensitiveness to experience and to feeling.
Statecraft, after all, is a difficult art, and it seems unreasonable to leave
the choice of those who practise it to accident, to heredity, or to the
possession of the wholly irrelevant gifts that take the fancy of the crowd.
The result of such methods of selection is not even a mere random choice
from the whole population, but shows a steady drift towards the
establishment in power of a type in certain ways almost char­ac­ter­is­ti­cal­ly
unfitted for the tasks of government. The fact that man has always shirked
the heavy intellectual and moral labour of founding a scientific and truly
expert statecraft may contain a germ of hope for the future, in that it shows
where effort may be usefully expended. But it cannot but justify uneasiness
as to the immediate future of society. The essential factor in society is the
subordination of the individual will to social needs. Our statecraft is still
ignorant of how this can be made a fair and honest bargain to the individual
and to the state, and recent events have convinced a very large proportion of
mankind that accepted methods of establishing this social cohesion have
proved to them at any rate the worst of bargains.
The Instability of Civilization
Table of Contents
The foregoing considerations are enough, perhaps, to make one wonder
whether, after all, Western civilization may not be about to follow its
unnumbered predecessors into decay and dissolution. There can be no doubt
that such a suspicion is oppressing many thoughtful minds at the present
time. It is not likely to be dispelled by the contemplation of history or by
the nature of recent events. Indeed, the view can be maintained very
plausibly that all civilizations must tend ultimately to break down, that they
reach sooner or later a period when their original vigour is worn out, and
then collapse through internal disruption or outside pressure. It is even
believed by some that Western civilization already shows the evidences of
decline which in its predecessors have been the forerunners of destruction.
When we remember that our very short period of recorded history includes
the dissolution of civilizations so elaborate as those of the Chaldeans, the
Assyrians, the Egyptians, and of the Incas, that a social structure so
complex as that but lately disclosed in Crete could leave no trace in human
memory but a faint and dubious whisper of tradition, and that the dawn of
history finds civilization already old, we can scarcely resist the conclusion
that social life has, more often than one can bear to contemplate, swung
laboriously up to a meaningless apogee and then lapsed again into darkness.
We know enough of man to be aware that each of these unnumbered
upward movements must have been infinitely painful, must have been at
least as fruitful of torture, oppression, and anguish as the ones of which we
know the history, and yet each was no more than the swing of a pendulum
and a mere fruitless oscillation landing man once more at his starting point,
impoverished and broken, with perhaps more often than not no
transmissible vestige of his greatness.
If we limit our view to the historical scale of time and the exclusively
human outlook, we seem almost forced to accept the dreadful hypothesis
that in the very structure and substance of all human constructive social
efforts there is embodied a principle of death, that there is no progressive
impulse but must become fatigued, that the intellect can provide no
permanent defence against a vigorous barbarism, that social complexity is
necessarily weaker than social simplicity, and that fineness of moral fibre
must in the long run succumb to the primitive and coarse.
Let us consider, however, what comments may be made on this
hypothesis in view of the biological conceptions of man which have been
put forward in this book. At the same time an opportunity is afforded to put
in a more continuous form the view of society that has necessarily been
touched on so far in an interrupted and incidental way.
Whatever may be one’s view as to the larger pretensions that are put
forward as to the significance and destiny of man, there can be no doubt
that it is indispensable to recognize the full implications of his status as an
animal completely indigenous in the zoological series. The whole of his
physical and mental structure is congruous with that of other living beings,
and is constantly giving evidence of the complicated network of
relationships by which he is bound to them.
The accumulation of knowledge is steadily amplifying the range over
which this congruity with the natural order can be demonstrated, and is
showing more and more fully that practical understanding and foresight of
man’s behaviour are attained in proportion as this hypothesis of the
complete “naturalness” of man is adhered to.
The endowment of instinct that man possesses is in every detail cognate
with that of other animals, provides no element that is not fully represented
elsewhere, and above all—however little the individual man may be
inclined to admit it—is in no degree less vigorous and intense or less
important in relation to feeling and activity than it is in related animals. This
supremely important side of mental life, then, will be capable of continuous
illustration and illumination by biological methods. It is on the intellectual
side of mental life that man’s congruity with other animals is least obvious
at first sight. The departure from type, however, is probably a matter of
degree only, and not of quality. Put in the most general terms, the work of
the intellect is to cause delay between stimulus and response, and under
circumstances to modify the direction of the latter. We may suppose all
stimulation to necessitate response, and that such response must ultimately
occur with undiminished total energy. The intellect, however, is capable of
delaying such response, and within limits of directing its path so that it may
superficially show no relation to the stimulus of which it is the discharge. If
we extend the word stimulation to include the impulses arising from
instinct, and grant that the delaying and deflecting influence of the intellect
may be indefinitely enlarged, we have an animal in which instinct is as
vigorous as in any of its primitive ancestors, but which is superficially
scarcely an instinctive animal at all. Such is the case of man. His instinctive
impulses are so greatly masked by the variety of response that his intellect
opens to him that he has been commonly regarded until quite recent times
as a practically non-instinctive creature, capable of determining by reason
his conduct and even his desires. Such a conception made it almost
impossible to gain any help in human psychology from the study of other
animals, and scarcely less difficult to evolve a psychology which would be
of the least use in foreseeing and controlling the behaviour of man.
No understanding of the causes of stability and instability in human
society is possible until the undiminished vigour of instinct in man is fully
recognized.
The significance of this rich instinctive endowment lies in the fact that
mental health depends upon instinct finding a balanced but vigorous
expression in functional activity. The response to instinct may be infinitely
varied, and may even, under certain circumstances, be not more than
symbolic without harm to the individual as a social unit, but there are limits
beyond which the restriction of it to indirect and symbolic modes of
expression cannot be carried without serious effects on personality. The
individual in whom direct instinctive expression is unduly limited acquires
a spiritual meagreness which makes him the worst possible social material.
All recorded history shows that society developing under the conditions
that have obtained up to the present time—developing, that is to say,
spontaneously under the random influences of an uncontrolled environment
of the individual—does not permit to the average man that balanced
instinctive expression which is indispensable for the formation of a rich,
vigorous, and functionally active personality. It has been one of my chief
efforts in this book to show that the social instinct, while in itself the very
foundation of society, takes, when its action is undirected and uncontrolled,
a principal part in restricting the completeness and efficacy of the social
impulse. This instinct is doubly responsible for the defects which have
always inhered in society through the personal impoverishment of its
individual constituents. In the first place, it is the great agent by which the
egoistic instincts are driven into dwarfed, distorted, and symbolic modes of
expression without any regard for the objective social necessity of such
oppressive regulation. In the second place, it is an instinct which, while it
embodies one of the deepest and potentially most invigorating passions of
the soul, tends automatically to fall out of vigorous and constant activity
with the expansion of societies. It is the common character of large societies
to suffer heavily from the restrictive effect on personality of the social
instinct, and at the same time to suffer in the highest degree from the
debilitation of the common social impulse. Only in the smallest groups,
such as perhaps was early republican Rome, can the common impulse
inform and invigorate the whole society. As the group expands and ceases
to feel the constant pressure of an environment it no longer has to fear, the
common impulse droops, and the society becomes segregated into classes,
each of which a lesser herd within the main body and under the reciprocated
pressure of its fellows, now yields to its members the social feeling which
the main body can no longer provide. The passage of the small, vigorous,
homogeneous and fiercely patriotic group into the large, lax, segregated and
ultimately decadent group is a commonplace of history. In highly
segregated peoples the restrictive effect of the social instinct upon
personality has usually been to some extent relaxed, and a relatively rich
personal development has been possible. Such an amplification has always,
however, been limited to privileged classes, has always been accompanied
by a weakening of the national bond, and a tendency of the privileged class
to the sincere conviction that its interests are identical with those of the
nation. No nation has ever succeeded in liberating the personality of its
citizens from the restrictive action of the social instinct and at the same time
in maintaining national homogeneity and common impulse. In a small
community inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion among its individual members is free
enough to keep common feeling intense and vigorous. As the community
increases in size the general inter­com­mun­i­ca­tion becomes attenuated, and
with this common feeling is cor­res­pon­ding­ly weakened. If there were no
other mechanism capable of inducing common action than the faint social
stimulus coming from the nation at large, a segregated society would be
incapable of national enterprise. There is, however, another mechanism
which we may call leadership, using the word in a certain special sense. All
social groups are more or less capable of being led, and it is manifest that
the leadership of individuals, or perhaps more usually of classes, has been a
dominant influence in the expansion and enterprise of all civilizations of
which we have any knowledge. It is only in the small communities that we
can detect evidence of a true common impulse shared alike by all the
members acting as the cause of expansion. In larger groups, autocracies and
dynasties, Pharaohs and Nebuchadnezzars have imposed the impulse of
expansion upon the people, and by virtue of human susceptibility to
leadership have secured a virtual, though only a secondary, common
purpose.
Now leadership, potent as it undoubtedly is in calling forth the energy
of the social instinct, is essentially a limited and therefore an exhaustible
force. It depends for continued vigour upon successful enterprise. While it
is succeeding there are only wide limits to the moral power it can set free
and command, but in the face of misfortune and disaster its limitations
become obvious, and its power inevitably declines. On the other hand, the
moral power yielded by a true community of feeling, and not imposed by
leadership, is enormously more resistant and even indestructible by failure
and defeat. History gives many examples of the encounters of communities
of these two types—the led society and the homogeneous society—and in
spite of the invariably greater size and physical power of the former,
frequently records the astoundingly successful resistance its greater moral
vigour has given to the latter. This is perhaps why Carthage beat in vain
against little Rome, and certainly why Austria failed to subdue Switzerland.
All large societies that have had their day and have fallen from their
zenith by internal dissolution or outward attack have been given their
impulse to expansion by leadership and have depended on it for their moral
power. If society is to continue to depend for its enterprise and expansion
upon leadership, and can find no more satisfactory source of moral power, it
is, to say the least, highly probable that civilizations will continue to rise
and fall in a dreadful sameness of alternating aspiration and despair until
perhaps some lucky accident of confusion finds for humanity in extinction
the rest it could never win for itself in life.
There is, however, reason to suppose that susceptibility to leadership is
a characteristic of relatively primitive social types, and tends to diminish
with increasing social complexity. I have already called attention to and
attempted to define the apparently specific psychological differences
between Germany and England before and during the war. These
differences I attributed to variations in the type of reaction to herd instinct
shown by the two peoples. The aggressive social type represented by
Germany and analogous with that characteristic of the predaceous social
animals I regarded as being relatively primitive and simple. The socialized
type represented by England and presenting analogies with that
characteristic of many social insects I regarded as being, though imperfect
as are all the human examples available for study up to the present time,
more complex and less primitive, and representing at any rate a tendency
towards a satisfactory solution of the problems with which man as a
gregarious animal is surrounded. Now, it is a very obvious fact that the
susceptibility to leadership shown by Germany and by England before the
war was remarkably different. The common citizen of Germany was
strikingly open to and dependent upon discipline and leadership, and
seemed to have a positive satisfaction in leaving to his masters the
management of his social problems and accepting with alacrity the
solutions that were imposed upon him. The nation consequently presented a
close knit uniformity of purpose, a singleness of national consciousness and
effort that gave it an aspect of moral power of the most formidable kind. In
England a very different state of affairs prevailed. The common citizen was
apt to meet with indifference or resentment all efforts to change the social
structure, and it had long been a political axiom that “reform” should
always await an irresistible demand for it. Instances will be within every
one’s memory of politicians who met with crushing rebuffs through
regarding the supposed desirability of a reform as a justification for
imposing it. This almost sullen indifference to great projects and ideals, this
unwillingness to take thought in the interests of the nation and the empire in
spite of the apostolic zeal of the most eloquent political prophets, was
generally regarded as evidence of a weakness and slackness in the body
politic that could not but threaten disaster. And yet in the trials of the war
the moral stability of England showed itself to be superior to that of
Germany, which, in those rough waters, it jostled as mercilessly and as
effectually as did the brass pot the earthen crock in the fable.
During the war itself the submission to leadership that England showed
was characteristic of the socialized type. It was to a great extent
spontaneous, voluntary, and undisciplined, and gave repeated evidence that
the passage of inspiration was essentially from the common people to its
leaders rather than from the leaders to the common people. When the
current of inspiration sets persistently in this direction, as it unquestionably
did in England, it is very plain that the primitive type of leadership that has
led so many civilizations to disaster is no longer in unmodified action.
Germany has provided the most complete example of a culture of
leadership that has ever been recorded, and has gone through the phases of
her evolution with a precision which should make her case an illustration
classical for all history. With a people showing strongly the char­ac­ter­is­tics
of the aggressive social type, and a social structure deeply and rigidly
segregated, the nation was ideally susceptible to discipline and leadership,
and a leading class was available which possessed an almost superhuman
prestige. The opportunity given to leadership was exploited with great
energy and thoroughness and with an intelligence that by its intensity
almost made up for being nowhere really profound. With all these
advantages and the full uses of the huge resources science has made
available to intelligently concerted effort, an extremely formidable power
was created. The peoples of the socialized type towards whom from the first
its hostility was scarcely veiled were under obvious disadvantages in rivalry
with it. Their social type made it impossible for them to combine and
organize themselves against what was to them no more than a vaguely
hypothetical danger. Against peaceful conquest by Germany in the
industrial sphere England was therefore practically helpless, and to it would
probably in time have succumbed. Paradox as it may seem, there can be no
doubt that it was in war only that England could contend with Germany on
equal terms. Paradoxically again, it was war for which England was
reluctant and Germany was eager.
War brought Germany into contact with the, to her, inexplicable ferocity
of peoples of the socialized type under attack, and it was by this
disappointment that the first blow to her morale was struck. The wastage of
modern warfare must very soon have begun to impair the isolation and
prestige of the officer class through increasingly free importation from
without the pale. With this necessarily began to be sapped the absolute and
rigid segregation on which leadership of the type we are considering so
largely depends. At the same time, the general tendency of the increasing
pressure of war is to wear down class segregation over the whole social
field. This tendency which intensified and invigorated the morale of her
enemies would work steadily against the leadership morale of Germany.
These factors must no doubt be added to the moral need for aggression, the
exhaustion consequent upon forced offensives, and the specific intolerance
of failure and retreat that combined to bring down the strongest example of
the predaceous led society that history records.
Some Characters of a Rational Statecraft
Table of Contents
If the foregoing discussion has been sound, we may attribute the
impermanence of all civilizations of which we have knowledge to the
failure of society to preserve with increasing magnitude of its communities
a true homogeneity and a progressive integration of its elements. We have
seen that there is a type of society—distinguished here as the socialized
type—in which a trace of this integrative tendency can be detected at work.
Under the threat of war this tendency is accelerated in its action, and can
attain a moderate, though very far indeed from a complete, degree of
development. In the absence of such a powerful stimulus to homogeneity,
however, segregation reasserts itself, and the society, necessarily deprived
by its type of the advantages of leadership, becomes confused, disunited,
and threatened with disruption. It seems probable, indeed, that the
integrative tendency unaided and uncontrolled is too weak to surmount the
obstacles with which it has to contend, and to anticipate disruption by
welding the elements of society into a common life and common purpose. It
has already been repeatedly suggested that these difficulties, due as they are
to the human power of various reaction, can be met only by the
interposition of the intellect as an active factor in the problem of the
direction of society. In other words, the progressive evolution of society has
reached a point where the construction and use of a scientific statecraft will
become an indispensable factor in further development and the only means
of arresting the dreary oscillations between progress and relapse which have
been so ominous a feature in human history. We are perhaps in a position
to-day to suggest tentatively some of the principles on which such a
statecraft might be built.
It would have to be based on a full recognition of the biological status
of man, and to work out the tendencies which as an animal he is pursuing
and must pursue. If we have evidence of the only course evolution can
follow satisfactorily, then it is clear that any social and legislative effort not
in line with that course must be entirely wasted. Moreover, since we are
proceeding on the hypothesis that direct conscious effort is now a necessary
factor in the process, we must clear our minds of the optimistic determinism
which regards man as a special pet of nature and the pessimistic
determinism which would reduce him to a mere spectator of his destiny.
The trained and conscious mind must come to be regarded as a definite
factor in man’s environment, capable of occupying there a larger and larger
area.
Such a statecraft would recognize how fully man is an instinctive being
and how his mental vigour and stability depend entirely upon instinctive
expression being adequate. The tyrannous power of the social instinct in
repressing and distorting instinctive expression would have to be controlled
and directed with the purpose of enlarging the personal and social
effectiveness of the individual to the maximum extent; the social instinct
would no longer be left to operate on the individual under the random
direction of custom and habit, of fashion and social whim, or for the
satisfaction of the jealousy of age.
Perhaps most important of all, a scientific statecraft would understand
that the social instinct itself is as deep and powerful as any, and hungrily
demands intense and positive gratification and expression. The social
instinct drives the individual to seek union with some community of his
fellows. The whole national body is in the present state of society the
smallest unit in which the individual can find complete and permanent
satisfaction. As long as the average man’s sense of possession in the state is
kept so low as it is at present, as long as the sense of moral inequality
between himself and his fellows is so vigorously maintained, so long will
he continue to make his class rather than his nation the object of social
passion, and so long will society continue to breed within itself a principle
of death.
The exploration of the psychology of man’s social relations has been
left almost exclusively to the operation of what we may call the method of
prophetic intuition, and there is no branch of knowledge where the
fumbling methods of unclarified intuition have introduced more confusion.
Intuitions in the sphere of feeling—moral intuitions—have more than the
usual tendency of intuitions to appear as half-truths surrounded and
corrupted by fantasies of the seer and isolated from correlation with the rest
of knowledge. Let us consider, for example, the intuitional doctrine of
philosophic anarchism. The nucleus of truth in this is the series of perfectly
sound psychological conceptions that all social discipline should be, as
experienced by the individual, spontaneous and voluntary, that man
possesses the instinctive endowment which renders possible a voluntary
organization of society, and that in such a society order would be more
effectively maintained than under our present partially compulsory system.
This nucleus, which of course is not understood or expressed in these
definite psychological terms by the anarchist, is apt to be associated with
dogmas which altogether obscure its strictly unassailable truth.
Communism, again, is another doctrine which contains its core of
psychological truth, namely, that individual property is an economic
convention rather than a psychological necessity, and that social inequality
is an infirmity of the state rather than its foundation stone. As it is
exemplified in practice, however, communism is so deeply tainted by the
belief in an inverted class segregation of its own, and by a horror of
knowledge, that its elements of reality are wholly obscured and rendered
useless.
Every doctrine that makes disciples freely must contain in it some
embodiment of psychological reality, however exiguous; but where it has
been arrived at by the methods of the prophet, there is no reason to expect
that stress will be laid on the true more than on the false elements of the
doctrinal scheme, and experience shows that the inessential falsity has for
the expositor as many, if not more, attractions than the essential truth. An
expert statecraft would be able to identify the real elements of discovery
that were present in any fresh prophetic appeal to public belief, and would
be able at any rate to save the state from the condition of petrified
embarrassment into which it now falls when faced by social dogmas and
experiments which win attention and adhesion while at the same time they
outrage convention and common sense.
The examination of the functional satisfactoriness of society, which has
been a chief object of this book, has yielded a certain general body of
conclusions. An attempt will now be made to summarize these in a compact
and even dogmatic form, and to add what further element of definition
seems indispensable for clearness.
1. All societies of which we have any knowledge have shown two
general defects—they have proved unable to develop and direct more than a
small fraction of the resources they theoretically possess, and they have
been impermanent, so that time after time laborious accumulations of
constructive effort have been wasted. According to our analysis these
defects are due to the drift of power into the hands of the stable-minded
class, and to the derivation of moral power and enterprise from the
mechanisms of leadership and class segregation.
2. A society, in order to have stability and full functional effectiveness,
must be capable of a continually progressive absorption of its individual
members into the general body—an uninterrupted movement towards a
complete moral homogeneity.
3. A tendency towards a progressive integration of this kind can be
detected in society to-day by direct observation. It is weak and its effects
are fluctuating, so that there is doubt whether it can, unless directly
encouraged by human effort, counteract the forces which up till now have
always limited social evolution to movements of oscillation rather than of
true progress.
4. The only way in which society can be made safe from disruption or
decay is by the intervention of the conscious and instructed intellect as a
factor among the forces ruling its development.
This last doctrine has been repeatedly stated, but we have perhaps
scarcely defined it precisely enough to avoid misunderstanding. Some such
definition is our concluding task. Of all the elements we find in a general
examination of the whole biological series the human intellect is the one
that most clearly gives the impression of a new and intrusive factor. The
instinctive side of man, with its derivatives, such as his morals, his altruism,
and his aspirations, falls very easily into line with the rest of the natural
order, and is seen to be at work in modes which nowhere show any essential
new departure. The intellect, however, brings with it a capacity for purpose
as distinct from and additional to desire, and this does apparently introduce
a factor virtually new to the biological series. The part that the purposive
foresight of the intellect has been allowed to take in human affairs has
always been limited by instinctive inhibitions. This limitation has
effectually prevented man from defining his situation in the world, and he
remains a captive in the house of circumstance, restrained as effectually by
the mere painted canvas of habit, convention, and fear as by the solid
masonry of essential instinctive needs. Being denied the freedom, which is
its indispensable source of vigour, the intellect has necessarily failed to get
a clear, comprehensive, and temperate view of man’s status and prospects,
and has, of course, shrunk from the yet more exacting task of making itself
responsible for his destiny. Nowhere has been and is the domination of the
herd more absolute than in the field of speculation concerning man’s
general position and fate, and in consequence prodigies of genius have been
expended in obscuring the simple truth that there is no responsibility for
man’s destiny anywhere at all outside his own responsibility, and that there
is no remedy for his ills outside his own efforts. Western civilization has
recently lost ten millions of its best lives as a result of the exclusion of the
intellect from the general direction of society. So terrific an object lesson
has made it plain enough how easy it is for man, all undirected and
unwarned as he is, to sink to the irresponsible destructiveness of the
monkey.
Such ostensible direction as societies obtain derives its sanction from
one or more of three sources—the hereditary, the representative, and the
official. No direction can be effective in the way needed for the preservation
of society unless it comes from minds broad in outlook, deep in sympathy,
sensitive to the new and strange in experience, capable of resisting habit,
convention, and the other sterilizing influences of the herd, deeply learned
in the human mind and vividly aware of the world. Plainly enough, neither
of the classes enumerated above is any more likely to possess these char­ac­‐
ter­is­tics than any one else. To the representative and official classes there
even attaches, at any rate theoretically, the suspicion that the methods by
which they are chosen and promoted, while they obviously in no way
favour fitness, may actually tend to favour unfitness. Of the hereditary class
it may at any rate be said that while it does not in any special degree include
the fit, its composition is random and in no way tainted by popular
standards of suitability or by the prejudices and conventions of the
examination room. It would seem, then, that none of the methods by which
society appoints its directors shows any promise of working towards the
effective intervention of the intellect in social affairs. In reaching this
conclusion we have perhaps passed too lightly over the claims of the trained
official as a possible nucleus of an ultimate scientific statecraft. The
present-day controversies as to the nationalization of various industries give
an especial interest to this very problem, and illustrate how unpromising a
source of knowledge is political discussion. One group of advocates points
to the obvious economies of conducting industry on the great scale and
without the destructive effects of competition; the other group points to the
infirmities which always have infected officially conducted enterprises.
Both sides would seem to be perfectly right so far and both to be wrong
when the first goes on to affirm that governments as they now are can and
do conduct industrial affairs quite satisfactorily, and the second goes on to
affirm that the only mechanism by which society can get its work
effectively done is commercial competition, and that the only adequate
motive is greed. It seems to have escaped the notice of both parties to the
controversy that no civilized country has evolved, or begun to evolve, or
thought of evolving a method of selecting and training its public servants
that bears any rational relation to their fitness for the art of government. It is
not here denied that selection and training are both of them severe in many
countries. Mere severity, however, as long as it is quite without relevance, is
manifestly worthless. We are forced to the conclusion, therefore, that to
expect an effective statecraft to be evolved from the official, whether of the
Chinese, the Prussian, or any other type, is a mere dream. To encourage
such a hope would be to strengthen the grip of the unsatisfactory stable-
minded class upon the gullet of society. The evidence then shows that
among the mechanisms whereby the directors of society are chosen there is
none that favours that intervention of the conscious and instructed intellect
that we have suggested is necessary to the effective evolution of
civilization. Nowhere in the structure of society is there a class tending to
develop towards this goal. Since from the point of view of social
effectiveness segregation into classes has been entirely random, the
appearance of such a class would have been indeed an extraordinary
accident. Good as are the grounds for hoping that human society may
ultimately mature into a coherent structure possessed of comprehensive and
intelligent direction, it would be no more than idle optimism to suppose that
there is any institution or class now existing which promises to inspire a
fundamental reconstruction. If the effective intrusion of the intellect into
social affairs does happily occur, it will come from no organ of society now
recognizable, but through a slow elevation of the general standard of
consciousness up to the level at which will be possible a kind of
freemasonry and syndicalism of the intellect. Under such circumstances
free communication through class barriers would be possible, and an
orientation of feeling quite independent of the current social segregation
would become manifest.
Throughout the enormously long period during which modern man has
been established on the earth human society has been left to the
uncontrolled contention of constructive and destructive forces, and in the
long run the destructive have always proved the stronger. Whether the
general level of consciousness will reach the height necessary to give a
decisive predominance to constructive tendencies, and whether such a
development will occur in time to save Western civilization from the fate of
its predecessors, are open questions. The small segment of the social
process of which we have direct knowledge in the events of the day has no
very encouraging appearance. Segregation has reasserted itself effectively;
the dominion of the stable and resistive mind is as firmly established as
ever, and no less dull and dangerous; while it is plain how far, in the
atmosphere of relaxation and fatigue, the social inspiration of the common
man has sunk from the high constancy of spirit by which throughout the
long pilgrimage of war so many weary feet have been upborne, so many dry
lips refreshed.
The Behavior of Crowds: A Psychological Study
(Everett Dean Martin)
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Foreword
I. The Crowd and the Social Problem of To-day
II. How Crowds are Formed
III. The Crowd and the Unconscious
IV. The Egoism of the Crowd-Mind
V. The Crowd a Creature of Hate
VI. The Absolutism of the Crowd-Mind
VII. The Psychology of Revolutionary Crowds
VIII. The Fruits of Revolution—New Crowd-Tyrannies for Old
IX. Freedom and Government by Crowds
X. Education as a Possible Cure for Crowd-Thinking
Foreword
Table of Contents
Since the publication of Le Bons book, The Crowd, little has been added to
our knowledge of the mechanisms of crowd-behavior. As a practical
problem, the habit of crowd-making is daily becoming a more serious
menace to civilization. Events are making it more and more clear that,
pressing as are certain economic questions, the forces which threaten
society are really psychological.
Interest in the economic struggle has to a large extent diverted attention
from the significance of the problems of social psychology. Social
psychology is still a rather embryonic science, and this notwithstanding the
fact that psychiatry has recently provided us with a method with which we
may penetrate more deeply than ever before into the inner sources of
motive and conduct.
The remedy which I have suggested in Chapter X deserves a much more
extended treatment than I have given it. It involves one of the great mooted
questions of modern philosophical discussion. It is, however, not within the
province of this book to enter upon a discussion of the philosophy of
Humanism. The subject has been thoroughly thrashed over in philosophical
journals and in the writings of James, Schiller, Dewey, and others. It is
sufficient for my purpose merely to point out the fact that the humanist way
of thinking may provide us with just that educational method which will
break up the logical forms in which the crowd-mind intrenches itself.
Those who expect to find a prescribed formula or ideal scheme of
organization as a remedy for our social ills may feel that the solution to
which I have come—namely, a new educational method—is too vague. But
the problem of the crowd is really concerned with the things of the mind.
And if I am correct in my thesis that there is a necessary connection
between crowd-thinking and the various traditional systems of
intellectualist, absolutist, and rationalist philosophy, the way out must be
through the formation of some such habits of thinking as I have suggested.
E. D. M.
New York, October 10, 1919.
I.
The Crowd and the Social Problem of To-day
Table of Contents
Every one at times feels himself in the grip of social forces over which he
has no control. The apparently impersonal nature of these forces has given
rise to various mechanistic theories of social behavior. There are those who
interpret the events of history as by-products of economic evolution.
Others, more idealistic but determinists, nevertheless, see in the record of
human events the working out of a preordained plan.
There is a popular notion, often shared by scholars, that the individual
and society are essentially irreconcilable principles. The individual is
assumed to be by nature an antisocial being. Society, on the other hand, is
opposed in principle to all that is personal and private. The demands of
society, its welfare and aims, are treated as if they were a tax imposed upon
each and every one by something foreign to the natural will or even the
happiness of all. It is as if society as "thing-in-itself" could prosper in
opposition to the individuals who collectively constitute it.
It is needless to say that both the individual and the social, according to
such a view, are empty abstractions. The individual is, in fact, a social
entity. Strip him of his social interests, endowments, and habits, and the
very feeling of self, or "social me" as William James called it, vanishes and
nothing is left but a Platonic idea and a reflex arc. The social also is nothing
else than the manner in which individuals habitually react to one another.
Society in the abstract, as a principle opposed to individual existence, has
no more reality than that of the grin which Alice in Wonderland sees after
the famous Cheshire cat has vanished. It is the mere logical concept of
others in general, left leering at us after all the concrete others have been
thought away.
Much social thinking is of this cat-grin sort. Having abstracted from the
thought of self everything that is social, and from the idea of the social all
that has to do with concrete persons, the task remains to get pure grin and
pure cat together again in such a way that neither shall lose its identity in
the other. It is, of course, impossible to reconcile these mutually exclusive
abstractions either in theory or in practice. It is often difficult enough, even
with the aid of empirical thinking, to adjust our relations with the other
people about us. But on the Cheshire-cat hypothesis, the social problem can
never be solved, because it is not a real problem at all.
Since the individual is therefore a social being as such, and the social is
just a way of acting together, the social problem does not grow out of a
conflict between the self and an impersonal social principle. The conflicts
are, in fact, clashes among certain individuals and groups of them, or else—
and this is a subject to which social psychology has paid insufficient
attention—the social struggle is in certain of its phases a conflict within the
personal psyche itself. Suppose that the apparently impersonal element in
social behavior is not impersonal in fact, but is, for the most part, the result
of an impersonal manner of thinking about ourselves. Every psychic fact
must really be an act of somebody. There are no ideas without thinkers to
think them, no impersonal thoughts or disembodied impulses, no
"independent" truths, no transcendental principles existing in themselves
and outside of human heads. Life is everywhere reaction; it is nowhere a
mere product or a passive registering of impersonal forces. It is the
organisms behavior in the presence of what we call environment.
Individual opinions cannot be tossed into a common hat, like small
coins. Though we may each learn from the others, there is no magic by
which our several thoughts can sum themselves up into a common fund of
public opinion or super-personal whole which thinks itself, there being no
collective head to think it. No matter how many people think and behave as
I do, each of us knows only his own thought and behavior. My thought may
be about you and what I judge you are thinking, but it is not the same as
your thought. To each the social is nil except in so far as he experiences it
himself, and to each it is something unique when viewed from within. The
uniformity and illusion of identity—in short, the impersonal aspect of social
thinking and activity appears only when we try to view social behavior
from without—that is, as objectively manifest in the behavior of others.
What then is the secret of this impersonal view of the social? Why do
we think of ourselves socially in the same impersonal or external way that
we think of others? There is an interesting parallel here in the behavior of
certain types of mental pathology. There are neurotics who commonly feel
that certain aspects of their behavior are really not of their own authorship,
but come to them as the result of influences acting from without. It was
such phenomena in part that led psychologists of a generation ago to
construct the theory of "multiple personality." It is known now that the
psychic material which in these cases appears to be automatic, and
impersonal, in the sense that it is not consciously willed, is really motivated
by unconscious mechanisms. The apparently "impersonal" behavior of the
neurotic is psychologically determined, though unconsciously.
May there not be a like unconscious psychic determination of much that
is called social behavior? It is my thesis that this is so, and that there are
certain types of social behavior which are characterized by unconscious
motivation to such a degree that they may be placed in a definite class of
psychological phenomena. This group of phenomena I have, following to
some extent the terminology of Le Bon, called "The Crowd." I wish there
were a more exact word, for it is very difficult to use the word crowd in its
psychological sense without causing some confusion in the mind of the
reader. In ordinary speech "a crowd" is any gathering of people. In the
writings of Le Bon, as we shall see, the word has a special meaning,
denoting not a gathering of people as such, but a gathering which behaves
in a certain way which may be classified and described psychologically as
"crowd mentality." Not every gathering of people shows this crowd-
mentality. It is a characteristic which appears under certain circumstances.
In this discussion the word "crowd" must be understood to mean the
peculiar mental condition which sometimes occurs when people think and
act together, either immediately where the members of the group are present
and in close contact, or remotely, as when they affect one another in a
certain way through the medium of an organization, a party or sect, the
press, etc.
The crowd while it is a social phenomenon differs greatly from the
social as such. People may be social—the family is an example of this—
without being a crowd either in thought or action. Again a crowd—a mob is
an example of this—may be distinctly antisocial, if we attach any ethical
meaning to the term. Both the individual and society suffer, as we shall see,
from crowd-behavior. I know of nothing which to-day so menaces not only
the values of civilization, but also—it is the same thing in other words,
perhaps—the achievement of personality and true knowledge of self, as the
growing habit of behaving as crowds.
Our society is becoming a veritable babel of gibbering crowds. Not only
are mob outbreaks and riots increasing in number, but every interest,
patriotic, religious, ethical, political, economic, easily degenerates into a
confusion of propagandist tongues, into extravagant partisanship, and
intemperance. Whatever be the ideal to which we would attain, we find the
path of self-culture too slow; we must become army worms, eating our way
to the goal by sheer force of numbers. The councils of democracy are
conducted on about the psychological level of commercial advertising and
with about the same degree of sincerity. While it cannot be said that the
habit of crowd-making is peculiar to our times—other ages, too, have
indulged in it—it does seem that the tendency to crowd-mindedness has
greatly increased in recent years.
Whether it is temperance, or justice, or greater freedom, moral
excellence or national glory, that we desire—whether we happen to be
conservatives or radicals, reformers or liberals, we must become a cult,
write our philosophy of life in flaming headlines, and sell our cause in the
market. No matter if we meanwhile surrender every value for which we
stand, we must strive to cajole the majority into imagining itself on our side.
For only with the majority with us, whoever we are, can we live. It is
numbers, not values, that count—quantity not quality. Everybody must
"moral-crusade," "agitate," "press-agent," play politics. Everyone is forced
to speak as the crowd, think as the crowd, understand as the crowd. The
tendency is to smother all that is unique, rare, delicate, secret. If you are to
get anywhere in this progressive age you must be vulgar, you must add to
your vulgarity unction. You must take sides upon dilemmas which are but
half true, change the tempo of your music to ragtime, eat your spiritual food
with a knife, drape yourself in the flag of the dominant party. In other
words, you must be "one hundred per cent" crowd man.
The effect of all this upon the individual is that he is permitted neither to
know nor to belong to himself. He becomes a mere banner toter. He must
hold himself ever in readiness to wiggle-waggle in the perpetual Simon-
says-thumbs-up game which his crowd is playing. He spends his days
playing a part which others have written for him; loses much of his
genuineness and courage, and pampers himself with imitation virtues and
second-hand truths.
Upon the social peace the effect is equally bad. Unnecessary and
meaningless strife is engendered. An idolatry of phrases is enthroned. A
silly game of bullying and deception is carried on among contending
crowds, national, religious, moral, social. The great truths of patriotism,
morality, and religion become hardly more than caricatures—mere
instruments of crowds for putting their rivals on the defensive, and securing
obeisance from the members of the crowd itself, easily repudiated in the
hour of the crowds victory. The social harmony is menaced by numerous
cliques and parties, ranging in size all the way from the nation-crowd down
to the smallest sect, each setting out like a band of buccaneers bent upon
nothing but its own dominance, and seeking to justify its piratical conduct
by time-worn platitudes.
That which is meant by the cry of the Russian Revolution, "All power to
the soviets," is peculiar neither to Russia nor to the working class. Such in
spirit is the cry of every crowd, for every crowd is, psychologically
considered, a soviet. The industrial and political danger of the soviet would
amount to little or nothing, were it not for the fact that the modern world is
already spiritually sovietized. The threatened soviet republic is hardly more
than the practical result of a hundred years of crowd-thinking on almost
every subject. Whether capitalist or proletarian, reformer or liberal, we have
all along been behaving and thinking in soviet fashion. In almost every
important matter in life we have ignored Emersons warning that we must
rely upon ourselves, and have permitted ourselves to behave and think as
crowds, fastening their labels and dogmas upon our spirits and taking their
shibboleths upon our tongues, thinking more of the temporary triumph of
our particular sect or party than of the effect of our behavior upon ourselves
and others.
There is certainly nothing new in the discovery that our social behavior
is not what it ought to be. Mediæval thinkers were as much aware of the
fact as we are, but they dismissed the social problem with the simple
declaration of the "sinfulness of human nature." Nineteenth-century
utilitarians felt that the social problem could be solved by more enlightened
and more reasonable behavior on the part of individuals. Recent social
psychology—of which the writings of Prof. William McDougall are
probably the best example, has abandoned the theory that social behavior is
primarily governed by reason or by considerations of utility. A better
explanation of social phenomena is found in instinct. It is held that the true
motives of social behavior are pugnacity, the instinct of self-appreciation or
self-debasement, of sex, gregariousness, and the like. Each instinct with its
"affective emotion" becomes organized through various complex reactions
to the social environment, into fairly well established "sentiments." These
sentiments are held to be the controlling social forces. As McDougall says:
We may say then that directly or indirectly the instincts are the prime
movers of all human activity; by the conative or impulsive force of
some instinct (or of some habit derived from an instinct), every train of
thought, however cold and passionless it may seem, is borne along
toward its end, and every bodily activity is initiated and sustained. The
instinctive impulses determine the ends of all activities and supply the
driving-power by which all mental activities are sustained; and all the
complex intellectual apparatus of the most highly developed mind is
but a means toward those ends, is but the instrument by which these
impulses seek their satisfactions.... These impulses are the mental
forces that maintain and shape all the life of individuals and societies,
and in them we are confronted with the central mystery of life and
mind and will.
This is all very good so far as it goes. But I confess that I am somewhat
at loss to know just what it explains so far as crowd-behavior is concerned.
Do these instincts and sentiments operate the same under all social
conditions? Are some of them suppressed by society and forced to seek
their satisfaction in roundabout ways? If so, how? Moreover, I fail to find in
present-day social psychology, any more than in the writings of Herbert
Spencer, Sumner, Ward, and others, any clear distinction between the
characteristic behavior of crowds and other forms of social activity. Only
the school of Le Bon has shown any definite appreciation of these facts. It
is to Le Bon, therefore, in spite of the many and just criticisms of his work,
that we must turn for a discussion of the crowd as a problem apart from
social psychology in general. Le Bon saw that the mind of the crowd
demanded special psychological study, but many of the psychological
principles which he used in solving the problem were inadequate to the
task. Certain of his conclusions were, therefore, erroneous. Since the close
of the nineteenth century, however, psychology has gained much insight
into the secret springs of human activity. Possibly the most significant
achievement in the history of this science is Freuds work in analytical
psychology.
So much light has been thrown upon the unconscious by Freud and
other analytical psychologists, that psychology in all its branches is
beginning to take some of Freuds discoveries into account. Strictly
speaking, psychoanalysis is a therapeutic method. It has, however, greatly
enriched our knowledge of mental pathology, and thus much of its data has
become indispensable to general psychology and to social psychology in
particular.
In his book the Interpretation of Dreams, Freud has shown that there
exist in the wish-fulfilling mechanisms of dream formation certain definite
laws. These laws undoubtedly underlie and determine also many of our
crowd-ideas, creeds, conventions, and social ideals. In his book, Totem and
Taboo, Freud has himself led the way to the application of the analytical
psychology to the customs and ideas of primitive groups. I am sure that we
shall find, as we proceed, that with the analytical method we shall gain an
entirely new insight into the causes and meaning of the behavior of crowds.
II.
How Crowds are Formed
Table of Contents
In his well-known work on the psychology of the crowd Le Bon noted the
fact that the unconscious plays a large part in determining the behavior of
crowds. But he is not clear in his use of the term "unconscious." In fact, as
Graham Wallas justly points out, his terminology is very loose indeed. Le
Bon seems to have made little or no attempt to discover in detail the
processes of this unconscious. In company with most psychologists of his
time, he based his explanation upon the theory of "suggestion and
imitation." He saw in the unconscious merely a sort of mystical "common
humanity," from which he derived his—also mystical—idea of a common
crowd-mind which each individual in the crowd in some unexplained
manner shared. He says:
The most striking peculiarity presented by a psychological crowd is
the following: Whoever be the individuals that compose it, however
like or unlike be their mode of life, their occupations, their character or
their intelligence, the fact that they have been transformed into a
crowd puts them in possession of a sort of collective mind which
makes them feel, think, and act in a manner quite different from that in
which each individual of them would feel, think, and act were he in a
state of isolation....
It is easy to prove how much the individual forming part of a
crowd differs from the isolated individual, but it is less easy to
discover the causes of this difference.
To obtain, at any rate, a glimpse of them it is necessary in the first
place to call to mind the truth established by modern psychology, that
unconscious phenomena play an altogether preponderating part, not
only in organic life, but also in the operations of intelligence.... Our
conscious acts are the outcome of an unconscious substratum created
in the mind in the main by heredity. This substratum consists of
innumerable characteristics handed down from generation to
generation which constitute the genius of the race....
It is more especially with respect to those unconscious elements
which constitute the genius of a race that all the individuals belonging
to it resemble each other.... It is precisely these general qualities of
character, governed by forces of which we are unconscious and
possessed by the majority of normal individuals of a race in much the
same degree—it is precisely these qualities, I say, that in crowds
become common property. In the collective mind the intellectual
aptitudes of the individuals, and in consequence their individuality, are
weakened. The heterogeneous is swamped in the homogeneous and the
unconscious qualities obtain the upper hand.
It may safely be said, I think, that this assumed impersonal collective
mind of the crowd has no existence in a sound psychology. Peoples minds
show, of course, innumerable mutual influences, but they do not fuse and
run together. They are in many respects very similar, but similarity is not
identity, even when people are crowded together. Our author has doubtless
borrowed here rather uncritically from Herbert Spencers organic conception
of society—his later statement, not quoted here, that the alleged merging of
the heterogeneous in the homogeneous would logically imply a regression
to a lower stage in evolution, is another bit of Spencerian jargon commonly
accepted in Le Bons day.
When, however, Graham Wallas, in The Great Society, states that Le
Bon is not "himself clear whether he means that crowds have no collective
consciousness, or that every individual in a crowd is completely
unconscious," it seems to me that Wallas is a little unfair. Neither Le Bon
nor the relation of the unconscious to the crowd-mind may be dismissed in
Wallass apparently easy manner. Le Bon has established two points which I
think cannot be successfully denied: first, that the crowd is essentially a
psychological phenomenon, people behaving differently in a crowd from
the way they behave when isolated; and second, that the unconscious has
something to do with crowd-thinking and acting.
Wallas says of Le Bon:
Tarde and Le Bon were Frenchmen brought up on vivid descriptions of
the Revolution and themselves apprehensive of the spread of
socialism. Political movements which were in large part carried out by
men conscious and thoughtful, though necessarily ill informed, seemed
therefore to them as they watched them from the outside to be due to
the blind and unconscious impulses of masses "incapable both of
reflection and of reasoning."
There is some truth in this criticism. In spite of the attempt of the
famous author of crowd-psychology to give us a really scientific
explanation of crowd-phenomena, his obviously conservative bias robs his
work of much of its power to convince. We find here, just as in the case of
Gobineau, Nietzsche, Faguet, Conway, and other supporters of the
aristocratic idea, an a priori principle of distrust of the common people as
such. In many passages Le Bon does not sufficiently distinguish between
the crowd and the masses. Class and mass are opposed to each other as
though, due to their superior reasoning powers, the classes were somehow
free from the danger of behaving as crowd. This is of course not true. Any
class may behave and think as a crowd—in fact it usually does so in so far
as its class interests are concerned. Anyone who makes a study of the public
mind in America to-day will find that the phenomena of the crowd-mind are
not at all confined to movements within the working class or so-called
common people.
It has long been the habit of conservative writers to identify the crowd
with the proletariat and then to feel that the psychology of the situation
could be summed up in the statement that the crowd was simply the
creature of passion and blind emotion. The psychology which lies back of
such a view—if it is psychology rather than class prejudice—is the old
intellectualism which sought to isolate the intellect from the emotional
nature and make the true mental life primarily a knowledge affair. The
crowd, therefore, since it was regarded as an affair of the emotions, was
held to be one among many instances of the natural mental inferiority of the
common people, and a proof of their general unfitness for self-government.
I do not believe that this emotional theory is the true explanation of
crowd-behavior. It cannot be denied that people in a crowd become
strangely excited. But it is not only in crowds that people show emotion.
Feeling, instinct, impulse, are the dynamic of all mental life. The crowd
doubtless inhibits as many emotions as it releases. Fear is conspicuously
absent in battle, pity in a lynching mob. Crowds are notoriously anæsthetic
toward the finer values of art, music, and poetry. It may even be argued that
the feelings of the crowd are dulled, since it is only the exaggerated, the
obvious, the cheaply sentimental, which easily moves it.
There was a time when insanity was also regarded as excessive
emotion. The insane man was one who raved, he was mad. The word
"crazy" still suggests the condition of being "out of ones mind"—that is,
driven by irrational emotion. Psychiatry would accept no such explanation
to-day. Types of insanity are distinguished, not with respect to the mere
amount of emotional excitement they display, but in accordance with the
patients whole psychic functioning. The analyst looks for some mechanism
of controlling ideas and their relation to impulses which are operating in the
unconscious. So with our understanding of the crowd-mind. Le Bon is
correct in maintaining that the crowd is not a mere aggregation of people. It
is a state of mind. A peculiar psychic change must happen to a group of
people before they become a crowd. And as this change is not merely a
release of emotion, neither is it the creation of a collective mind by means
of imitation and suggestion. My thesis is that the crowd-mind is a
phenomenon which should best be classed with dreams, delusions, and the
various forms of automatic behavior. The controlling ideas of the crowd are
the result neither of reflection nor of "suggestion," but are akin to what, as
we shall see later, the psychoanalysts term "complexes." The crowd-self—if
I may speak of it in this way—is analogous in many respects to
"compulsion neurosis," "somnambulism," or "paranoiac episode." Crowd
ideas are "fixations"; they are always symbolic; they are always related to
something repressed in the unconscious. They are what Doctor Adler would
call "fictitious guiding lines."
There is a sense in which all our thinking consists of symbol and fiction.
The laws, measurements, and formulas of science are all as it were
"shorthand devices"—instruments for relating ourselves to reality, rather
than copies of the real. The "truth" of these working ideas is demonstrated
in the satisfactoriness of the results to which they lead us. If by means of
them we arrive at desired and desirable adaptations to and within our
environment, we say they are verified. If, however, no such verification is
reached, or the result reached flatly contradicts our hypothesis, the sane
thinker holds his conclusions in abeyance, revises his theories, or candidly
gives them up and clings to the real as empirically known.
Suppose now that a certain hypothesis, or "fiction," instead of being an
instrument for dealing with external reality, is unconsciously designed as a
refuge from the real. Suppose it is a symbolic compromise among
conflicting desires in the individuals unconscious of which he cannot rid
himself. Suppose it is a disguised expression of motives which the
individual as a civilized being cannot admit to his own consciousness.
Suppose it is a fiction necessary to keep up ones ego consciousness or self-
appreciative feeling without which either he or his world would instantly
become valueless. In these latter cases the fiction is not and cannot be,
without outside help, modified by the reality of experience. The complex of
ideas becomes a closed system, a world in and of itself. Conflicting facts of
experience are discounted and denied by all the cunning of an insatiable,
unconscious will. The fiction then gets itself substituted for the true facts of
experience; the individual has "lost the function of the real." He no longer
admits its disturbing elements as correctives. He has become mentally
unadjusted—pathological.
Most healthy people doubtless would on analysis reveal themselves as
nourishing fictions of this sort, more or less innocent in their effects. It is
possible that it is by means of such things that the values of living are
maintained for us all. But with the healthy these fictions either hover about
the periphery of our known world as shadowy and elusive inhabitants of the
inaccessible, or else they are socially acceptable as religious convention,
race pride, ethical values, personal ambition, class honor, etc. The fact that
so much of the ground of our valuations, at least so far as these affect our
self-appreciation, is explicable by psychologists as "pathological" in origin
need not startle us. William James in his Varieties of Religious Experience,
you will remember, took the ground that in judging of matters of this kind,
it is not so much by their origins—even admitting the pathological as a
cause—but by their fruits that we shall know them. There are "fictions"
which are neither innocent nor socially acceptable in their effects on life
and character. Many of our crowd-phenomena belong, like paranoia, to this
last class.
As I shall try to show later, the common confusion of the crowd with
"society" is an error. The crowd is a social phenomenon only in the sense
that it affects a number of persons at the same time. As I have indicated,
people may be highly social without becoming a crowd. They may meet,
mingle, associate in all sorts of ways, and organize and co-operate for the
sake of common ends—in fact, the greater part of our social life might
normally have nothing in common with crowd-behavior. Crowd-behavior is
pseudo-social—if social organizations be regarded as a means to the
achievement of realizable goods. The phenomena which we call the crowd-
mind, instead of being the outgrowth of the directly social, are social only
in the sense that all mental life has social significance; they are rather the
result of forces hidden in the personal and unconscious psyche of the
members of the crowd, forces which are merely released by social
gatherings of a certain sort.
Let us notice what happens in a public meeting as it develops into a
crowd, and see if we can trace some of the steps of the process. Picture a
large meeting-hall, fairly well filled with people. Notice first of all what sort
of interest it is which as a rule will most easily bring an assemblage of
people together. It need not necessarily be a matter of great importance, but
it must be something which catches and challenges attention without great
effort. It is most commonly, therefore, an issue of some sort. I have seen
efforts made in New York to hold mass meetings to discuss affairs of the
very greatest importance, and I have noted the fact that such efforts usually
fail to get out more than a handful of specially interested persons, no matter
how well advertised, if the subject to be considered happens not to be of a
controversial nature. I call especial attention to this fact because later we
shall see that it is this element of conflict, directly or indirectly, which plays
an overwhelming part in the psychology of every crowd.
It is the element of contest which makes baseball so popular. A debate
will draw a larger crowd than a lecture. One of the secrets of the large
attendance of the forum is the fact that discussion—"talking back"—is
permitted and encouraged. The evangelist Sunday undoubtedly owes the
great attendance at his meetings in no small degree to the fact that he is
regularly expected to abuse some one.
If the matter to be considered is one about which there is keen partisan
feeling and popular resentment—if it lends itself to the spectacular personal
achievement of one whose name is known, especially in the face of
opposition or difficulties—or if the occasion permits of resolutions of
protest, of the airing of wrongs, of denouncing abuse of some kind, or of
casting statements of external principles in the teeth of "enemies of
humanity," then, however trivial the occasion, we may count on it that our
assembly will be well attended. Now let us watch the proceedings.
The next thing in importance is the speaker. Preferably he should be an
"old war horse," a victor in many battles, and this for a psychological
reason which we shall soon examine. Whoever he is, every speaker with
any skill knows just when this state of mind which we call "crowd" begins
to appear. My work has provided me with rather unusual opportunities for
observing this sort of thing. As a regular lecturer and also as director of the
forum which meets three nights a week in the great hall of Cooper Union, I
have found that the intellectual interest, however intense, and the
development of the crowd-spirit are accompanied by wholly different
mental processes. Let me add in passing that the audiences which gather at
Cooper Union are, on the whole, the most alert, sophisticated, and reflective
that I have ever known. I doubt if in any large popular assembly in America
general discussion is carried on with such habitual seriousness. When on
rare occasions the spirit of the crowd begins to manifest itself—and one can
always detect its beginnings before the audience is consciously aware of it
—I have noticed that discussion instantly ceases and people begin merely to
repeat their creeds and hurl cant phrases at one another. All then is changed,
though subtly. There may be laughter as at first; but it is different. Before, it
was humorous and playful, now there is a note of hostility in it. It is
laughter at some one or something. Even the applause is changed. It is more
frequent. It is more vigorous, and instead of showing mere approval of
some sentiment, it becomes a means of showing the numerical strength of a
group of believers of some sort. It is as if those who applaud were
unconsciously seeking to reveal to themselves and others that there is a
multitude on their side.
I have heard the most exciting and controversial subjects discussed, and
seen the discussion listened to with the intensest difference of opinion, and
all without the least crowd-phenomena—so long as the speaker refrained
from indulging in generalities or time-worn forms of expression. So long as
the matter discussed requires close and sustained effort of attention, and the
method of treatment is kept free from anything which savors of ritual, even
the favorite dogmas of popular belief may be discussed, and though the
interest be intense, it will remain critical and the audience does not become
a crowd. But let the most trivial bit of bathos be expressed in rhythmical
cadences and in platitudinous terms, and the most intelligent audience will
react as a crowd. Crowd-making oratory is almost invariably platitudinous.
In fact, we think as a crowd only in platitudes, propaganda, ritual, dogma,
and symbol. Crowd-ideas are ready-made, they possess finality and
universality. They are fixed. They do not develop. They are ends in
themselves. Like the obsessions of the insane, there is a deadly inevitability
in the logic of them. They are "compulsions."
During the time of my connection with the Cooper Union Forum, we
have not had a crowd-demonstration in anything more than an incipient
form. The best laboratory for the study of such a phenomenon is the
political party convention, the mass meeting, or the religious revival. The
orators who commonly hold forth at such gatherings know intuitively the
functional value of bathos, ridicule, and platitude, and it is upon such
knowledge that they base the success of their careers in "getting the crowd."
The noisy "demonstrations" which it has of late become the custom to stage
as part of the rigmarole of a national party convention have been cited as
crowning examples of the stupidity and excess of crowd enthusiasm. But
this is a mistake. Anyone who has from the gallery witnessed one or more
of these mock "stampedes" will agree that they are exhibitions of endurance
rather than of genuine enthusiasm or of true crowd-mindedness. They are so
obviously manipulated and so deliberately timed that they can hardly be
regarded as true crowd-movements at all. They are chiefly interesting as
revelations of the general insincerity of the political life of this republic.
True crowd-behavior requires an element of spontaneity—at least on the
part of the crowd. And we have abundant examples of this in public
meetings of all sorts. As the audience becomes crowd, the speakers cadence
becomes more marked, his voice more oracular, his gestures more
emphatic. His message becomes a recital of great abstract "principles." The
purely obvious is held up as transcendental. Interest is kept upon just those
aspects of things which can be grasped with least effort by all. Emphasis is
laid upon those thought processes in which there is greatest natural
uniformity. The general, abstract, and superficial come to be exalted at the
expense of that which is unique and personal. Forms of thought are made to
stand as objects of thinking.
It is clear that such meaning as there is in those abstract names,
"Justice," "Right," "Liberty," "Peace," "Glory," "Destiny," etc., or in such
general phrases as "Brotherly Love," "Grand and Glorious," "Public Weal,"
"Common Humanity," and many others, must vary with each ones personal
associations. Popular orators deal only with the greatest common
denominator of the meaning of these terms—that is, only those elements
which are common to the associations of all. Now the common associations
of words and phrases of this general nature are very few—hardly more than
the bare sound of the words, plus a vague mental attitude or feeling of
expectancy, a mere turning of the eyes of the mind, as it were, in a certain
direction into empty space. When, for instance, I try now to leave out of the
content of "justice" all my personal associations and concrete experiences, I
can discover no remaining content beyond a sort of grand emptiness, with
the intonations of the word booming in my auditory centers like the ringing
of a distant bell. As "public property," the words are only a sort of worn
banknote, symbols of many meanings and intentions like my own,
deposited in individual minds. Interesting as these personal deposits are,
and much as we are mutually interested by them and moved to harmonious
acting and speaking, it is doubtful if more than the tiniest fragment of what
we each mean by "justice" can ever be communicated. The word is a
convenient instrument in adjusting our conduct to that of others, and when
such adjustment seems to meet with mutual satisfaction we say, "That is
just." But the just thing is always a concrete situation. And the general term
"justice" is simply a combination of sounds used to indicate the class of
things we call just. In itself it is but a form with the content left out. And so
with all other such abstractions.
Now if attention can be directed to this imaginary and vague "meaning
for everybody"—which is really the meaning for nobody—and so directed
that the associations with the unique in personal experience are blocked,
these abstractions will occupy the whole field of consciousness. The mind
will yield to any connection which is made among them almost
automatically. As conscious attention is cut away from the psyche as a
whole, the objects upon which it is centered will appear to have a reality of
their own. They become a closed system, perfectly logical it may be in
itself, but with the fatal logic commonly found in paranoia—the fiction may
become more real than life itself. It may be substituted, while the spell is
on, for the world of actual experience. And just as the manifest content of a
dream is, according to Freud, the condensed and distorted symbol of latent
dream-thoughts and desires in the unconscious, so, in the case we are
discussing, the unconscious invests these abstract terms with its own
peculiar meanings. They gain a tremendous, though undefined, importance
and an irresistible compelling power.
Something like the process I have described occurs when the crowd
appears. People are translated to a different world—that is, a different sense
of the real. The speaker is transfigured to their vision. His words take on a
mysterious importance; something tremendous, eternal, superhuman is at
stake. Commonplace jokes become irresistibly amusing. Ordinary truths are
wildly applauded. Dilemmas stand clear with all middle ground brushed
away. No statement now needs qualification. All thought of compromise is
abhorrent. Nothing now must intervene to rob these moments of their
splendid intensity. As James once said of drunkenness, "Everything is just
utterly utter." They who are not for us are against us.
The crowd-mind consists, therefore, first of all, of a disturbance of the
function of the real. The crowd is the creature of Belief. Every crowd has its
peculiar "illusions," ideals, dreams. It maintains its existence as a crowd just
so long as these crowd-ideas continue to be held by practically all the
members of the group—so long, in fact, as such ideas continue to hold
attention and assent to the exclusion of ideas and facts which contradict
them.
I am aware of the fact that we could easily be led aside at this point into
endless metaphysical problems. It is not our purpose to enter upon a
discussion of the question, what is the real world? The problem of the real
is by no means so simple as it appears "to common sense." Common sense
has, however, in practical affairs, its own criteria, and beyond these it is not
necessary for us now to stray. The "illusions" of the crowd are almost never
illusions in the psychological sense. They are not false perceptions of the
objects of sense. They are rather akin to the delusions and fixed ideas
commonly found in paranoia. The man in the street does not ordinarily
require the technique either of metaphysics or of psychiatry in order to
characterize certain individuals as "crazy." The "crazy" man is simply
unadjustable in his speech and conduct. His ideas may be real to him, just
as the color-blind mans sensations of color may be as real as those of
normal people, but they wont work, and that is sufficient.
It is not so easy to apply this criterion of the real to our crowd-ideas.
Social realities are not so well ordered as the behavior of the forces of
nature. Things moral, religious, and political are constantly in the making.
The creative role which we all play here is greater than elsewhere in our
making of reality. When most of our neighbors are motivated by certain
ideas, those ideas become part of the social environment to which we must
adjust ourselves. In this sense they are "real," however "crazy." Every
struggle-group and faction in society is constantly striving to establish its
ideas as controlling forces in the social reality. The conflicts among ideals
are therefore in a sense conflicts within the real. Ideas and beliefs which
seek their verification in the character of the results to which they lead, may
point to very great changes in experience, and so long as the believer takes
into account the various elements with which he has to deal, he has not lost
his hold upon reality. But when ones beliefs or principles become ends in
themselves, when by themselves they seem to constitute an order of being
which is more interesting than fact, when the believer saves his faith only
by denying or ignoring the things which contradict him, when he strives not
to verify his ideas but to "vindicate" them, the ideas so held are
pathological. The obsessions of the paranoiac are of this sort. We shall see
later that these ideas have a meaning, though the conscious attention of the
patient is systematically diverted from that meaning. Crowd-ideas are
similar. The reason why their pathology is not more evident is the fact that
they are simultaneously entertained by so great a number of people.
There are many ideas in which our faith is sustained chiefly by the
knowledge that everyone about us also believes them. Belief on such
ground has commonly been said to be due to imitation or suggestion. These
do play a large part in determining all our thinking, but I can see no reason
why they should be more operative in causing the crowd-mind than in other
social situations. In fact, the distinctive phenomena which I have called
crowd-ideas clearly show that other causes are at work.
Among civilized people, social relationships make severe demands
upon the individual. Primitive impulses, unchecked eroticism, tendencies to
perversions, and antisocial demands of the ego which are in us all, are
constantly inhibited, resisted, controlled and diverted to socially acceptable
ends. The savage in us is "repressed," his demands are so habitually denied
that we learn to keep him down, for the most part, without conscious effort.
We simply cease to pay attention to his gnawing desires. We become
decently respectable members of society largely at the expense of our
aboriginal nature. But the primitive in us does not really die. It asserts itself
harmlessly in dreams. Psychoanalysis has revealed the fact that every dream
is the realization of some desire, usually hidden from our conscious thought
by our habitual repression. For this reason the dream work consists of
symbols. The great achievement of Freud is the technique which enables the
analyst to interpret this symbolism so that his own unconscious thought and
desire are made known to the subject. The dream is harmless and is
normally utilized by the unconscious ego because during sleep we cannot
move. If one actually did the things he dreamed, a thing which happens in
various somnambulisms, the dream would become anything but harmless.
Every psychosis is really a dramatized dream of this sort.
Now as it is the social which demands the repression of our primitive
impulses, it is to be expected that the unconscious would on certain
occasions make use of this same social in order to realize its primitive
desires. There are certain mental abnormalities, such as dementia præcox, in
which the individual behaves in a wholly antisocial manner, simply
withdrawing into himself. In the crowd the primitive ego achieves its wish
by actually gaining the assent and support of a section of society. The
immediate social environment is all pulled in the same direction as the
unconscious desire. A similar unconscious impulse motivates each member
of the crowd. It is as if all at once an unspoken agreement were entered into
whereby each member might let himself go, on condition that he approved
the same thing in all the rest. Of course such a thing cannot happen
consciously. Our normal social consciousness would cause us each to resist,
let us say, an exhibition of cruelty—in our neighbors, and also in ourselves.
The impulse must therefore be disguised.
The term "unconscious" in the psychology of the crowd does not, of
course, imply that the people in the crowd are not aware of the fact that they
are lynching a negro or demanding the humiliation or extermination of
certain of their fellows. Everybody is perfectly aware of what is being said
and done; only the moral significance of the thing is changed. The deed or
sentiment, instead of being disapproved, appears to be demanded, by moral
principle, by the social welfare, by the glory of the state, etc. What is
unconscious is the fact that the social is actually being twisted around into
giving approval of the things which it normally forbids. Every crowd
considers that it is vindicating some sacred principle. The more bloody and
destructive the acts to which it is impelled, the more moral are its
professions. Under the spell of the crowds logic certain abstract principles
lead inevitably to the characteristic forms of crowd-behavior. They seem to
glorify such acts, to make heroes and martyrs of those who lead in their
performance.
The attention of everyone is first centered on the abstract and universal,
as I have indicated. The repressed wish then unconsciously gives to the
formulas which the crowd professes a meaning different from that which
appears, yet unconsciously associated with it. This unconscious meaning is
of course an impulse to act. But the motive professed is not the real motive.
Normally our acts and ideas are corrected by our social environment.
But in a crowd our test of the real fails us, because, since the attention of all
near us is directed in the same way as our own, the social environment for
the time fails to check us. As William James said:
The sense that anything we think is unreal can only come when that
thing is contradicted by some other thing of which we think. Any
object which remains uncontradicted is ipso facto believed and posited
as "absolute reality."
Our immediate social environment is all slipping along with us. It no
longer contradicts the thing we want to believe, and, unconsciously, want to
do. As the uncontradicted idea is, for the time, reality, so is it a motor
impulse. The only normal reason why we do not act immediately upon any
one of our ideas is that action is inhibited by ideas of a contradictory nature.
As crowd, therefore, we find ourselves moving in a fictitious system of
ideas uncritically accepted as real—not as in dreams realizing our hidden
wishes, merely in imagination, but also impelled to act them out in much
the way that the psychoeurotic is impelled to act out the fixed ideas which
are really the symbols of his suppressed wish. In other words, a crowd is a
device for indulging ourselves in a kind of temporary insanity by all going
crazy together.
Of the several kinds of crowds, I have selected for our discussion the
mass meeting, because we are primarily interested in the ideas which
dominate the crowd. The same essential psychological elements are also
found in the street crowd or mob. Serious mob outbreaks seldom occur
without mass meetings, oratory, and propaganda. Sometimes, as in the case
of the French Revolution and of the rise of the Soviets in Russia, the mass
meetings are held in streets and public places. Sometimes, as, for instance,
the crowds in Berlin when Germany precipitated the World War, a long
period of deliberate cultivation of such crowd-ideas as happen to be
advantageous to the state precedes. There are instances, such as the Frank
case, which brought unenviable fame to Georgia, when no mass meeting
seems to have been held. It is possible that in this instance, however, certain
newspapers, and also the trial—which, as I remember, was held in a theater
and gave an ambitious prosecuting attorney opportunity to play the role of
mob leader—served the purpose of the mass meeting.
The series of outbreaks in New York and other cities, shortly after the
War, between the socialists and certain returned soldiers, seem to have first
occurred quite unexpectedly, as do the customary negro lynchings in the
South. In each case I think it will be found that the complex of crowd-ideas
had been previously built up in the unconscious. A deep-seated antagonism
had been unconsciously associated with the self-appreciative feelings of a
number of individuals, all of which found justification in the consciousness
of these persons in the form of devotion to principle, loyalty, moral
enthusiasm, etc. I suspect that under many of our professed principles there
lurk elements of unconscious sadism and masochism. All that is then
required is an occasion, some casual incident which will so direct the
attention of a number of these persons that they provide one another
temporarily with a congenial social environment. In the South this mob
complex is doubtless formed out of race pride, a certain unconscious
eroticism, and will to power, which unfortunately has too abundant
opportunity to justify itself as moral indignation. With the returned soldiers
the unconscious desires were often rather thinly disguised—primitive
impulses to violence which had been aroused and hardly satisfied by the
war, a wish to exhibit themselves which found its opportunity in the
knowledge that their lawlessness would be applauded in certain influential
quarters, a dislike of the nonconformist, the foreign, and the unknown,
which took the outward form of a not wholly unjustifiable resentment
toward the party which had to all appearances unpatriotically opposed our
entrance into the war.
Given a psychic situation of this nature, the steps by which it leads to
mob violence are much alike in all cases. All together they simply amount
to a process of like direction of the attention of a sufficient number of
persons so affected as to produce a temporary social environment in which
the unconscious impulses may be released with mutual approval. The
presence of the disliked object or person gains general attention. At first
there is only curiosity; then amusement; there is a bantering of crude
witticisms; then ridicule. Soon the joking turns to insults. There are angry
exclamations. A blow is struck. There is a sudden rush. The blow, being the
act which the members of the crowd each unconsciously wished to do,
gains general approval, "it is a blow for righteousness"; a "cause" appears.
Casually associated persons at once become a group, brought together, of
course, by their interest in vindicating the principles at stake. The mob finds
itself suddenly doing things which its members did not know they had ever
dreamed of.
Different as this process apparently is from that by which a meeting is
turned into a crowd by an orator, I think it will be seen that the two are
essentially alike.
Thus far we have been considering crowd-movements which are local
and temporary—casual gatherings, which, having no abiding reason for
continued association, soon dissolve into their individual elements.
Frequently, after participating in such a movement, the individual, on
returning to his habitual relations, "comes to." He wonders what the affair
was all about. In the light of his re-established control ideas—he will call it
"reason"—the unconscious impulses are again repressed; he may look with
shame and loathing upon yesterdays orgy. Acts which he would ordinarily
disapprove in his neighbors, he now disapproves in himself. If the behavior
of the crowd has not been particularly atrocious and inexcusable to ordinary
consciousness, the reaction is less strong. The voter after the political
campaign merely "loses interest." The convert in the revival "backslides."
The striker returns to work and is soon absorbed by the daily routine of his
task. The fiery patriot, after the war, is surprised to find that his hatred of
the enemy is gradually waning. Electors who have been swept by a wave of
enthusiasm for "reform" and have voted for a piece of ill-considered
restrictive legislation easily lapse into indifference, and soon look with
unconcern or amusement upon open violations of their own enactments.
There is a common saying that the public has a short memory. Pick up an
old newspaper and read about the great movements and causes which were
only a short time ago stirring the public mind, many of them are now dead
issues. But they were not answered by argument; we simply "got over"
them.
Not all crowd-movements, however, are local and temporary. There are
passing moments of crowd-experience which are often too sweet to lose.
The lapse into everyday realism is like "falling from grace." The crowd
state of mind strives often to keep itself in countenance by perpetuating the
peculiar social-psychic conditions in which it can operate. There are certain
forms of the ego consciousness which are best served by the fictions of the
crowd. An analogy here is found in paranoia, where the individuals morbid
fixed ideas are really devices for the protection of his self-esteem. The
repressed infantile psyche which exists in us all, and in certain neurotics
turns back and attaches itself to the image of the parent, finds also in the
crowd a path for expression. It provides a perpetual interest in keeping the
crowd-state alive. Notice how invariably former students form alumni
associations, and returned soldiers at once effect permanent organizations;
persons who have been converted in one of Mr. Sundays religious
campaigns do the same thing—indeed there are associations of all sorts
growing out of these exciting moments in peoples common past experience,
the purpose of which is mutually to recall the old days and aid one another
in keeping alive the enlarged self-feeling.
In addition to this, society is filled with what might be called "struggle
groups" organized for the survival and dominance of similarly constituted
or situated people. Each group has its peculiar interests, economic, spiritual,
racial, etc., and each such interest is a mixture of conscious and
unconscious purposes. These groups become sects, cults, partisan
movements, class struggles. They develop propaganda, ritual, orthodoxies,
dogma, all of which are hardly anything more than stereotyped systems of
crowd-ideas. These systems differ from those of the neurosis in that the
former are less idiosyncratic, but they undoubtedly perform much the same
function. The primary aim of every such crowd is to keep itself together as
a crowd. Hardly less important is the desire of its members to dominate
over all outsiders. The professed purpose is to serve some cause or principle
of universal import. Thus the crowd idealizes itself as an end, makes
sanctities of its own survival values, and holds up its ideals to all men,
demanding that every knee shall bow and every tongue confess—which is
to say, that the crowd believes in its own future supremacy, the members of
the group knowing that such a belief has survival value. This principle is
used by every politician in predicting that his party is bound to win at the
next election.
Hence the crowd is a device by which the individuals "right" may be
baptized "righteousness" in general, and this personality by putting on
impersonality may rise again to new levels of self-appreciation. He
"belongs to something," something "glorious" and deathless. He himself
may be but a miserable clod, but the glory of his crowd reflects upon him.
Its expected triumph he already shares. It gives him back his lost sense of
security. As a good crowd man, true believer, loyal citizen, devoted
member, he has regained something of his early innocence. In other
members he has new brothers and sisters. In the finality of his crowd-faith
there is escape from responsibility and further search. He is willing to be
commanded. He is a child again. He has transferred his repressed
infantilism from the lost family circle to the crowd. There is a very real
sense in which the crowd stands to his emotional life in loco parentis.
It is to be expected, therefore, that wherever possible the crowd-state of
mind will be perpetuated. Every sort of device will be used to keep the
members of the crowd from coming to. In almost every organization and
social relationship there will be a tendency on part of the unconscious to
behave as crowd. Thus permanent crowds exist on every hand—especially
wherever political, moral, or religious ideas are concerned. The general and
abstract character of these ideas makes them easily accessible instruments
for justifying and screening the unconscious purpose. Moreover it is in just
those aspects of our social life where repression is greatest that crowd-
thinking is most common, for it is by means of such thinking and behavior
that the unconscious seeks evasions and finds its necessary compensations.
The modern man has in the printing press a wonderfully effective means
for perpetuating crowd-movements and keeping great masses of people
constantly under the sway of certain crowd-ideas. Every crowd-group has
its magazines, press agents, and special "literature" with which it
continually harangues its members and possible converts. Many books, and
especially certain works of fiction of the "best-seller" type, are clearly
reading-mob phenomena.
But the leader in crowd-thinking par excellence is the daily newspaper.
With few exceptions our journals emit hardly anything but crowd-ideas.
These great "molders of public opinion," reveal every characteristic of the
vulgar mob orator. The character of the writing commonly has the standards
and prejudices of the "man in the street." And lest this mans ego
consciousness be offended by the sight of anything "highbrow"—that is,
anything indicating that there may be a superior intelligence or finer
appreciation than his own—newspaper-democracy demands that everything
more exalted than the level of the lowest cranial altitude be left out. The
average result is a deluge of sensational scandal, class prejudice, and special
pleading clumsily disguised with a saccharine smear of the cheapest moral
platitude. Consequently, the thinking of most of us is carried on chiefly in
the form of crowd-ideas. A sort of public-meeting self is developed in the
consciousness of the individual which dominates the personality of all but
the reflective few. We editorialize and press-agent ourselves in our inmost
musings. Public opinion is manufactured just as brick are made. Possibly a
slightly better knowledge of mechanical engineering is required for making
public opinion, but the process is the same. Both can be stamped out in the
quantity required, and delivered anywhere to order. Our thinking on most
important subjects to-day is as little original as the mental processes of the
men who write and the machines which print the pages we read and repeat
as our own opinions.
Thomas Carlyle was never more sound than when railing at this "paper
age." And paper, he wisely asked us to remember, "is made of old rags."
Older writers who saw the ragged throngs in the streets were led to identify
the mob or crowd with the tattered, illiterate populace. Our mob to-day is
no longer merely tramping the streets. We have it at the breakfast table, in
the subway, alike in shop and boudoir, and office—wherever, in fact, the
newspaper goes. And the raggedness is not exterior, nor is the mob confined
to the class of the ill-clad and the poor. The raggedness, and tawdriness
have now become spiritual, a universal presence entering into the fabric of
nearly all our mental processes.
We have now reached a point from which we can look back over the
ground we have traversed and note the points of difference between our
view and the well-known theory of Le Bon. The argument of the latter is as
follows: (1) From the standpoint of psychology, the crowd, as the term is
here defined, is not merely a group of people, it is the appearance within
such a group of a special mental condition, or crowd-mind. (2) The
sentiments and ideas of all the persons in the gathering take one and the
same direction. (3) Conscious personality vanishes. (4) A collective mind is
formed: This is Le Bons "Law of the mental unity of crowds." (5) This
collective mind consists in the main of "general qualities of character"
which are our common racial inheritance. It is an "unconscious substratum"
which in the crowd becomes uppermost, dominating over the unique
personal consciousness. (6) Three causes determine the characteristics of
the crowd-mind, (a) From purely numerical considerations, the individual
acquires a sentiment of invincible power which encourages him in an
unrestrained yielding to his instincts, (b) Contagion, or imitation, and (c)
hypnotic suggestion cause the individuals in the crowd to become "slaves of
all the unconscious activities of the spinal cord." (7) The resulting
characteristics of the crowd are (a) a descent of several rungs in the ladder
of civilization, (b) a general intellectual inferiority as compared with the
isolated individual, (c) loss of moral responsibility, (d) impulsiveness, (e)
credulity, (f) exaggeration, (g) intolerance, (h) blind obedience to the leader
of the crowd, (i) a mystical emotionalism. (8) The crowd is finally and
somewhat inconsistently treated by Le Bon as being identical with the
masses, the common people, the herd.
Without pausing to review the criticisms of this argument which were
made at the beginning of our discussion, our own view may be summarized
as follows: (1) The crowd is not the same as the masses, or any class or
gathering of people as such, but is a certain mental condition which may
occur simultaneously to people in any gathering or association. (2) This
condition is not a "collective mind." It is a release of repressed impulses
which is made possible because certain controlling ideas have ceased to
function in the immediate social environment. (3) This modification in the
immediate social environment is the result of mutual concessions on the
part of persons whose unconscious impulses to do a certain forbidden thing
are similarly disguised as sentiments which meet with conscious moral
approval. (4) Such a general disguising of the real motive is a characteristic
phenomenon of dreams and of mental pathology, and occurs in the crowd
by fixing the attention of all present upon the abstract and general. Attention
is thus held diverted from the individuals personal associations, permitting
these associations and their accompanying impulses to function
unconsciously. (5) The abstract ideas so entertained become symbols of
meanings which are unrecognized; they form a closed system, like the
obsessions of the paranoiac, and as the whole group are thus moved in the
same direction, the "compulsory" logic of these ideas moves forward
without those social checks which normally keep us within bounds of the
real. Hence, acting and thinking in the crowd become stereotyped and
"ceremonial." Individuals move together like automatons. (6) As the
unconscious chiefly consists of that part of our nature which is habitually
repressed by the social, and as there is always, therefore, an unconscious
resistance to this repressive force, it follows that the crowd state, like the
neurosis, is a mechanism of escape and of compensation. It also follows
that the crowd-spirit will occur most commonly in reference to just those
social forms where repression is greatest—in matters political, religious,
and moral. (7) The crowd-mind is then not a mere excess of emotion on the
part of people who have abandoned "reason"; crowd-behavior is in a sense
psychopathic and has many elements in common with somnambulism, the
compulsion neurosis, and even paranoia. (8) Crowds may be either
temporary or permanent in their existence. Permanent crowds, with the aid
of the press, determine in greater or less degree the mental habits of nearly
everyone. The individual moves through his social world like a popular
freshman on a college campus, who is to be "spiked" by one or another
fraternity competing for his membership. A host of crowds standing for
every conceivable "cause" and "ideal" hover constantly about him,
ceaselessly screaming their propaganda into his ears, bullying and cajoling
him, pushing and crowding and denouncing one another, and forcing all
willy-nilly to line up and take sides with them upon issues and dilemmas
which represent the real convictions of nobody.
III.
The Crowd and the Unconscious
Table of Contents
Throughout the discussion thus far I have been making repeated reference
to the psychology of the unconscious, without going into detail any more
than was necessary. Let us now take a closer look at some of Freuds
discoveries. In this way, what Brill would call the "psychogenesis" of
certain characteristic ideas and practices of crowds will be, I think, made
clear. Up to this point we have dealt generally with those mental processes
by which the crowd is formed. There are certain traits, tendencies, ways of
thinking which crowds so uniformly display that one is justified, in want of
other explanation, in assuming them to be unconsciously determined. The
remarkable blindness of organized crowds to the most obvious of their own
performances is so common as to be the regularly expected thing—that is,
of crowds other than our own. Long and extensive operations may be
carried on for years by crowds whose members repeatedly declare that such
things are not being done. The way in which a nation will carefully prepare
for war, gradually organizing its whole life on a military basis with
tremendous cost and effort, all the while declaring that it is interested only
in peace, denying its warlike intentions, and even in the moment of picking
a quarrel with its neighbors declare to all the world that it had been
wantonly and unexpectedly attacked, is all a matter of general comment.
The American colonists, during the decade before the signing of the
Declaration of Independence, of course had no conscious thought of
separating from Great Britain. Almost to the very last they professed their
loyalty to the King; but looking back now it is clear that Independence was
the motive all along, and doubtless could not have been achieved more
opportunely or with greater finesse if it had been deliberately planned from
the start. The Hebrew Scriptures contain a story which illustrates this aspect
of crowd-behavior everywhere. The Children of Israel in bondage in Egypt
merely wished to go out in the wilderness for a day or so to worship their
God. All they asked was religious liberty. How unjust of the authorities to
assume they were planning to run away from their masters! You will
remember that at the last moment they incidentally borrow some jewelry
from their Egyptian neighbors. Of course they will pay it back after their
little religious holiday, but ... later a most unforeseen thing happens to that
jewelry, a scandalous thing—it is made into an idol. Does it require that one
be a psychologist to infer that it was the unconscious intention all along to
use this metal for just that, the first good chance they had—and that, too,
notwithstanding repeated prohibitions of idolatry? The motive for
borrowing the jewelry is evident.
Certain crowd-movements in America to-day give marked evidence of
this unconscious motivation. Notice how both the radical and reactionary
elements behave when, as is frequently the case with both, the crowd-spirit
comes over them. Certain radicals, who are fascinated with the idea of the
Russian Revolution, are still proclaiming sentiments of human brotherhood,
peace, and freedom, while unconsciously they are doing just what their
enemies accuse them of—playing with the welcome ideas of violence, class
war, and proletarian dictatorship. And conservative crowds, while
ostensibly defending American traditions and ideals against destructive
foreign influence, are with their own hands daily desecrating many of the
finest things which America has given to the world in its struggle of more
than a century for freedom and justice. Members of each crowd, while
blissfully unaware of the incompatibility of their own motives and
professions, have no illusions about those of the counter-crowd. Each crowd
sees in the professions of its antagonist convincing proof of the insincerity
and hypocrisy of the other side. To the student of social philosophy both are
right and both wrong. All propaganda is lies, and every crowd is a deceiver,
but its first and worst deception is that of itself. This self-deception is a
necessary step in crowd-formation and is a sine qua non of becoming a
crowd. It is only necessary for members of a crowd to deceive themselves
and one another for the crowd-mind to function perfectly; I doubt if they are
often successful in deceiving anybody else. It was this common crowd-
phenomenon of self-deception which led Gobineau and Nietzsche to the
conclusion that the common people are liars. But as has been said, the
crowd is by no means peculiar to the working class; some of its worst
features are exhibited these days among employers, law-makers, and the
well-to-do classes. This deception is moreover not really conscious and
deliberate. If men deliberately set about to invent lies to justify their
behavior I have little doubt that most of them would be clever enough to
conjure up something a little more plausible. These naïve and threadbare
"hypocrisies" of crowds are a commonplace mechanism of the unconscious.
It is interesting to note that the delusions of the paranoiac likewise deceive
no one but himself, yet within themselves form a perfectly logical a priori
system. They also serve the well-understood purpose, like that of crowd-
ideas, of keeping their possessor in a certain fixed relation toward portions
of his own psychic material. As Brill says, they are "compromise
formations."
Those who have read Freuds little book, Delusion and Dream, an
analysis of a psychological romance written by Wilhelm Jensen, will recall
how extensive a fabric of plausibilities a delusion may build up in its
defense in order at the same time to satisfy a repressed wish, and keep the
true meaning of the subjects acts and thoughts from conscious attention. In
the story which Freud has here taken as his subject for study, a young
student of archæology has apparently conquered all adolescent erotic
interest and has devoted himself whole-heartedly to his science. While at
the ruins of ancient Pompeii, he finds a bas-relief containing the figure of a
young woman represented in the act of walking with peculiar grace. A cast
of this figure he brings home. His interest is curiously aroused. At first this
interest appears to be scientific only, then æsthetic, and historical. Finally
he builds up about it a complete romance. He becomes restless and very
much of a misogynist, and is driven, he knows not why, again to the ruins.
Here he actually meets the object of his dreams in the solitude of the
excavated city. He allows himself to believe that the once living model of
his treasured bas-relief has again come to life. For days he meets and talks
with the girl, living all the while in a world of complete unreality, until she
finally succeeds in revealing herself as the young woman who lives next
door to him. It also appears that in their childhood he and this girl had been
playmates, and that in spite of all his conscious indifference to her his
unconscious interest was the source of his interest in the bas-relief and the
motive which led him to return to Pompeii, where he unconsciously
expected to find her. The interesting thing about all this for our present
study is the series of devices, fictions, and compromises with reality which
this repressed interest made use of while having its way with him, and at the
same time resisting whatever might force it upon his conscious attention,
where a recognition of its significance might result in a deliberate rejection.
We shall not go into Freuds ingenious analysis of the mental processes
at work here. The following passage is sufficient for our purpose:
There is a kind of forgetting which distinguishes itself by the difficulty
with which memory is awakened, even by strong appeals, as if a
subjective resistance struggled against the revival. Such forgetting has
received the name of "repression" in psychopathology ... about
repression we can assert that certainly it does not coincide with the
destruction, the obliteration of memory. The repressed material can not
of itself break through as memory, but remains potent and effective.
From this, and from what was said in our previous chapter, it is plain
that the term "unconscious" as used in psychology does not mean total
absence of psychic activity. It refers to thoughts and feelings which have
purposefully been forgotten—to experiences or impulses to which we do
not pay attention nor wish to attend to, but which influence us nevertheless.
Everyone of us, when he dreams, has immediate knowledge of the
unconscious as here defined. Certainly we pass into unconsciousness when
we sleep. Yet something is unquestionably going on inside our heads. One
wakens and says, "What strange, or exciting, or delightful dreams I have
had!" Bergson says that sleep is due to the relaxing of attention to our
environment. Yet in dreams attention is never turned away from ourselves.
Possibly instead of the word "unconscious" the term "unattended" might be
used with less danger of confusion.
Consciousness is, therefore, not the whole of our psychic activity. Much
of our behavior is reflex and automatic. James used to be fond of showing
how much even of our higher psychic activity was reflex in its nature. We
may be conscious of various portions of our psychic material, but never of
all of it at once. Attention is like a spotlight thrown on a semi-darkened
stage, moving here and there, revealing the figures upon which it is directed
in vivid contrast with the darkly moving objects which animate the regions
outside its circle. A speaker during his discourse will straighten his tie,
make various gestures, and toy with any object which happens to be lying
on the desk, all without being aware of his movements, until his attention is
called to the fact. Absent-minded persons habitually amuse us by frequently
performing complete and rather complex series of actions while wholly
oblivious to what they are doing. Everyone can recall numerous instances
of absent-mindedness in his own experience.
Now all pathological types of mental life have in common this quality
of absent-mindedness, and it is held that the thing said or done absent-
mindedly has in every instance, even when normal, a meaning which is
unconscious. But the unconscious or unattended is by no means confined to
the infrequent and the trivial. As temperament, or character, its activity is a
determining factor in all our thought and conduct. Dream fancies do not
really cease when we awake; the dream activity goes on all about our
conscious thoughts, our associations now hovering near long-forgotten
memories, now pulled in the direction of some unrecognized bit of personal
conceit, now skipping on tiptoe over something forbidden and wicked and
passing across without looking in; only a part of our mental processes ever
directly finding expression in our conscious acts and words. The unchosen
and the illogical run along with the desired and the logical material, only we
have learned not to pay attention to such things. Under all our logical
structures there flows a ceaseless stream of dream stuff. Our conscious
thought is like little planks of attention laid end to end on the stones which
here and there rise above the surface of our thinking. The mind skips across
to a desired conclusion, not infrequently getting its feet wet, and, on
occasion, upsetting a plank or slipping off and falling in altogether.
We have only to relax our attention a little to enter the world of day
dreams, of art, and religion; we can never hold it so rigid as to be wholly
rational for long.
Those interested in the general psychology of the unconscious are
referred to the writings of such authorities in this field as Freud, Jung,
Adler, Dr. A. A. Brill, and Dr. William White. In fact, the literature dealing
with psychoanalysis is now so widely read that, unless the reader has
received his information about this branch of science from hostile sources
alone, it is to be assumed that he has a fairly accurate acquaintance with its
general history and theory. We must confine our discussions to those
aspects of unconscious behavior which can be shown by analogy with the
psychoneurosis to be determinants of crowd-thinking. As the details and
technical discussions of psychoanalytical material belong strictly to the
psychiatric clinic, any attempt at criticism by the medical layman of the
scientific processes by which they are established is of course impossible.
Consequently, I have sought to make use of only those principles which are
now so well established as to become rather generally accepted
commonplaces of psychopathology.
All analysis reveals the fact that the unconscious of the individual is
concerned primarily with himself. This is true in the psychosis, and always
in dreams. Freud says:
Every dream is absolutely egotistical; in every dream the beloved ego
appears, even though it be in a disguised form. The wishes that are
realized in dreams are regularly the wishes of this ego; it is only a
deceptive appearance if interest in another person is thought to have
caused the dream.
Freud then proceeds to give analyses of several dreams in which the
naïve egoism of childhood which lies at the core of the unconscious psyche
is apparently absent, and shows that in each and every case it is there. The
hero of our dreams, notwithstanding all appearances to the contrary, is
always ourself.
Brill, in his book, Psychoanalysis, says of the neurosis:
Both hysteria and compulsion neurosis belong to the defense
neuropsychoses; their symptoms originate through the psychic
mechanism of defense, that is, through the attempt to repress a painful
idea which was incompatible with the ego of the patient. There is still
another more forceful and more successful form of defense wherein
the ego misplaces the incompatible idea with its emotions and acts as
though the painful idea had never come to pass. When this occurs the
person merges into a psychosis which may be called "hallucinatory
confusion."
Thus the psychoneurosis is in all its forms, I believe, regarded as a
drama of the ego and its inner conflicts. The egoism of the unconscious
belongs alike to the normal and the unadjusted. The mental abnormalities
appear when the ego seeks to escape some such conflict by means of a
closed system of ideas or symbolic acts which will divert attention from the
unwelcome psychic material. Adler, in The Neurotic Constitution, is even, if
possible, more emphatic in affirming the egoism of the unconscious as
revealed in neurotics. His thesis is that the mainspring of all the efforts of
achievement and the source of all the vicissitudes of the psyche is a desire
to be important, or will to "be above," not wholly unlike Nietzsches theory
of the "will to power." The neurosis goes back to some organic defect or
other cause of childish humiliation. As a result, the cause of such
humiliation, a defective bodily organ, or whatever it may be, gains special
attention. The whole psyche is modified in the process of adjustment. In
cases where the psyche remains normal, adjustment is achieved through
stimulation to extra effort to overcome the disadvantage, as in the triumph
of Demosthenes, Byron, Pope.
On the contrary, this disadvantage may result in a fixed feeling of
inferiority. Such a feeling may be brought about in the sensitive child by a
variety of circumstances, physical facts such as smallness of stature,
adenoids, derangements of the alimentary organs, undersized genitals,
homeliness of feature, or any physical deformity or weakness; again by
such circumstances as domineering parents or older brothers and sisters.
The child then thinks always of himself. He forms the habit of comparing
himself with others. He creates, as a protection against the recognition of
this feeling of inferiority, what Adler calls the "masculine protest."
The feeling which the individual has of his own inferiority,
incompetency, the realization of his smallness, of his weakness, of his
uncertainty, thus becomes the appropriate working basis which,
because of the intrinsically associated feelings of pleasure and pain,
furnishes the inner impulse to advance toward an imaginary goal....
In all similar attempts (and the human psyche is full of them), it is
the question of the introduction of an unreal and abstract scheme into
actual life.... No matter from what angle we observe the psychic
development of a normal or neurotic person, he is always found
ensnared in the meshes of his particular fiction—a fiction from which
the neurotic is unable to find his way back to reality and in which he
believes, while the sound and normal person utilizes it for the purpose
of reaching a definite goal ... the thing which impels us all, and
especially the neurotic and the child, to abandon the direct path of
induction and deduction and use such devices as the schematic fiction,
originates in the feeling of uncertainty, and is the craving for security,
the final purpose of which is to escape from the feeling of inferiority in
order to ascend to the full height of the ego consciousness, to complete
manliness, to attain the ideal of being "above."...
Even our judgments concerning the value of things are determined
according to the standard of the imaginary goal, not according to "real"
feelings or pleasurable sensations.
That repressed sexuality plays an important part in the conflicts of the
ego is well known to all who are acquainted with analytical psychology.
According to Freud, the sexual impulse dates from earliest childhood and is
an essential element in every stage of self-appreciation. A summary of the
process by which the infantile ego develops to maturity is as follows: The
child is by nature "polymorphous perverse"—that is, both physically and
psychically he possesses elements which in the mature individual would be
considered perversions. Physiologically, what are known as "erogenous
zones"—tissue which is capable of what in mature life is sexual excitation
—are diffused through the organism. As the child passes through the "latent
period" of later childhood and adolescence, these "erogenous zones" are
concentrated as it were in the organs which are to serve the purpose of
reproduction. If for any reason this process of concentration is checked, and
remains in later life incomplete, the mature individual will be afflicted with
certain tendencies to sex perversion.
Similarly the psychosexual passes through a metamorphosis in normal
development. The erotic interest of the child, at first quite without any
object at all, is soon attached to one or the other of the parents, then, in the
"narcissus period" is centered upon the individual himself, after which,
normally, but not without some storm and stress, it becomes detached and
capable of "object love"—that is, love of a person of the opposite sex. This
psychic process is by no means a smooth and easy matter. It is attended at
every stage with such dangers that a very large number of people never
achieve it entire. Various kinds of "shock" and wrong educational influence,
or overindulgence on the part of the parents, may cause the psychosexual
interest of the ego—or "libido"—to remain "fixed" at some point in its
course. It may retain vestiges of its early undifferentiated stage, appearing
then in the perverted forms of "masochism"—sexual enjoyment of self-
torture—or "sadism"—sexual pleasure in torturing others. Or the libido may
remain fixed upon the parent, rendering the individual in some degree
incapable of a normal mature love life. He has never quite succeeded in
severing his infantile attachment to his mother and transferring his interest
to the world of social relations and mature experiences. If he meets with a
piece of misfortune, he is likely to seek imaginary security and
compensation by a "regression" of the libido and a revival of childlike
affection for the mother image. As this return is, in maturity, unconsciously
resisted by the horror of incest, a conflict results. The individual then
develops certain mechanisms or "complex formations" in defense of his ego
against this painful situation. The withdrawal of the libido from the ordinary
affairs of life renders the latter valueless. Thoughts of death and like
compulsory mechanisms ensue. The patient has become a neurotic.
Psychoanalysts make much of this latter situation. They term it the
"Œdipus complex." They assert that in its severer forms it is a common
feature of psychoneurosis, while in less marked form, according to Jung, it
underlies, and is the real explanation of the "birth of tragedy," being also the
meaning of much religious symbolism, including the Divine Drama of
Christian tradition. It is not, therefore, only the psychoneurotic whose
unconscious takes the form of the "Œdipus complex." Under certain
conditions it is manifest in normal people. I have already indicated that the
crowd is one of those conditions, and shall have something a little more
specific to say about this later on.
Again the growing libido may become fixed in the "narcissus stage."
Between the period of love of parents and object love, the adolescent youth
passes through a period when he is "in love with himself." The fact that
many people remain in some measure fixed in this period of their
development is not surprising when we remember that self-feeling occupies
a central place in the unconscious at all times. Many of the worlds greatest
men have doubtless been characters in which there was a slightly more than
average fixation at this point. Inordinate ambition is, I should say, an
evidence of such a fixation. If one possesses great natural ability he may
under such circumstances be able to forge ahead to his goal, overcoming the
conflicts which such a fixation always raises, and show no greater evidence
of pathology in his career than is seen in the usual saying that "genius is
always a little queer." The typical crowd-leader would, on analysis, I think,
show something of this "narcissus complex," as would doubtless the great
run of fanatics, bigots, and doctrinaires, "hundred per cent" crowd-men all.
According to Brill, these "auto erotic" persons are always homosexual,
their homosexuality manifesting itself in various ways. The overt
manifestations of this tendency are known as perversions. Certain persons
who have suppressed or sublimated these tendencies, by means of certain
defense mechanisms, or "fictions," as Adler would call them, get along very
well so long as the defense mechanism functions. There are cases when this
unconsciously constructed defense breaks down. An inner conflict is then
precipitated, a marked form of which is the common type of insanity,
"paranoia." Persons suffering with paranoia are characterized by an
insatiable demand for love along with a psychic incapacity to give love.
They have an exaggerated sense of their own importance which is sustained
by a wholly unreal but deadly logical system of a priori ideas, which
constitute the "obsessions" common to this type of mentality. The inner
conflict becomes external—that is, it is "projected." The paranoiac projects
his own inner hostility and lack of adjustment upon others—that is, he
attributes his own feeling of hostility to some one else, as if he were the
object, not the author, of his hatred. He imagines that he is persecuted, as
the following example will show. The passage here quoted is taken from a
pamphlet which was several years ago given to me by the author. He
ostensibly wished to enlist my efforts in a campaign he believed himself to
be conducting to "expose" the atrocious treatment of persons, like himself,
who were imprisoned in asylums as the innocent victims of domestic
conspiracy. By way of introducing himself the author makes it known that
he has several times been confined in various hospitals, each time by the
design and instigation of his wife, and after stating that on the occasion
described he was very "nervous and physically exhausted" and incidentally
confessing that he was arrested while attempting homicide "purely in self-
defense," he gives this account of his incarceration:
I was locked in a cold cell, and being in poor health, my circulation
was poor, and the officer ordered me to go to bed and I obeyed his
orders, but I began to get cold, and believing then, as I still believe,
that the coffee I got out of the coffee tank for my midnight lunch had
been "doped," and fearful that the blood in my veins which began to
coagulate would stop circulating altogether, I got out of bed and
walked the floor to and fro all the remainder of the night and by so
doing I saved my life. For had I remained in bed two hours I would
have been a dead man before sunrise next morning. I realized my
condition and had the presence of mind to do everything in my power
to save my life and put my trust in God, and asked his aid in my
extremity. But for divine aid, I would not now have the privilege of
writing my awful experiences in that hell-hole of a jail.
The officer who arrested me without any warrant of law, and
without any unlawful act on my part was the tool of some person or
persons who were either paid for their heinous crime, or of the
landlady of the —— hotel (he had been a clerk there) who allowed
gambling to go on nearly every night, and thought I was a detective or
spy, and so was instrumental in having me thrown into jail.
I begged so hard not to be locked in the cell that I was allowed to
stay in the corridor in front of the cells. I observed chloral dripping
through the roof of the cell-house in different places, and as I had had
some experience with different drugs, I detected the smell of chloral as
soon as I entered the cell-house.
Sometime after midnight some one stopped up the stovepipe and
the door of the coal stove was left open so that the coal gas issued from
the stove, so that breathing was difficult in the jail. The gases from the
stove and other gases poisoned the air ... and your humble servant had
the presence of mind to tear up a hair mattress and kept my nostrils
continually filled with padding out of the mattress. I would often and
instantly change the filling in one nostril, and not during the long hours
of that awful night did I once open my mouth. In that manner I inhaled
very little gases. Why in my weakened condition and my poor health
anyone wanted to deprive me of my life I am at a loss to know, but
failing to kill me, I was taken after nearly three days of sojourn in that
hell-hole to the courthouse in ——. But such thoughts as an innocent
man in my condition would think, in among criminals of all sorts, can
better be imagined than described.... I thought of Christs persecutors
and I thought how the innocent suffer because of the wicked.
In general we may say that the various forms of psychoneurosis are
characterized by a conflict of the ego with primitive impulses inadequately
repressed. In defense against these impulses, which though active remain
unconsciously so, the individual constructs a fictitious system of ideas, of
symbolic acts, or bodily symptoms. These systems are attempts to
compromise the conflict in the unconscious, and in just the degree that they
are demanded for this function, they fail of their function of adjusting the
individual to his external world. Thought and behavior thus serve the
purpose of compensating for some psychic loss, and of keeping up the
individuals self feeling. Though the unconscious purpose is to enhance the
ego consciousness, the mechanisms through which this end is achieved
produce through their automatic and stereotyped form a shrinking of
personality and a serious lack of adjustment to environment.
Now it is not at all the aim of this argument to try to prove that crowds
are really insane. Psychoanalysts commonly assert that the difference
between the normal and the abnormal is largely one of degree and of
success in adjustment. We are told that the conflict exists also in normal
people, with whom, however, it is adequately repressed and "sublimated"—
that is, normal people pass on out of the stages in which the libido of the
neurotic becomes fixed, not by leaving them behind, but by attaching the
interests which emerge in such stages to ends which are useful in future
experience. The neurotic takes the solitary path of resolving the conflict
between his ego and the impulses which society demands shall be
repressed.
It is altogether conceivable that another path lies open—that of
occasional compromise in our mutual demands on one another. The force
of repression is then relaxed by an unconscious change in the significance
of social ideas. Such a change must of course be mutual and unconscious.
Compromise mechanisms will again be formed serving a purpose similar to
the neurosis. As in the neurosis, thought and action will be compulsory,
symbolic, stereotyped, and more or less in conflict with the demands of
society as a whole, though functioning in a part of it for certain purposes.
Many of the characteristics of the unconscious will then appear and will be
similar in some respects to those of neurosis. It is my contention that this is
what happens in the crowd, and I will now point out certain phases of
crowd-behavior which are strikingly analogous to some of the phenomena
which have been described above.
IV.
The Egoism of the Crowd-Mind
Table of Contents
The unconscious egoism of the individual in the crowd appears in all forms
of crowd-behavior. As in dreams and in the neurosis this self feeling is
frequently though thinly disguised, and I am of the opinion that with the
crowd the mechanisms of this disguise are less subtle. To use a term which
Freud employs in this connection to describe the process of distortion in
dreams, the "censor" is less active in the crowd than in most phases of
mental life. Though the conscious thinking is carried on in abstract and
impersonal formula, and though, as in the neurosis, the "compulsive"
character of the mechanisms developed frequently—especially in
permanent crowds—well nigh reduces the individual to an automaton, the
crowd is one of the most naïve devices that can be employed for enhancing
ones ego consciousness. The individual has only to transfer his repressed
self feeling to the idea of the crowd or group of which he is a member; he
can then exalt and exhibit himself to almost any extent without shame,
oblivious of the fact that the supremacy, power, praise, and glory which he
claims for his crowd are really claimed for himself.
That the crowd always insists on being flattered is a fact known
intuitively by every orator and editor. As a member of a crowd the
individual becomes part of a public. The worship with which men regard
"The Public," simply means that the personal self falls at the feet of the
same self regarded as public, and likewise demands that obeisance from all.
Vox populi est vox Dei is obviously the apotheosis of ones own voice while
speaking as crowd-man. When this "god-almightiness" manifests itself
along the solitary path of the psychoneurosis it becomes one of the common
symptoms of paranoia. The crowd, in common with paranoia, uniformly
shows this quality of "megalomania." Every crowd "boosts for" itself, lauds
itself, gives itself airs, speaks with oracular finality, regards itself as morally
superior, and will, so far as it has the power, lord it over everyone. Notice
how each group and section in society, so far as it permits itself to think as
crowd, claims to be "the people." To the working-class agitator, "the cause
of labor is the cause of humanity," workers are always, "innocent exploited
victims, kept down by the master class whose lust for gain has made them
enemies of Humanity and Justice." "Workers should rule because they are
the only useful people; the sole creators of wealth; their dominance would
mean the end of social wrong, and the coming of the millennium of peace
and brotherhood, the Kingdom of Heaven on the Earth, the final triumph of
Humanity!"
On the other hand, the wealthy and educated classes speak of
themselves as "the best people"; they are "society." It is they who "bear the
burdens of civilization, and maintain Law and Order and Decency." Racial
and national crowds show the same megalomania. Hebrews are "Gods
chosen." "The Dutch Company is the best Company that ever came over
from the Old Country." "The Irish may be ornery, and they aint worth much,
but they are a whole lot better than the —— —— Dutch." "Little Nigger
baby, black face, and shiny eye, youre just as good as the poor white trash,
an youll git thar by and by." "He might have been a Russian or a Prussian,
... but its greatly to his credit that he is an Englishman." The German is the
happy bearer of Kultur to a barbarian world. America is "The land of the
free and the home of the brave," and so on, wherever a group has become
sufficiently a crowd to have a propaganda of its own. Presbyterians are "the
Elect," the Catholics have the "true church of God," the Christian Scientists
have alone attained "Absolute Truth."
A number of years ago, when the interest in the psychology of the
crowd led me to attempt a study of Mr. Sundays revival meetings, then in
their earlier stages, certain facts struck me with great force. Whatever else
the revival may be, it provides the student of psychology with a delightful
specimen for analysis. Every element of the mob or crowd-mind is present
and the unconscious manifests itself with an easy naïveté which is probably
found nowhere else, not even in the psychiatric clinic. One striking fact,
which has since provided me with food for a good deal of reflection, was
the place which the revival holds in what I should like to call the spiritual
economy of modern democracy.
It is an interesting historical fact that each great religious revival, from
Savonarola down, has immediately followed—and has been the resistance
of the man in the street to—a period of intellectual awakening. Mr. Sundays
meetings undeniably provided a device whereby a certain psychic type, an
element which had hitherto received scant recognition in the community,
could enormously enhance his ego consciousness. It would be manifestly
unfair to say that this is the sole motive of the religious revival, or that only
this type of mind is active in it. But it is interesting to see whose social
survival values stand out most prominently in these religious crowd-
phenomena. The gambler, the drunkard, the loafer, the weak, ignorant, and
unsuccessful, whose self-esteem it may be assumed had always been made
to suffer in small communities, where everyone knew everyone else, had
only to yield himself to the pull of the obviously worked-up mechanism of
the religious crowd, and lo! all was changed. He was now the repentant
sinner, the new convert, over whom there was more rejoicing in heaven,
and, what was more visible, also for a brief time, in the Church, than over
the ninety and nine just persons. He was "redeemed," an object now of
divine love, a fact which anyone who has studied the effects of these crowd-
movements scientifically will agree was at once seized upon by these
converts to make their own moral dilemmas the standards of righteousness
in the community, and hence secure some measure of dominance.
This self-adulation of crowds, with its accompanying will to be
important, to dominate, is so constant and characteristic a feature of the
crowd-mind that I doubt if any crowd can long survive which fails to
perform this function for its members. Self-flattery is evident in the pride
with which many people wear badges and other insignia of groups and
organizations to which they belong, and in the pompous names by which
fraternal orders are commonly designated. In its more "exhibitionist" types
it appears in parades and in the favorite ways in which students display their
"college spirit." How many school and college "yells" begin with the
formula, "Who are We?" obviously designed to call general attention to the
group and impress upon people its importance.
In this connection I recall my own student days, which are doubtless
typical—the pranks which served the purpose of bringing certain groups of
students into temporary prominence and permitted them for a brief period to
regard themselves as comic heroes, the practices by which the different
classes and societies sought to get the better of one another, the "love
feasts" of my society which were hardly more than mutual admiration
gatherings, the "pajama" parades in which the entire student body would
march in costume (the wearing of which by an isolated individual would
probably have brought him before a lunacy commission) all through the
town and round and round the dormitories of the womens college a mile or
so away, in order to announce a victory in some intercollegiate contest or
other. There was the brazenness—it seems hardly credible now—with
which the victors on such occasions would permit themselves to be carried
on their comrades shoulders through the public square, also the deportment
with which a delegation of students would announce their arrival in a
neighboring college town and the grinning self-congratulation with which
we would sit in chapel and hear a wrathful president denounce our group
behavior as "boorishness and hoodlumism." There was the unanimous
conviction of us all, for no other reason I imagine than that it was graced
with our particular presence, that our own institution was the most superior
college in existence, and I well remember the priggishness with which at
student banquets we applauded the sentiment repeated ad nauseam, that the
great aim of education and the highest mark of excellence in our college
was the development of character. What is it all but a slightly exaggerated
account of the egoism of all organized crowds? Persons of student age are
for the most part still in the normal "narcissus" period, and their ego-mania
is naturally less disguised than that of older groups. But even then we could
never have given such open manifestation to it as isolated individuals; it
required the crowd-spirit.
The egoism of the crowd commonly takes the form of the will to social
dominance and it is in crowd behavior that we learn how insatiable the
repressed egoism of mankind really is. Members of the crowd are always
promising one another a splendid future triumph of some sort. This promise
of victory, which is nearly always to be enjoyed at the expense,
discomfiture, and humiliation of somebody else, is of great advantage in the
work of propaganda. People have only to be persuaded that prohibition, or
equal suffrage, or the single tax "is coming," and thousands whose reason
could not be moved by argument, however logical it might be, will begin to
look upon it with favor. The crowd is never so much at home as "on the
band wagon." Each of the old political parties gains strength through the
repeated prediction of victory in the presidential campaign of 1920. The
Socialist finds warmth in the contemplation of the "coming dictatorship of
the proletariat." The Prohibitionist intoxicates himself by looking forward
to a "dry world." So long as the German crowds expected a victorious end
of the war, their morale remained unbroken, the Kaiser was popular.
When a crowd is defeated and its hope of victory fades, the individual
soon abandons the unsuccessful group. The great cause, being now a forlorn
hope, is seen in a different light, and the crowd character of the group
vanishes. When, however, certain forces still operate to keep the crowd
state of mind alive—forces such as race feeling, patriotism, religious belief,
or class consciousness—the ego consciousness of the individuals so
grouped finds escape in the promise of heaven, the Judgment Day, and that
"far off divine event toward which the whole creation moves." Meanwhile
the hope of victory is changed into that "impotent resentment" so
graphically described by Nietzsche.
Another way in which the self feeling of the crowd functions is in
idealizing those who succeed in gaining its recognition. The crowd always
makes a hero of the public person, living or dead. Regardless of what he
really did or was, he is transformed into a symbol of what the crowd wishes
to believe him to be. Certain aspects of his teaching and various incidents
which would appear in his biography are glossed over, and made into
supports for existing crowd-ideas and prejudices. Most of the great
characters in history have suffered in this way at the hands of tradition. The
secret of their greatness, their uniqueness and spiritual isolation, is in great
part ignored. The crowds own secret is substituted. The great man now
appears great because he possessed the qualities of little men. He is
representative man, crowd man. Every crowd has a list of heroic names
which it uses in its propaganda and in its self-laudation. The greatness
which each crowd reveres and demands that all men honor is just that
greatness which the crowd treasures as a symbol of itself, the sort of
superiority which the members of the crowd may suck up to swell their own
ego consciousness.
Thus, hero worship is unconsciously worship of the crowd itself, and
the constituents thereof. The self-feeling of a crowd is always enhanced by
the triumph of its leader or representative. Who, at a ball game or athletic
event, has not experienced elation and added self-complacency in seeing the
home team win? What other meaning has the excited cheering? Even a
horse on a race track may become the representative of a crowd and lift five
thousand people into the wildest joy and ecstasy by passing under a wire a
few inches ahead of a rival. We have here one of the secrets of the appeal
which all such exhibitions make to people. Nothing so easily catches
general attention and creates a crowd as a contest of any kind. The crowd
unconsciously identifies its members with one or the other competitor.
Success enables the winning crowd to "crow over" the losers. Such an
occasion becomes symbolic and is utilized by the ego to enhance its feeling
of importance.
A similar psychological fact may be observed in the "jollifications" of
political parties after the election of their candidates for high office. This
phenomenon is also seen, if I may say so without being misunderstood, in
the new spirit which characterizes a people victorious in war, and is to no
small degree the basis of the honor of successful nations. It is seen again in
the pride which the citizens of a small town show in the fact that the
governor of the state is a native of the place. This same principle finds place
in such teachings of the Church as the doctrine of the "communion of the
saints," according to which the spiritual grace and superiority of the great
and pure become the common property of the Church, and may be shared
by all believers as a saving grace.
Every organized crowd is jealous of its dignity and honor and is bent
upon keeping up appearances. Nothing is more fatal to it than a successful
assault upon its prestige. Every crowd, even the casual street mob, clothes
the egoistic desires of its members or participants in terms of the loftiest
moral motive. No crowd can afford to be laughed at. Crowd men have little
sense of humor, certainly none concerning themselves and their crowd-
ideas. Any laughter they indulge in is more likely to be directed at those
who do not believe with them. The crowd-man resents any suspicion of
irreverence or criticism of his professions, because to question them is to
weaken the claim of his crowd upon the people, and to destroy in those
professed ideals their function of directing his own attention away from the
successful compromise of his unconscious conflicts which the crowd had
enabled him to make. The crowd would perish if it lost its "ideals." It clings
to its fixed ideas with the same tenacity as does the paranoiac. You can no
more reason with the former than you can with the latter, and for much the
same cause; the beliefs of both are not the fruit of inquiry, neither do they
perform the normal intellectual function of adjustment to environment; they
are mechanisms of the ego by which it keeps itself in countenance.
Much of the activity of the unconscious ego is viewed by psychologists
as "compensation." Devices which serve the purpose of compensating the
ego for some loss, act of self-sacrifice, or failure, are commonly revealed by
both the normal and the unadjusted. The popular notion that unsatisfied
desires sooner or later perish of starvation is at best but a half truth. These
desires after we have ceased to attend them become transformed. They
frequently find satiety in some substitute which the unconscious accepts as
a symbol of its real object. Dreams of normal people contain a great deal of
material of this sort. So do day-dreams, and art. Many religious beliefs also
serve this purpose of compensation. Jung follows Freud in pointing out as a
classic example of the compensation in dreams, that of Nebuchadnezzar, in
the Bible.
Nebuchadnezzar at the height of his power had a dream which foretold
his downfall. He dreamed of a tree which had raised its head even up
to Heaven and now must be hewn down. This was a dream which is
obviously a counterpoise to the exaggerated feeling of royal power.
According to Jung, we may expect to find only those things contained in
the unconscious which we have not found in the conscious mind. Many
conscious virtues and traits of character are thus compensations for their
opposite in the unconscious.
In the case of abnormal people, the individual entirely fails to
recognize the compensating influences which arise in the unconscious.
He even continues to accentuate his onesidedness; this is in accord
with the well-known psychological fact that the worst enemy of the
wolf is the wolfhound, the greatest despiser of the negro is the mulatto,
and that the biggest fanatic is the convert; for I should be a fanatic
were I to attack a thing outwardly which inwardly I am obliged to
concede is right.
The mentally unbalanced man tries to defend himself against his
own unconscious—that is to say, he battles against his own
compensating influences. In normal minds opposites of feeling and
valuations lie closely associated; the law of this association is called
"ambivalence," about which we shall see more later. In the abnormal,
the pairs are torn asunder, the resulting division, or strife, leads to
disaster, for the unconscious soon begins to intrude itself violently
upon the conscious processes.
An especially typical form of unconscious compensation ... is the
paranoia of the alcoholic. The alcoholic loses his love for his wife; the
unconscious compensation tries to lead him back again to his duty, but
only partially succeeds, for it causes him to become jealous of his wife
as if he still loved her. As we know, he may go so far as to kill both his
wife and himself, merely out of jealousy. In other words, his love for
his wife has not been entirely lost. It has simply become subliminal;
but from the realm of consciousness it can now only reappear in the
form of jealousy.... We see something of a similar nature in the case of
the religious convert.... The new convert feels himself constrained to
defend the faith he has adopted (since much of the old faith still
survives in the unconscious associations) in a more or less fanatical
way. It is exactly the same in the paranoiac who feels himself
constantly constrained to defend himself against all external criticism,
because his delusional system is too much threatened from within.
It is not necessary for us to enter here upon a discussion of the processes
by which these compensating devices are wrought out in the
psychoneurosis. It is significant, though, that Jung calls attention to the
likeness between religious fanaticism and paranoia. Now it is obvious that
the fanaticism of the religious convert differs psychologically not at all
from that of any other convert. We have already noted the fact that most
religious conversions are accomplished by the crowd. Moreover the crowd
everywhere tends to fanaticism. The fanatic is the crowd-man pure and
simple. He is the type which it ever strives to produce. His excess of
devotion, and willingness to sacrifice both himself and everyone else for the
crowds cause, always wins the admiration of his fellow crowd-members.
He has given all for the crowd, is wholly swallowed by it, is "determined
not to know anything save" his crowd and its propaganda. He is the martyr,
the true believer, "the red-blooded loyal American" with "my country right
or wrong." He is the uncompromising radical whose prison record puts to
shame the less enthusiastic members of his group. He is the militant
pacifist, the ever-watchful prohibitionist, and keeper of his neighbors
consciences, the belligerent moral purist, who is scandalized even at the
display of lingerie in the store windows, the professional reformer who in
every community succeeds in making his goodness both indispensable and
unendurable.
One need not be a psychologist to suspect that the evil against which the
fanatic struggles is really in large measure in himself. He has simply
externalized, or "projected" the conflict in his own unconscious. Persons
who cry aloud with horror at every change in the style of womens clothing
are in most cases persons whose ego is gnawed by a secret promiscuous
eroticism. The scandalmonger, inhibited from doing the forbidden thing,
enjoys himself by a vicarious indulgence in rottenness. The prohibition
agitator, if not himself an alcoholic barely snatched from the burning, is
likely to be one who at least feels safer in a democracy where it is not
necessary to resist temptation while passing a saloon door. Notice that the
fanatic or crowd-man always strives to universalize his own moral
dilemmas. This is the device by which every crowd seeks dominance in the
earth. A crowds virtues and its vices are really made out of the same stuff.
Each is simply the other turned upside down, the compensation for the
other. They are alike and must be understood together as the expression of
the type of person who constitutes the membership of some particular group
or crowd.
I'll never use tobacco, it is a filthy weed
I'll never put it in my mouth, said little Robert Reed.
But obviously, little Robert is already obsessed with a curious interest in
tobacco. His first word shows that he has already begun to think of this
weed in connection with himself. Should a crowd of persons struggling
with Roberts temptation succeed in dominating society, tobacco would
become taboo and thus would acquire a moral significance which it does
not have at present. So with all our crowd-ethics. The forbidden thing
protrudes itself upon consciousness as a negation. The negation reveals
what it is that is occupying the inner psyche, and is its compensation. There
are certain psychoneuroses in which this negative form of compensation is
very marked. Now it is a noteworthy fact that with the crowd the ethical
interest always takes this negative form.
The healthy moral will is characterized by a constant restating of the
problem of living in terms of richer and higher and more significant
dilemmas as new possibilities of personal worth are revealed by experience.
New and more daring valuations are constantly made. The whole psychic
functioning is enriched. Goodness means an increase of satisfactions
through a more adequate adjustment to the real—richer experience, more
subtle power of appreciation and command, a self-mastery, sureness, and
general personal excellence—which on occasions great and small mark the
good will as a reality which counts in the sum total of things. Something is
achieved because it is really desired; existence is in so far humanized, a self
has been realized. As Professor Dewey says:
If our study has shown anything it is that the moral is a life, not
something ready-made and complete once for all. It is instinct with
movement and struggle, and it is precisely the new and serious
situations which call out new vigor and lift it to higher levels.
It is not so with the crowd-ethic. It is interesting to note that from the
"Decalogue" to Kants "Categorical Imperative," crowd-morals always and
everywhere take the form of prohibitions, taboos, and ready-made
standards, chiefly negative. Freud has made an analytical study of the
Taboo as found in primitive society and has shown that it has a
compensatory value similar to that of the taboos and compulsions of certain
neurotics.
The crowd admits of no personal superiority other than that which
consists in absolute conformity to its own negative standards. Except for the
valuations expressed by its own dilemmas, "one man is as good as
another"—an idea which it can be easily seen serves the purpose of
compensation. The goodness which consists of unique personal superiority
is very distasteful to the crowd. There must be only one standard of
behavior, alike for all. A categorical imperative. The standard as set up is of
the sort which is most congenial, possible of attainment, and even necessary
for the survival of the members of some particular crowd. It is their good,
the converse and compensation of their own vices, temptations, and
failures. The crowd then demands that this good shall be THE GOOD, that it
become the universal standard. By such means even the most incompetent
and unadventurous and timid spirits may pass judgment upon all men. They
may cry to the great of the earth, "We have piped unto you and you have not
danced." Judged by the measure of their conformity to the standards of the
small, the great may be considered no better, possibly not so good as the
little spirits. The well are forced to behave like the spiritually sick. The
crowd is a dog in the manger. If eating meat maketh my brother to be
scandalized, or giveth him the cramps, I shall remain a vegetarian so long as
the world standeth. Nietzsche was correct on this point. The crowd—he
called it the herd—is a weapon of revenge in the hands of the weaker
brother. It is a Procrustean bed on which every spiritual superiority may be
lopped off to the common measure, and every little ego consciousness may
be stretched to the stature of full manhood.
V.
The Crowd a Creature of Hate
Table of Contents
Probably the most telling point of likeness between the crowd-mind and the
psychoneurosis—paranoia especially—is the "delusion of persecution." In
cases of paranoia the notion that the patient is the victim of all sorts of
intrigue and persecution is so common as to be a distinguishing symptom of
this disease. Such delusions are known to be defenses, or compensation
mechanisms, growing out of the patients exaggerated feeling of self-
importance. The delusion of grandeur and that of being persecuted
commonly go together. The reader will recall the passage quoted from the
pamphlet given me by a typical paranoiac. The author of the document
mentioned feels that he has a great mission, that of exposing and reforming
the conditions in hospitals for the insane. He protests his innocence. In jail
he feels like Christ among his tormentors. His wife has conspired against
him. The woman who owns the hotel where he was employed wishes to put
him out of the way. The most fiendish methods are resorted to in order to
end his life. "Some one" blocked up the stovepipe, etc., etc.
Another illustration of a typical case is given by Doctor Brill. I quote
scattered passages from the published notes on the case record of the
patient, "E. R."
He graduated in 1898 and then took up schoolteaching.... He did not
seem to get along well with his principal and other teachers.... He
imagined that the principal and other teachers were trying to work up a
"badger game" on him, to the effect that he had some immoral
relations with his girl pupils....
In 1903 he married, after a brief courtship, and soon thereafter took
a strong dislike to his brother-in-law and sister and accused them of
immorality.... He also accused his wife of illicit relations with his
brother and his brother-in-law, Mr. S.
Mr. S., his brother-in-law, was the arch conspirator against him. He
also (while in the hospital) imagined that some women made signs to
him and were in the hospital for the purpose of liberating him.
Whenever he heard anybody talking he immediately referred it to
himself. He interpreted every movement and expression as having
some special meaning for himself....
Now and then (after his first release by order of the court) he
would send mysterious letters to different persons in New York City.
At that time one of his delusions was that he was a great statesman and
that the United States government had appointed him ambassador (to
Canada), but that the "gang" in New York City had some one without
ability to impersonate him so that he lost his appointment. (Later,
while confined to the hospital again) he thought that the daughter of
the President of the United States came to visit him....
After the patient was recommitted to Bellevue Hospital, he told me
that I (Doctor Brill) was one of the "gang." I was no longer his wife in
disguise (as he has previously imagined) but his enemy.
Brills discussion of this case contains an interesting analysis of the
several stages of "regression" and the unconscious mechanisms which
characterize paranoia. He holds that such cases show a "fixation" in an
earlier stage of psychosexual development. The patient, an unconscious
homosexual, is really in love with himself. The resulting inner conflict
appears, with its defense formations, as the delusion of grandeur and as
conscious hatred for the person or persons who happen to be the object of
the patients homosexual wish fancy." However this may be, the point of
interest for our study is the "projection" of this hatred to others. Says Brill:
The sentence, "I rather hate him" becomes transformed through
projection into the sentence, "he hates (persecutes) me, which justifies
my hating him."
The paranoiacs delusional system inevitably brings him in conflict with
his environment, but his feeling of being persecuted is less the result of this
conflict with an external situation than of his own inner conflict. He
convinces himself that it is the other, or others, not he, who is the author of
this hatred. He is the innocent victim of their malice.
This phenomenon of "projection and displacement" has received
considerable attention in analytical psychology. Freud, in the book, Totem
and Taboo, shows the role which projection plays in the primitive mans fear
of demons. The demons are of course the spirits of the dead. But how
comes it that primitive people fear these spirits, and attribute to them every
sort of evil design against the living? To quote Freud:
When a wife loses her husband, or a daughter her mother, it not
infrequently happens that the survivor is afflicted with tormenting
scruples, called "obsessive reproaches," which raise the question
whether she herself has not been guilty, through carelessness or
neglect, of the death of the beloved person. No recalling of the care
with which she nursed the invalid, or direct refutation of the asserted
guilt, can put an end to the torture, which is the pathological
expression of mourning and which in time slowly subsides.
Psychoanalytic investigation of such cases has made us acquainted
with the secret mainspring of this affliction. We have ascertained that
these obsessive reproaches are in a certain sense justified.... Not that
the mourner has really been guilty of the death or that she has really
been careless, as the obsessive reproach asserts; but still there was
something in her, a wish of which she was unaware, which was not
displeased with the fact that death came, and which would have
brought it about sooner had it been strong enough. The reproach now
reacts against this unconscious wish after the death of the beloved
person. Such hostility, hidden in the unconscious behind tender love,
exists in almost all cases of intensive emotional allegiance to a
particular person; indeed, it represents the classic case, the prototype
of the ambivalence of human emotions....
By assuming a similar high degree of ambivalence in the emotional
life of primitive races such as psychoanalysis ascribes to persons
suffering from compulsion neurosis, it becomes comprehensible that
the same kind of reaction against the hostility latent in the unconscious
behind the obsessive reproaches of the neurotic should also be
necessary here after the painful loss has occurred. But this hostility,
which is painfully felt in the unconscious in the form of satisfaction
with the demise, experiences a different fate in the case of primitive
man: the defense against it is accomplished by a displacement upon the
object of hostility—namely, the dead. We call this defense process,
frequent in both normal and diseased psychic life, a "projection."...
Thus we find that taboo has grown out of the soil of an ambivalent
emotional attitude. The taboo of the dead also originates from the
opposition between conscious grief and the unconscious satisfaction at
death. If this is the origin of the resentment of spirits, it is self-evident
that the nearest and formerly most beloved survivors have to feel it
most. As in neurotic symptoms, the taboo regulations evince opposite
feelings. Their restrictive character expresses mourning, while they
also betray very clearly what they are trying to conceal—namely, the
hostility toward the dead which is now motivated as self-defense....
The double feeling—tenderness and hostility—against the
deceased, which we consider well-founded, endeavors to assert itself at
the time of bereavement as mourning and satisfaction. A conflict must
ensue between these contrary feelings, and as one of them—namely,
the hostility, is altogether, or for the greater part, unconscious, the
conflict cannot result in a conscious difference in the form of hostility
or tenderness, as, for instance, when we forgive an injury inflicted
upon us by some one we love. The process usually adjusts itself
through a special psychic mechanism which is designated in
psychoanalysis as "projection." This unknown hostility, of which we
are ignorant and of which we do not wish to know, is projected from
our inner perception into the outer world and is thereby detached from
our own person and attributed to another. Not we, the survivors,
rejoice because we are rid of the deceased, on the contrary we mourn
for him; but now, curiously enough, he has become an evil demon who
would rejoice in our misfortune and who seeks our death. The
survivors must now defend themselves against this evil enemy; they
are freed from inner oppression, but they have only succeeded in
exchanging it for an affliction from without.
Totem, taboo, demon worship, etc., are clearly primitive crowd-
phenomena. Freuds main argument in this book consists in showing the
likeness between these phenomena and the compulsion neurosis. The
projection of unconscious hostility upon demons is by no means the only
sort of which crowds both primitive and modern are capable. Neither must
the hostility always be unconscious. Projection is a common device
whereby even normal and isolated individuals justify themselves in hating.
Most of us love to think evil of our enemies and opponents. Just as two
fighting schoolboys will each declare that the other "began it," so our
dislike of people often first appears to our consciousness as a conviction
that they dislike or entertain unfriendly designs upon us. There is a common
type of female neurotic whose repressed erotic wishes appear in the form of
repeated accusations that various of her men acquaintances are guilty of
making improper advances to her. When the "white slavery" reform
movement swept over the country—an awakening of the public conscience
which would have accomplished a more unmixed good if it had not been
taken up in the usual crowd-spirit—it was interesting to watch the
newspapers and sensational propagandist speakers as they deliberately
encouraged these pathological phenomena in young people. The close
psychological relation between the neurosis and the crowd-mind is shown
by the fact that the two so frequently appear at the same moment, play so
easily into each others hands, and are apparently reactions to the very same
social situation.
In Brills example of paranoia, it will be remembered that the patients
delusions of persecution took the form of such statements as that the "gang"
had intrigued at Washington to prevent his appointment as ambassador, that
certain of his relatives were in a "conspiracy against him." How commonly
such phrases and ideas occur in crowd-oratory and in the crowd-newspaper
is well known to all. We have already seen that the crowd in most cases
identifies itself with "the people," "humanity," "society," etc. Listen to the
crowd-orator and you will also learn that there are all sorts of abominable
"conspiracies" against "the people." "The nation is full of traitors." The
Church is being "undermined by cunning heretics." "The Bolshevists are in
secret league with the Germans to destroy civilization." "Socialists are
planning to corrupt the morals of our youth and undermine the sacredness
of the home." "The politicians gang intends to loot the community." "Wall
Street is conspiring to rob the people of their liberties." "England plans to
reduce America to a British colony again." "Japan is getting ready to make
war on us." "German merchants are conducting a secret propaganda
intending to steal our trade and pauperize our nation." "The Catholics are
about to seize power and deliver us over to another Inquisition." "The liquor
interests want only to make drunkards of our sons and prostitutes of our
daughters." And so on and so forth, wherever any crowd can get a hearing
for its propaganda. Always the public welfare is at stake; society is
threatened. The "wrongs" inflicted upon an innocent humanity are
rehearsed. Bandages are taken off every social wound. Every scar, be it as
old as Cromwells mistreatment of Ireland, is inflamed. "The people are
being deceived," "kept down," "betrayed." They must rise and throw off
their exploiters, or they must purge the nation of disloyalty and "anarchy."
It cannot be denied that our present social order is characterized by deep
and fundamental social injustices, nor that bitter struggles between the
various groups in society are inevitable. But the crowd forever ignores its
own share in the responsibility for human ills, and each crowd persists in
making a caricature of its enemies, real and imagined, nourishing itself in a
delusion of persecution which is like nothing so much as the characteristic
obsessions of the paranoiac. This suspiciousness, this habit of
misrepresentation and exaggeration of every conceivable wrong, is not only
a great hindrance to the conflicting groups in adjusting their differences, it
makes impossible, by misrepresenting the real issue at stake, any effective
struggle for ideals. As the history of all crowd movements bears witness,
the real source of conflict is forgotten, the issue becomes confused with the
spectacular, the unimportant, and imaginary. Energy is wasted on side
issues, and the settlement finally reached, even by a clearly victorious
crowd, is seldom that of the original matter in dispute. In fact, it is not at all
the function of these crowd-ideas of self-pity and persecution to deal with
real external situations. These ideas are propaganda. Their function is to
keep the crowd together, to make converts, to serve as a defense for the
egoism of the crowd-man, to justify the anticipated tyranny which it is the
unconscious desire of the individual to exercise in the moment of victory
for his crowd, and, as "they who are not for us are against us," to project the
crowd-mans hatred upon the intended victims of his crowds will to
universal dominion. In other words, these propaganda ideas serve much the
same end as do the similar delusions of persecution in paranoia.
This likeness between the propaganda of the crowd and the delusions of
paranoia is illustrated daily in our newspapers. The following items cut
from the New York Tribune are typical. The first needs no further
discussion, as it parallels the cases given above. The second is from the
published proceedings of "a committee," appointed, as I remember it, by the
assembly of the state of New York, to conduct an investigation into certain
alleged seditious and anarchist activities. These articles well illustrate the
character of the propaganda to which such a committee almost inevitably
lends itself. Whether the committee or the newspapers were chiefly
responsible for such fabrications, I do not know, but the crowd character of
much of the attempt to stamp out Bolshevism is strikingly revealed in this
instance. No doubt the members of this committee, as well as the detectives
and the press agents who are associated with them, are as honestly
convinced that a mysterious gang of radicals is planning to murder us all as
is the paranoiac W. H. M. fixed in his delusion that his enemies are trying to
asphyxiate him. It will be remembered that Brills patient "E. S." interpreted
"every movement and expression as having some special meaning for
himself." This kind of "interpretation" has a curious logic all its own. It is
what I would call "compulsive thinking," and is characteristic of both the
delusions of paranoia and the rumors of the crowd.
First clipping:
Inventor is Declared Insane by a Jury.
W. H. M. declares rivals are attempting to asphyxiate him. W. H. M.,
an inventor, was declared mentally incompetent yesterday by a jury in
the Sheriffs court.... Alienists said M. had hallucinations about enemies
who he thinks are trying to asphyxiate him. He also imagines that he is
under hypnotic influences and that persons are trying to affect his body
with "electrical influences."
Second clipping:
Radicals Here Seek Soldiers for "Red Guard."
Several hundred men, formerly in United States Service, signify
willingness to aid in project. A "Red Guard" composed of men who
have served in the American military establishment is contemplated in
the elaborate revolutionary plans of Bolshevik leaders here. This was
learned yesterday when operatives of the Lusk committee discovered
that the radicals were making every effort to enlist the aid of the
Soldiers, Sailors, and Marines Protective Association in carrying out a
plot to overthrow the government by force. As far as the detectives
have been able to ascertain, the great mass of fighting men are not in
sympathy with the Reds, but several hundred have signified their
willingness to co-operate.
Just how far the plans of the Reds have progressed was not
revealed. It is known, however, that at a convention of the Left Wing
Socialists in Buffalo the movement designed to enlist the support of
the Soldiers, Sailors, and Marines Protective Association was
launched. This convention was addressed by prominent Left Wingers
from Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Paterson. They
asserted that trained military men must be obtained for the
organization if the plans were to be successful.
It was from this meeting, which was held in secret, that agitators
were sent to various parts of the state to form soviets in the shops and
factories. This phase of the radical activity, according to the
investigators, has met with considerable success in some large factory
districts where most of the workers are foreign-born. In some places
the soviets in the shops have become so strong that the employers are
alarmed and have notified the authorities of the menace. When
sufficient evidence has been gathered, foreign-born agitators working
to cause unrest in factories will be apprehended and recommended for
deportation.
Later report:
Denies Formation of "Red Guard" in U. S.
Alfred Levitt, secretary of the Soldiers, Sailors, and Marines Protective
Association, yesterday emphatically denied that the organization was
to be used as a "Red Guard" by the radicals when they started their
contemplated revolution. He said he never had heard any of the
members of the association discuss the formation of a "Red Guard" but
admitted that many of them were radicals.
In the two instances given above, fear, suspicion, hatred, give rise in one
case to a delusional system in the mind of an isolated individual, and in the
other to the circulation of an unfounded rumor by men who in their right
minds would, to say the least, carefully scrutinize the evidence for such a
story before permitting it to be published. As several months have passed
since the publication of this story and nothing more has appeared which
would involve our returned service men in any such treasonable conspiracy,
I think it is safe to say that this story, like many others circulated by radicals
as well as by reactionaries during the unsettled months following the war,
has its origin in the unconscious mechanisms of crowd-minded people.
Every sort of crowd is prone to give credence to rumors of this nature, and
to accuse all those who can not at once give uncritical acceptance to such
tales of sympathy with the enemy. Later we shall have something to say
about the delusional systems which appear to be common to the crowd-
mind and the paranoiac. In this connection I am interested in pointing out
only the psychological relation between what I might call the "conspiracy
delusion" and unconscious hatred. Commonly the former is the "projection"
of the latter.
One of the differences between these two forms of "projection" is the
fact that the hatred of the crowd is commonly less "rationalized" than in
paranoia—that is, less successfully disguised. Like the paranoiac, every
crowd is potentially if not actually homicidal in its tendencies. But whereas
with the paranoiac the murderous hostility remains for the greater part an
unconscious "wish fancy," and it is the mechanisms which disguise it or
serve as a defense against it which appear to consciousness, with the crowd
the murder-wish will itself appear to consciousness whenever the
unconscious can fabricate such defense mechanisms as will provide it with
a fiction of moral justification. Consequently, it is this fiction of
justification which the crowd-man must defend.
The crowds delusion of persecution, conspiracy, or oppression is thus a
defense mechanism of this nature. The projection of this hatred on those
outside the crowd serves not so much, as in paranoia, to shield the subject
from the consciousness of his own hatred, as to provide him with a pretext
for exercising it. Given such a pretext, most crowds will display their
homicidal tendencies quite openly.
Ordinary mobs or riots would seem to need very little justification of
this sort. But even these directly homicidal crowds invariably represent
themselves as motivated by moral idealism and righteous indignation.
Negroes are lynched in order to protect the white womanhood of the South,
also because, once accused, the negro happens to be helpless. If the colored
people were in the ascendancy and the whites helpless we should doubtless
see the reverse of this situation. A community rationally convinced of the
culprits guilt could well afford to trust the safety of womanhood to the
justice meted out by the courts, but it is obvious that these "moral" crowds
are less interested in seeing that justice is done than in running no risk of
losing their victim, once he is in their power. A recent development of this
spirit is the lynching in a Southern town of a juror who voted for the
acquittal of a black man accused of a crime.
It may be taken as a general law of crowd-psychology that the
"morality" of the crowd always demands a victim. Is it likely that one of
these mobs would "call off" an interesting lynching party if at the last
minute it were demonstrated that the accused was innocent? The practice of
lynching has been extended, from those cases where the offense with which
the accused is charged is so revolting as justly to arouse extreme
indignation, to offenses which are so trivial that they merely serve as a
pretext for torture and killing.
The homicidal tendencies of the crowd-mind always reveal themselves
the minute the crowd becomes sufficiently developed and powerful to relax
for the time being the usual social controls. Illustrations of this may be seen
in the rioting between the white and the colored races—epidemics of killing
—such as occurred recently in East St. Louis, and in the cities of
Washington, Chicago, and Omaha. The same thing is evident in the
"pogroms" of Russia and Poland, in the acts of revolutionary mobs of
Germany and Russia, in the promptness with which the Turks took
advantage of the situation created by the war to slaughter the Armenians.
This hatred is the specter which forever haunts the conflict between labor
and capital. It is what speedily transformed the French Revolution from the
dawn of an era of "Fraternity" to a day of terror and intimidation. It is seen
again in the curious interest which the public always has in a sensational
murder trial. It is evident in the hostility, open or suppressed, with which
any community regards the strange, the foreign, the "outlandish"—an
example of which is the frequent bullying and insulting of immigrants in
this country since the war. Much of the "Americanization propaganda"
which we have carried on since the war unfortunately gave the typical
crowd-man his opportunity. One need only listen to the speeches or read the
publications of certain "patriotic" societies to learn why it was that the
exhortation to our foreign neighbors to be loyal did so much more harm
than good.
The classic example of the killing crowd is, of course, a nation at war.
There are, to be sure, wars of national self-defense which are due to
political necessity rather than to crowd-thinking, but even in such cases the
phenomena of the crowd are likely to appear to the detriment of the cause.
At such times not only the army but the whole nation becomes a homicidal
crowd. The army, at least while the soldiers are in service, probably shows
the crowd-spirit in a less degree than does the civilian population. The
mental processes of an entire people are transformed. Every interest—
profit-seeking excepted—is subordinated to the one passion to crush the
enemy. The moment when war is declared is usually hailed with
tremendous popular enthusiasm and joy. There is a general lifting of spirits.
There is a sense of release, a nation-wide exultation, a sigh of relief as we
feel the deadening hand of social control taken from our throats. The
homicidal wish-fancy, which in peace times and in less sovereign crowds
exists only as an hypothesis, can now become a reality. And though it is
doubtful if more than one person in a million can ever give a rational
account of just what issue is really at stake in any war, the conviction is
practically unanimous that an occasion has been found which justifies, even
demands, the release of all the repressed hostility in our natures. The fact
that in war time this crowd hostility may, under certain circumstances,
really have survival value and be both beneficial and necessary to the
nation, is to my mind not a justification of crowd-making. It is rather a
revelation of the need of a more competent leadership in world politics.
Unconsciously every national crowd, I mean the crowd-minded element
in the nation, carries a chip on its shoulder, and swaggers and challenges its
neighbors like a young town-bully on his way home from grammar school.
This swaggering, which is here the "compulsive manifestation" of
unconscious hostility characteristic of every crowd, appears to
consciousness as "national honor." To the consciousness of the nation-
crowd the quarrel for which it has been spoiling for a long time always
appears to have been "forced upon it." Some nations are much more
quarrelsome than others. I cannot believe that our conviction that Imperial
Germany was the aggressor in the great war is due merely to patriotic
conceit on our part. The difference between our national spirit and that of
Imperial Prussia is obvious, but the difference in this respect, great as it is,
is one of degree rather than of kind, and is due largely to the fact that the
political organization of Germany permitted the Prussian patriots to hold the
national mind in a permanent crowd state to a degree which is even now
hardly possible in this republic. My point is that a nation becomes warlike
to precisely the extent that its people may be made to think and behave as a
crowd. Once a crowd, it is always "in the right" however aggressive and
ruthless its behavior; every act or proposal which is calculated to involve
the nation-crowd in a controversy, which gains some advantage over
neighboring peoples, or intensifies hatred once it is released, is wildly
applauded. Any dissent from the opinions of our particular party or group is
trampled down. He who fails at such a time to be a crowd-man and our own
sort of a crowd-man is a "slacker." Everyones patriotism is put under
suspicion, political heresy-hunting is the rule, any personal advantage
which can be gained by denouncing as "enemy sympathizers" rival persons
or groups within the nation is sure to be snatched up by some one. The
crowd-mind, even in times of peace, distorts patriotism so that it is little
more than a compulsive expression and justification of repressed hostility.
In war the crowd succeeds in giving rein to this hostility by first projecting
it upon the enemy.
Freud in his little book, War and Death, regards war as a temporary
"regression" in which primitive impulses which are repressed by
civilization, but not eradicated, find their escape. He argues that most
people live psychologically "beyond their means." Hence war could be
regarded, I suppose, as a sort of "spiritual liquidation." But if the hostility
which the war crowd permits to escape is simply a repressed impulse to
cruelty, we should be obliged to explain a large part of crowd-behavior as
"sadistic." This may be the case with crowds of a certain type, lynching
mobs, for instance. But as the homicidal tendencies of paranoia are not
commonly explained as sadism, I can see no reason why those of the crowd
should be. Sadism is a return to an infantile sex perversion, and in its direct
overt forms the resulting conflicts are conscious and are between the subject
and environment. It is where a tendency unacceptable to consciousness is
repressed—and inadequately—that neurotic conflict ensues. This conflict
being inner, develops certain mechanisms for the defense of the ego-feeling
which is injured. The hatred of the paranoiac is really a defense for his own
injured self-feeling. As the crowd always shows an exaggerated ego-feeling
similar to the paranoiacs delusion of grandeur, and as in cases of paranoia
this inner conflict is always "projected" in the form of delusions of
persecution, may we not hold that the characteristic hostility of the crowd is
also in some way a device for protecting this inflated self-appreciation from
injury? The forms which this hatred takes certainly have all the appearance
of being "compulsive" ideas and actions.
We have been discussing crowds in which hostility is present in the
form of overt destructive and homicidal acts or other unmistakable
expressions of hatred. But are there not also peaceable crowds, crowds
devoted to religious and moral propaganda, idealist crowds? Yes, all crowds
moralize, all crowds are also idealistic. But the moral enthusiasm of the
crowd always demands a victim. The idealist crowd also always makes
idols of its ideals and worships them with human sacrifice. The peaceable
crowd is only potentially homicidal. The death-wish exists as a fancy only,
or is expressed in symbols so as to be more or less unrecognizable to
ordinary consciousness. I believe that every crowd is "against some one."
Almost any crowd will persecute on occasion—if sufficiently powerful and
directly challenged. The crowd tends ever to carry its ideas to their deadly
logical conclusion.
I have already referred to the crowds interest in games and athletic
events as an innocent symbolization of conflict. How easy it is to change
this friendly rivalry into sudden riot—its real meaning—every umpire of
baseball and football games knows. As an illustration of my point—namely,
that the enthusiasm aroused by athletic contests is the suppressed hostility
of the crowd, I give the following. In this letter to a New York newspaper,
the writer, a loyal "fan," reveals the same mentality that we find in the
sectarian fanatic, or good party man, whose "principles" have been
challenged. The challenge seems in all such cases to bring the hostility into
consciousness as "righteous indignation."
To the Editor:
Sir,—The article under the caption "Giants Chances for Flag to be
Settled in Week," on the sporting page of the Tribune, is doubtless
intended to be humorous.
The section referring to the Cincinnati baseball public is somewhat
overdrawn, to say the least, and does not leave a very favorable
impression on the average Cincinnatian, such as myself. I have been a
reader of your paper for some time, but if this sort of thing continues I
shall feel very much like discontinuing.
W. L. D.
The extremes to which partisan hatred and jealousy can lead even
members of the United States Senate, the intolerance and sectarian spirit
which frequently characterize crowds, the "bigotry" of reformist crowds,
are matters known to us all. Does anyone doubt that certain members of the
Society for the Prevention of Vice, or of the Prohibitionists, would
persecute if they had power? Have not pacifist mass meetings been known
to break up in a row? The Christian religion is fundamentally a religion of
love, but the Church has seldom been wholly free from the crowd-spirit,
and the Church crowd will persecute as quickly as any other. In each period
of its history when Christian believers have been organized as dominant
crowds the Church has resorted to the severest forms of persecution.
Popular religion always demands some kind of devil to stand as the
permanent object of the believers hostility. Let an editor, or lecturer, or
clergyman anywhere attack some one, and he at once gains following and
popularity. Evangelists and political orators are always able to "get" their
crowd by resorting to abuse of some one. Let any mass meeting become a
crowd, and this note of hostility inevitably appears.
Notice the inscriptions which commonly appear on the banners carried
in political or labor parades. On the day after the armistice was signed with
Germany, when the most joyous and spontaneous crowds I have ever seen
filled the streets of New York, I was greatly impressed with those
homemade banners. Though it was the occasion of the most significant and
hard-won victory in human history, there was hardly a reference to the fact.
Though it was the glad moment of peace for which all had longed, I did not
see ten banners bearing the word "Peace," even in the hands of the element
in the city who were known to be almost unpatriotically pacifist. But within
less than an hour I counted on Fifth Avenue more than a hundred banners
bearing the inscription, "To Hell with the Kaiser."
That the man chiefly responsible for the horrors of the war should be the
object of universal loathing is only to be expected, but the significant fact is
that of all the sentiments which swept into peoples minds on that occasion,
this and this alone should have been immediately seized upon when the
crowd spirit began to appear. I doubt if at the time there was a very clear
sense of the enormity of Wilhelms guilt in the minds of those laughing
people. The Kaiser was hardly more than a symbol. The antagonist,
whoever he be, was "fallen down to hell," our own sense of triumph was
magnified by the depth of his fall. Just so the Hebrew Prophet cried
"Babylon is fallen," so the early Christians pictured Satan cast into the
bottomless pit, so the Jacobins cried "A bas les Aristocrats," our own
Revolutionary crowds cried "Down with George III," and the Union
soldiers sang, "Hang Jeff Davis on a Sour Apple Tree." I repeat that
wherever the crowd-mind appears, it will always be found to be "against"
some one.
An interesting fact about the hostility of a crowd is its ability on
occasion to survive the loss of its object. It may reveal the phenomenon
which psychologists call "displacement." That is to say, another object may
be substituted for the original one without greatly changing the quality of
the feeling. A mob in the street, driven back from the object of its attack,
will loot a store or two before it disperses. Or, bent on lynching a certain
negro, it may even substitute an innocent man, if robbed of its intended
victim—as, for instance, the lynching of the mayor of Omaha. Such facts
would seem to show that these hostile acts are really demanded by
mechanisms within the psyche. Many symbolic acts of the person afflicted
with compulsion neurosis show this same trait of substitution. If inhibited
in the exercise of one mechanism of escape, the repressed wish will
substitute another. Also anyone associated by the unconscious reasoning
with the hated object, or anyone who tries to defend him or prove him
innocent, may suffer from this crowds hatred. Freud has analyzed this
phenomenon in his study of taboo. He who touches the tabooed object
himself becomes taboo.
I have said that the hostility of the crowd is a sort of "defense
mechanism." That this is so in certain cases, I think can be easily
demonstrated. The following news item is an example of the manner in
which such hostility may serve as a "defense mechanism" compensating the
self-feeling for certain losses and serving to enhance the feeling of self-
importance:
Charges Baker Had 57 Brands of Army Objector.
——, of Minnesota, Defending Marines Fathers Association Protest;
Assails Freeing of "Slackers."
Washington, July 23.—A bitter partisan quarrel developed in the
House today when Representative ——, of Minnesota, attacked
Secretary Baker and the President for the governments policy toward
conscientious objectors. The attack was the result of protests by the
Marines Fathers Association of Minneapolis, Minnesota, representing
between 500 and 600 young marines now in France, all from the
Minneapolis high schools and the University of Minnesota, and many
in the famous 6th Regiment of Marines that took a big part in stopping
the Germans at Chateau Thierry.
Upon learning of the treatment accorded conscientious objectors in
this country while their sons were dying in France, the association
asked Representative —— to fix the responsibility for the
governments policy. Representative —— fixed it today as that of
Secretary Baker and President Wilson, charging that they extended the
definition of those to be exempted from military service laid down by
Congress in an act of May 17, 1917.
"One variety of conscientious objector was not enough for Mr.
Baker," declared Representative ——. "He had 57 kinds...."
Representative ——, of Arizona, defended Secretary Baker,
asserting that of 20,000 men who were certified as conscientious
objectors, 16,000 ultimately went to war. The case of Sergt. Alvin C.
York, the Tennessee hero, who had conscientious objections at first,
but soon changed his mind, was cited in defense of the War
Departments policy.
Let us pass over the obviously partisan element in this Congressional
debate—a crowd phenomenon in itself, by the way—and consider the
mental state of this Fathers Association.
In spite of the fact that the treatment of those who refused military
service in this country was so much more severe than the manner with
which the British government is reported to have dealt with this class of
persons, that many people, including the Secretary of War, whose loyalty
except to partisan minds was above suspicion, sought in the name of
humanity to alleviate some of the conditions in our military prisons, it was
not severe enough to satisfy these "fathers." It is doubtful if anything short
of an auto da fe would have met their approval. Now no one believes that
these simple farmers from the Northwest are such sadists at heart that they
enjoy cruelty for its own sake. I imagine that the processes at work here are
somewhat as follows:
The telltale phrase here is that these farmers sons "were dying in
France." Patriotic motives rightly demanded that fathers yield their sons to
the hardship and danger of battle, and while the sacrifice was made
consciously, with willingness and even with pride in having done their
painful duty, it was not accomplished without struggle—the unconscious
resisted it. It could not be reconciled to so great a demand. In other words,
these fathers, and probably many of their sons also, were unconsciously
"conscientious objectors." Unconsciously they longed to evade this painful
duty, but these longings were put aside, "repressed" as shameful and
cowardly—that is, as unacceptable to conscious self-feeling. It was
necessary to defend the ego against these longings. Compensation was
demanded and found in the nation-wide recognition of the value of this
patriotic sacrifice. Expressions of patriotic sentiment on the part of others,
therefore, compensated the individual and enhanced his self-feeling.
Successful refusal anywhere to recognize the duty which consciously
motivated this sacrifice strengthened the unconscious desire to evade it. The
unconscious reasoning was something like this: "If those men got out of this
thing, why should not we? Since we had to bear this loss, they must also.
We have suffered for dutys sake. By making them suffer also, they will be
forced to recognize this duty with which we defend ourselves against our
sense of loss and desire to escape it." As a witness to the values against
which the ego of these fathers has to struggle, the existence of the
conscientious objector, in a less degree of suffering than their own, is as
intolerable as their own "shameful and cowardly" unconscious longings.
Hostility to the conscientious objector is thus a "projection" of their own
inner conflict. By becoming a crowd, the members of this "Fathers
Association" make it mutually possible to represent their hostility to
conscientious objectors as something highly patriotic. Secretary Bakers
alleged leniency to these hated persons is now not only an affront to these
fathers, it is an affront to the entire nation.
Another and somewhat different example of the function of hatred in
the service of the self-feeling is the following item, which throws some
light on the motives of the race riots in Washington. This is, of course, a
defense of but one of the crowds involved, but it is interesting
psychologically.
Negro Editor Blames Whites for Race Riots.
Dr. W. F. B. DuBois, of 70 Fifth Avenue, editor of The Crisis, a
magazine published in connection with the work of the National
Association for the Advancement of the Colored People, yesterday
attributed the race riots in Washington to the irritability of all people
and the unsettling of many ideas caused by the war, to the influx of a
large number of Southerners into Washington, and to the presence in
that city of many of the representatives of the educated, well-dressed
class of negroes which white racial antagonists dislike.
Washington policemen are notoriously unfriendly to the colored
people, he added. Time and time again they stand by and witness a
dispute between a white man and a negro, and when it is over and the
negro has been beaten they arrest the negro, and not the white man
who caused the trouble in the first place.
The colored editor pointed out the similarity between the present
riots in Washington and the Atlanta riots which occurred about twelve
years ago. In both places, he said, white hoodlums began rioting and
killing negroes. When the latter became aroused and began to retaliate,
the authorities stepped in and the rioting stopped.
Major J. E. Spingarn, acting treasurer of the National Association
for the Advancement of the Colored People, said the soldiers and
sailors who have been taking part in the rioting in Washington resent
the new attitude of self-respect which the negro has assumed because
of the part he played in the war.
"The soldiers," he said, "instead of fighting the negroes because the
latter think better of themselves for having fought in the war, should
respect them for having proved themselves such good fighters." (The
italics are mine.)
It is quite possible that in most communities where such race riots occur
certain members of the colored race are responsible to the extent that they
have made themselves conspicuously offensive to their white neighbors.
But such individual cases, even where they exist, do not justify attacks
upon hundreds of innocent people. And it must be said that in general the
kind of people whose feelings of personal superiority can find no other
social support than the mere fact that they happen to belong to the white
race—and I think it will be found that the mobs who attack negroes are
uniformly made of people who belong to this element—naturally find their
self-feeling injured "if a nigger puts on airs." Their fiction is challenged; to
accept the challenge would force upon the consciousness of such people a
correct estimate of their own worth. Such an idea is unacceptable to
consciousness. The presumptuous negroes who serve as such unpleasant
reminders "must be put in their proper place"—that is, so completely under
the feet of the white element in the community that the mere fact of being a
white man may serve as a defense mechanism for just those members of our
noble race who approach more closely to the social position of the colored
element in our midst.
As the moral standards of the community will not permit even this
element of the white race to play the hoodlum with self-approval, some
disguise or "displacement" for this motive must be found whereby the acts
to which it prompts may appear to the consciousness of their perpetrators as
justifiable. A misdeed is committed by a black man; instantly this element
of the white race becomes a crowd. The deed provides the whites with just
the pretext they want. They may now justify themselves and one another in
an assault on the whole colored community. Here I believe we have the
explanation of much that is called "race prejudice." The hatred between the
races, like all crowd-hatred, is a "defense mechanism" designed to protect
the ego in its conflict with ideas unacceptable to consciousness.
The intensest hatred of the crowd is that directed toward the heretic, the
nonconformist, the "traitor." I have sometimes thought that to the crowd-
mind there is only one sin, heresy. Every sort of crowd, political, religious,
moral, has an ax ready for the person who in renouncing its ideas and
leaving it threatens to break it up. The bitter partisan hatred of crowds is
nothing compared to their hatred for the renegade. To the crowd of true
believers, the heretic or schismatic is "worse than the infidel." The moral
crowd will "bear with" the worst roué if only he strives to keep up
appearances, has a guilty conscience, asks forgiveness, and professes firm
belief in the conventions against which he offends; one may be forgiven his
inability to "live up to his principles" if only his professed principles are the
same as the crowds. But let a Nietzsche, though his life be that of an
ascetic, openly challenge and repudiate the values of popular morality, and
his name is anathema.
As an example of the hatred of the political crowd for one who, having
once put his hand to the plow and turned back, henceforth is no longer fit
for the "kingdom," I quote the following from an ultraradical paper. It is
hard to believe that this passage was written by a man who, in his right
mind, is really intelligent and kind-hearted, but such is the case:
An Explanation.—Owing to a failure of editorial supervision we
published an advertisement of John Spargos book on Bolshevism. We
have returned the money we received for it, and canceled the contract
for its future appearances. We do not pretend to protect our readers
against patent-medicine swindlers, real-estate sharpers, canned goods
prevaricators, ptomaine poisoners, fairy bond-sellers, picaroon nickel-
pickers, subway ticket speculators, postage-stamp forgers, pie and
pancake counterfeiters, plagiary burglars, lecherous pornographers,
and pictorial back-porch climbers, plundering buccaneer blackmailers
and defaulting matrimonial agents, journalistic poachers, foragers,
pickpockets, thimbleriggers, lick-sauce publicity men, notoriety
hunters, typographical body-snatchers, blackletter assassins, and
promulgators of licentious meters in free verse. Against these natural
phenomena we offer no guarantee to our readers, but we never
intended to advertise John Spargos book on Bolshevism.
Here again, it seems, the reason for hatred is "self-defense." One
important difference between the crowd-mind and the psychosis is the fact
that while the psychic mechanisms of the latter serve to disguise the
inadequately repressed wish, those of the crowd-mind permit the escape of
the repressed impulse by relaxing the force which demands the repression
—namely, the immediate social environment. This relaxation is
accomplished by a general fixation of attention which changes for those
who share it the moral significance of the social demand. The repressed
wish then appears to consciousness in a form which meets with the mutual
approval of the individuals so affected. Or, as I have said, the social
environment, instead of acting as a check upon the realization of the wish-
fancy, slips along in the same direction with it. Hence the will to believe the
same, so characteristic of every crowd. As soon as this mutuality is broken
the habitual criteria of the real again become operative. Every individual
who "comes to" weakens the hold of the crowd-ideas upon all the others to
just the extent that his word must be taken into account. The crowd resorts
to all sorts of devices to bind its members together permanently in a
common faith. It resists disintegration as the worst conceivable evil.
Disintegration means that crowd-men must lose their pet fiction—which is
to say, their "faith." The whole system elaborated by the unconscious fails
to function; its value for compensation, defense, or justification vanishes as
in waking out of a dream.
Strong spirits can stand this disillusionment. They have the power to
create new, more workable ideals. They become capable of self-analysis.
They learn to be legislators of value and to revise their beliefs for
themselves. Their faiths become not refuges, but instruments for meeting
and mastering the facts of experience and giving them meaning. The strong
are capable of making their lives spiritual adventures in a real world. The
"truths" of such persons are not compulsive ideas, they are working
hypotheses which they are ready, as occasion may demand, to verify at
great personal risk, or to discard when proved false. Such persons sustain
themselves in their sense of personal worth less by defense mechanisms
than by the effort of will which they can make.
As William James said:
If the searching of our heart and reins be the purpose of this human
drama, then what is sought seems to be what effort we can make. He
who can make none is but a shadow; he who can make much is a hero.
The huge world that girdles us about puts all sorts of questions to us,
and tests us in all sorts of ways. Some of the tests we meet by actions
that are easy, and some of the questions we answer in articulately
formulated words. But the deepest question that is ever asked admits
of no reply but the dumb turning of the will and tightening of our
heartstrings as we say, "Yes, I will even have it so!" When a dreadful
object is presented, or when life as a whole turns up its dark abysses to
our view, then the worthless ones among us lose their hold on the
situation altogether, and either escape from its difficulties by averting
their attention, or, if they cannot do that, collapse into yielding masses
of plaintiveness and fear. The effort required for facing and consenting
to such objects is beyond their power to make. But the heroic mind
does differently. To it, too, the objects are sinister and dreadful,
unwelcome, incompatible with wished-for things. But it can face them
if necessary without losing its hold upon the rest of life. The world
thus finds in the heroic man its worthy match and mate.... He can stand
this Universe.
Indeed the path for all who would make of living a reality rather than an
imitation leads along what James used to call "the perilous edge." Every
personal history that is a history, and not a mere fiction, contains in it
something unique, a fraction for which there is no common denominator. It
requires just that effort of attention to concrete reality and the fact of self
which in the crowd we always seek to escape by diverting attention to
congenial abstractions and ready-made universals. We "find ourselves" only
as we "get over" one after another of our crowd-compulsions, until finally
we are strong enough, as Ibsen would say, "to stand alone."
Timid spirits seldom voluntarily succeed in getting closer to reality than
the "philosophy of as if" which characterizes the thinking both of the crowd
and the psychoneurosis. What indeed is the crowd but a fiction of upholding
ourselves by all leaning on one another, an "escape from difficulties by
averting attention," a spiritual safety-first or "fool-proof" mechanism by
which we bear up one anothers collapsing ego-consciousness lest it dash its
foot against a stone?
The crowd-man can, when his fiction is challenged, save himself from
spiritual bankruptcy, preserve his defenses, keep his crowd from going to
pieces, only by a demur. Anyone who challenges the crowds fictions must
be ruled out of court. He must not be permitted to speak. As a witness to
contrary values his testimony must be discounted. The worth of his
evidence must be discredited by belittling the disturbing witness. "He is a
bad man; the crowd must not listen to him." His motives must be evil; he
"is bought up"; he is an immoral character; he tells lies; he is insincere or he
"has not the courage to take a stand" or "there is nothing new in what he
says." Ibsens "Enemy of the People," illustrates this point very well. The
crowd votes that Doctor Stockman may not speak about the baths, the real
point at issue. Indeed, the mayor takes the floor and officially announces
that the doctors statement that the water is bad is "unreliable and
exaggerated." Then the president of the Householders Association makes an
address accusing the doctor of secretly "aiming at revolution." When finally
Doctor Stockman speaks and tells his fellow citizens the real meaning of
their conduct, and utters a few plain truths about "the compact majority,"
the crowd saves its face, not by proving the doctor false, but by howling
him down, voting him an "enemy of the people," and throwing stones
through his windows.
A crowd is like an unsound banking institution. People are induced to
carry their deposits of faith in it, and so long as there is no unusual
withdrawing of accounts the insolvent condition may be covered up. Many
uneasy depositors would like to get their money out if they could do so
secretly, or without incurring the displeasure of the others. Meanwhile all
insist that the bank is perfectly safe and each does all he can to compel the
others to stay in. The thing they all most fear is that some one will "start a
run on the bank," force it to liquidate, and everyone will lose. So the crowd
functions in its way just so long as its members may be cajoled into an
appearance of continued confidence in its ideals and values. The spiritual
capital of each depends on the confidence of the others. As a consequence
they all spend most of their time exhorting one another to be good crowd-
men, fearing and hating no one so much as the person who dares raise the
question whether the crowd could really meet its obligations.
The classic illustration of the manner in which the crowd is led to
discredit the witness to values contrary to its own, is the oration of Mark
Antony in Shakespeares "Julius Cæsar." It is by this means alone that
Antony is able to turn the minds of the Roman citizens into the crowd state.
It will be remembered that the address of Brutus, just before this, while not
at all a bit of crowd-oratory, left a favorable impression. The citizens are
convinced that "This Cæsar was a tyrant." When Antony goes up to speak,
he thanks them "for Brutus sake." They say, "Twere best he speak no harm
of Brutus here." He can never make them his crowd unless he can destroy
Brutus influence. This is precisely what he proceeds gradually to do.
At first with great courtesy—"The noble Brutus hath told you Cæsar
was ambitious; if it were so it was a grievous fault ... for Brutus is an
honorable man, so are they all, all honorable men." This sentence is
repeated four times in the first section; Cæsar was a good faithful friend to
Antony, "But ... and Brutus is an honorable man." Again Cæsar refused the
crown, but "Brutus is an honorable man." Cæsar wept when the poor cried,
"sure, Brutus is an honorable man, I speak not to disprove what he says" but
"men have lost their reason" and "my heart is in the coffin there with
Cæsar." The citizens are sorry for the weeping Antony; they listen more
intently now. Again—"If I were disposed to stir your hearts and minds to
mutiny and rage"—but that would be to wrong Brutus and Cassius, "Who
you all know are honorable men"—this time said with more marked irony.
Rather than wrong such honorable men, Antony prefers to "wrong the dead,
to wrong myself—and you." That sentence sets Brutus squarely in
opposition to the speaker and his audience. Cæsars will is mentioned—if
only the commons knew what was in it, but Antony will not read it, "you
are not wood, you are not stones, but men." The speaker now resists their
demand to hear the will, he ought not have mentioned it. He fears he has,
after all, wronged "the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed Cæsar."
The citizens have caught the note of irony now; the honorable men are
"traitors," "villains," "murderers."
From this point on the speakers task is easy; they have become a crowd.
They think only of revenge, of killing everyone of the conspirators, and
burning the house of Brutus. Antony has even to remind them of the
existence of the will. The mischief is set afloat the moment Brutus is
successfully discredited.
The development of the thought in this oration is typical. Analysis of
almost any propagandist speech will reveal some, if not all, the steps by
which Brutus is made an object of hatred. The crowd hates in order that it
may believe in itself.
VI.
The Absolutism of the Crowd-Mind
Table of Contents
Wherever conscious thinking is determined by unconscious mechanisms,
and all thinking is more or less so, it is dogmatic in character. Beliefs which
serve an unconscious purpose do not require the support of evidence. They
persist because they are demanded. This is a common symptom of various
forms of psychoneurosis. Ideas "haunt the mind" of the patient; he cannot
rid himself of them. He may know they are foolish, but he is compelled to
think them. In severe cases, he may hear voices or experience other
hallucinations which are symbolic of the obsessive ideas. Or his psychic life
may be so absorbed by his one fixed idea that it degenerates into the
ceaseless repetition of a gesture or a phrase expressive of this idea.
In paranoia the fixed ideas are organized into a system. Brill says:
I know a number of paranoiacs who went through a stormy period
lasting for years, but who now live contentedly as if in another world.
Such transformations of the world are common in paranoia. They do
not care for anything, as nothing is real to them. They have withdrawn
their sum of libido from the persons of their environment and the outer
world. The end of the world is the projection of this internal
catastrophe. Their subjective world came to an end since they
withdrew their love from it. By a secondary rationalization, the
patients then explain whatever obtrudes itself upon them as something
intangible and fit it in with their own system. Thus one of my patients
who considers himself a sort of Messiah denies the reality of his own
parents by saying that they are only shadows made by his enemy, the
devil, whom he has not yet wholly subdued. Another paranoiac in the
Central Islip State Hospital, who represented himself as a second
Christ, spends most of his time sewing out on cloth crude scenes
containing many buildings, interspersed with pictures of the doctors.
He explained all this very minutely as the new world system.... Thus
the paranoiac builds up again with his delusions a new world in which
he can live.... (Italics mine.)
However, a withdrawal of libido is not an exclusive occurrence in
paranoia, nor is its occurrence anywhere necessarily followed by
disastrous consequences. Indeed, in normal life there is a constant
withdrawal of libido from persons and objects without resulting in
paranoia or other neuroses. It merely causes a special psychic mood.
The withdrawal of the libido as such cannot therefore be considered as
pathogenic of paranoia. It requires a special character to distinguish the
paranoiac withdrawal of libido from other kinds of the same process.
This is readily found when we follow the further utilization of the
libido thus withdrawn. Normally, we immediately seek a substitute for
the suspended attachment, and until one is found the libido floats
freely in the psyche and causes tensions which influence our moods. In
hysteria the freed sum of libido becomes transformed into bodily
innervations of fear. Clinical indications teach us that in paranoia a
special use is made of the libido which is withdrawn from its object ...
the freed libido in paranoia is thrown back on the ego and serves to
magnify it.
Note the fact that there is a necessary relation between the fixed ideal
system of the paranoiac and his withdrawal of interest in the outside world.
The system gains the function of reality for him in the same measure that,
loving not the world nor the things that are in the world, he has rendered
our common human world unreal. His love thrown back upon himself
causes him to create another world, a world of "pure reason," so to speak,
which is more congenial to him than the world of empirical fact. In this
system he takes refuge and finds peace at last. Now we see the function, at
least so far as paranoia is concerned, of the ideal system. As Brill says, it is
a curative process of a mind which has suffered "regression" or turning
back of its interest from the affairs of ordinary men and women, to the
attachments of an earlier stage in its history. To use a philosophical term,
the paranoiac is the Simon-pure "solipsist." And as a priori thinking tends,
as Schiller has shown, ever to solipsism, we see here the grain of truth in G.
K. Chestertons witty comparison of rationalism and lunacy.
"Regression," or withdrawal of the libido, is present to some degree I
believe in all forms of the neurosis. But we are informed that a withdrawal
of the libido may, and frequently does, occur also in normal people.
Knowledge of the neurosis here, as elsewhere, serves to throw light on
certain thought processes of people who are considered normal. Brill says
that "normally we seek a substitute for the suspended attachment." New
interests and new affections in time take the places of the objects from
which the feelings have been torn. In analytical psychology the process by
which this is achieved is called a "transference."
Now the crowd is in a sense a "transference phenomenon." In the
temporary crowd or mob this transference is too transitory to be very
evident, though even here I believe there will generally be found a certain
esprit de corps. In permanent crowds there is often a marked transference to
the other members of the group. This is evident in the joy of the new
convert or the newly initiated, also in such terms of affection as "comrade"
and "brother." I doubt, however, if this affection, so far as it is genuine
among individuals of a certain crowd, is very different from the good will
and affection which may spring up anywhere among individuals who are
more or less closely associated, or that it ever really extends beyond the
small circle of personal friends that everyone normally gains through his
daily relations with others.
But to the crowd-mind this transference is supposed to extend to all the
members of the group; they are comrades and brothers not because we like
them and know them intimately, but because they are fellow members. In
other words, this transference, so far as it is a crowd phenomenon as such,
is not to other individuals, but to the idea of the crowd itself. It is not
enough for the good citizen to love his neighbors in so far as he finds them
lovable; he must love his country. To the churchman the Church herself is
an object of faith and adoration. One does not become a humanitarian by
being a good fellow; he must love "humanity"—which is to say, the bare
abstract idea of everybody. I remember once asking a missionary who was
on his way to China what it was that impelled him to go so far in order to
minister to suffering humanity. He answered, "It is love." I asked again, "Do
you really mean to say that you care so much as that for Chinese, not one of
whom you have ever seen?" He answered, "Well, I—you see, I love them
through Jesus Christ." So in a sense it is with the crowd-man always; he
loves through the crowd.
The crowd idealized as something sacred, as end in itself, as something
which it is an honor to belong to, is to some extent a disguised object of our
self-love. But the idea of the crowd disguises more than self-love. Like
most of the symbols through which the unconscious functions, it can serve
more than one purpose at a time. The idea of the crowd also serves to
disguise the parental image, and our own imaginary identification or
reunion with it. The nation is to the crowd-man the "Fatherland," the
"mother country," "Uncle Sam"—a figure which serves to do more than
personalize for cartoonists the initials U. S. Uncle Sam is also the father-
image thinly disguised. The Church is "the Mother," again the "Bride."
Such religious symbols as "the Heavenly Father" and the "Holy Mother"
also have the value of standing for the parent image. For a detailed
discussion of these symbols, the reader is referred to Jungs Psychology of
the Unconscious.
In another connection I have referred to the fact that the crowd stands to
the member in loco parentis. Here I wish to point out the fact that such a
return to the parent image is commonly found in the psychoneurosis and is
what is meant by "regression." I have also dwelt at some length on the fact
that it is by securing a modification in the immediate social environment,
ideally or actually, that the crowd permits the escape of the repressed wish.
Such a modification in the social at once sets the members of the crowd off
as a "peculiar people." Interest tends to withdraw from the social as a whole
and center in the group who have become a crowd. The Church is "in the
world but not of it." The nation is an end in itself, so is every crowd.
Transference to the idea of the crowd differs then from the normal
substitutes which we find for the object from which affection is withdrawn.
It is itself a kind of regression. In the psychoneurosis—in paranoia most
clearly—the patients attempt to rationalize this shifting of interest gives rise
to the closed systems and ideal reconstructions of the world mentioned in
the passage quoted from Brill.
Does the crowds thinking commonly show a like tendency to construct
an imaginary world of thought-forms and then take refuge in its ideal
system? As we saw at the beginning of our discussion, it does. The focusing
of general attention upon the abstract and universal is a necessary step in
the development of the crowd-mind.
The crowd does not think in order to solve problems. To the crowd-
mind, as such, there are no problems. It has closed its case beforehand. This
accounts for what Le Bon termed the "credulity" of the crowd. But the
crowd believes only what it wants to believe and nothing else. Anyone who
has been in the position of a public teacher knows how almost universal is
the habit of thinking in the manner of the crowd and how difficult it is to get
people to think for themselves. One frequently hears it said that the people
do not think, that they do not want to know the truth.
Ibsen makes his Doctor Stockman say:
What sort of truths are they that the majority usually supports? They
are truths that are of such advanced age that they are beginning to
break up.... These "majority truths" are like last years cured meat—like
rancid tainted ham; and they are the origin of the moral scurvy that is
rampant in our communities.... The most dangerous enemy of truth and
freedom among us is the compact majority, yes, the damned compact
liberal majority ... the majority has might on its side unfortunately, but
right it has never.
It is not really because so many are ignorant, but because so few are
able to resist the appeal which the peculiar logic of crowd-thinking makes
to the unconscious, that the cheap, the tawdry, the half-true almost
exclusively gain popular acceptance. The average man is a dogmatist. He
thinks what he thinks others think he is thinking. He is so used to
propaganda that he can hardly think of any matter in other terms. It is
almost impossible to keep the consideration of any subject of general
interest above the dilemmas of partisan crowds. People will wherever
possible change the discussion of a mooted question into an antiphonal
chorus of howling mobs, each chanting its ritual as ultimate truth, and
hurling its shibboleths in the faces of the others. Pursuit of truth with most
people consists in repeating their creed. Nearly every movement is
immediately made into a cult. Theology supplants religion in the churches.
In popular ethics a dead formalism puts an end to moral advance. Straight
thinking on political subjects is subordinated to partisan ends. Catch-
phrases and magic formulas become substituted for scientific information.
Even the Socialists, who feel that they are the intellectually elect—and I
cite them here as an example in no unfair spirit, but just because so many of
them are really well-informed and "advanced" in their thinking—have been
unable to save themselves from a doctrinaire economic orthodoxy of spirit
which is often more dogmatic and intolerant than that of the "religious
folks" to whose alleged "narrow-mindedness" every Socialist, even while
repeating his daily chapter from the Marxian Koran, feels himself superior.
The crowd-mind is everywhere idealistic, and absolutist. Its truths are
"given," made-in-advance. Though unconsciously its systems of logic are
created to enhance the self-feeling, they appear to consciousness as highly
impersonal and abstract. As in the intellectualist philosophies, forms of
thought are regarded as themselves objects of thought. Systems of general
ideas are imposed upon the minds of men apparently from without.
Universal acceptance is demanded. Thought becomes stereotyped. What
ought to be is confused with what is, the ideal becomes more real than fact.
In the essays on "Pragmatism" William James showed that the
rationalist system, even that of the great philosopher, is in large measure
determined by the thinkers peculiar "temperament." Elsewhere he speaks of
the "Sentiment of Rationality." For a discussion of the various types of
philosophical rationalism, the reader is referred to the criticisms by William
James, F. C. S. Schiller, Dewey, and other Pragmatists. It is sufficient for
our purpose to note the fact that the rationalist type of mind everywhere
shows a tendency to assert the unreality of the world of everyday
experience, and to seek comfort and security in the contemplation of a
logically ordered system or world of "pure reason." Ideals, not concrete
things, are the true realities. The world with which we are always wrestling
is but a distorted manifestation, a jumbled, stereotyped copy of what James
ironically referred to as "the de luxe edition which exists in the Absolute."
The parable of the cave which Plato gives in the Republic represents
ordinary knowledge as a delusion, and the empirically known world as but
dancing shadows on the wall of our subterranean prison.
R. W. Livingstone, who sees in Platonism, from the very beginning, a
certain world-weariness and turning away of the Greek spirit from the
healthy realism which had formerly characterized it, says:
For if Greece showed men how to trust their own nature and lead a
simply human life, how to look straight in the face of the world and
read the beauty that met them on the surface, certain Greek writers
preached a different lesson from this. In opposition to directness they
taught us to look past the "unimaginary and actual" qualities of things
to secondary meanings and inner symbolism. In opposition to liberty
and humanism they taught us to mistrust our nature, to see in it
weakness, helplessness, and incurable taint, to pass beyond humanity
to communion with God, to live less for this world than for one to
come.... Perhaps to some people it may seem surprising that this writer
is Plato.
According to this view reality may be found only by means of "pure
knowledge," and, to give a familiar quotation from the Phædo:
If we would have pure knowledge of anything we must be quit of the
body; the soul in herself must behold things in themselves; and then
we shall attain the wisdom which we desire and of which we say that
we are lovers; not while we live, but after death; for if, while in
company with the body, the soul cannot have pure knowledge, one of
two things follows—either knowledge is not to be obtained at all, or if
at all after death.
Intellectualism may not always be so clearly other-worldly as Plato
shows himself to be in this passage. But it commonly argues that behind the
visible world of "illusory sense experience" lies the true ground and cause
—an unseen order in which the contradictions of experience are either
unknown or harmonized, an external and unchangeable "Substance," a self-
contained Absolute to which our ephemeral personalities with their
imperfections and problems are unknown. A "thing in itself," or principle of
Being which transcends our experience.
This type of thinking, whether it be known as Idealism, Rationalism,
Intellectualism, or Absolutism, finds little sympathy from those who
approach the study of philosophy from the standpoint of psychology. The
following passages taken from Studies in Humanism by Schiller, show that
even without the technique of the analytical method, it was not hard to
detect some of the motives which prompted the construction of systems of
this sort. The partisanism of one of these motives is rather suggestive for
our study of the mind of the crowd. Says our author:
Logical defects rarely kill beliefs to which men, for psychological
reasons, remain attached.... This may suggest to us that we may have
perhaps unwittingly misunderstood Absolutism, and done it a grave
injustice.... What if its real appeal was not logical but psychological?...
The history of English Absolutism distinctly bears out these
anticipations. It was originally a deliberate importation from Germany,
with a purpose. And this purpose was a religious one—that of
counteracting the antireligious developments of Science. The
indigenous philosophy, the old British empiricism, was useless for this
purpose. For though a form of intellectualism, its sensationalism was
in no wise hostile to Science. On the contrary, it showed every desire
to ally itself with, and to promote, the great scientific movement of the
nineteenth century, which penetrated into and almost overwhelmed
Oxford between 1859 and 1870.
But this movement excited natural and not unwarranted alarm in
that great center of theology. For Science, flushed with its hard-won
liberty, ignorant of philosophy, and as yet unconscious of its proper
limitations, was decidedly aggressive and overconfident. It seemed
naturalistic, nay, materialistic, by the law of its being. The logic of
Mill, the philosophy of Evolution, the faith in democracy, in freedom,
in progress (on material lines), threatened to carry all before them.
What was to be done? Nothing directly; for on its own ground
Science seemed invulnerable, and had the knack of crushing the
subtlest dialectics by the knockdown force of sheer scientific fact. But
might it not be possible to change the venue, to shift the battleground
to a region ubi instabilis terra unda (where the land afforded no firm
footing), where the frozen sea could not be navigated, where the very
air was thick with mists so that phantoms might well pass for realities
—the realm, in short, of metaphysics?...
So it was rarely necessary to do more than recite the august table of
a priori categories in order to make the most audacious scientist feel
that he had got out of his depth; while at the merest mention of the
Hegelian dialectic all the "advanced thinkers" of the time would flee
affrighted.
Schillers sense of humor doubtless leads him to exaggerate somewhat
the deliberateness of this importation of German metaphysics. That these
borrowed transcendental and dialectical systems served their purpose in the
warfare of traditional theologies against Science is but half the truth. The
other half is that these logical formulas provided certain intelligent
believers with a defense, or safe refuge, in their own inner conflicts.
That this is the case, Schiller evidently has little doubt. After discussing
Absolutism itself as a sort of religion, and showing that its "catch-words"
taken at their face value are not only emotionally barren, but also logically
meaningless because "inapplicable to our actual experience," he then
proceeds to an examination of the unconscious motives which determine
this sort of thinking. His description of these motives, so far as it goes, is an
excellent little bit of analytical psychology. He says:
How then can Absolutism possibly be a religion? It must appeal to
psychological motives of a different sort, rare enough to account for its
total divergence from the ordinary religious feelings and compelling
enough to account for the fanaticism with which it is held and the
persistence with which the same old round of negations has been
reiterated through the ages. Of such psychological motives we shall
indicate the more important and reputable.
(1) It is decidedly flattering to ones spiritual pride to feel oneself a
"part" or "manifestation" or "vehicle" or "reproduction" of the
Absolute Mind, and to some this feeling affords so much strength and
comfort and such exquisite delight that they refrain from inquiring
what these phrases mean.... It is, moreover, the strength of this feeling
which explains the blindness of Absolutists toward the logical defects
of their own theory....
(2) There is a strange delight in wide generalization merely as
such, which, when pursued without reference to the ends which it
subserves, and without regard to its actual functioning, often results in
a sort of logical vertigo. This probably has much to do with the
peculiar "craving for unity" which is held to be the distinctive
affliction of philosophers. At any rate, the thought of an all-embracing
One or Whole seems to be regarded as valuable and elevating quite
apart from any definite function it performs in knowing, or light it
throws on any actual problem.
(3) The thought of an Absolute Unity is cherished as a guarantee of
cosmic stability. In face of the restless vicissitudes of phenomena it
seems to secure us against falling out of the Universe. It assures us a
priori—and that is its supreme value—that the cosmic order cannot
fall to pieces and leave us dazed and confounded among the debris....
We want to have an absolute assurance a priori concerning the future,
and the thought of the absolute seems designed to give it. It is probably
this last notion that, consciously or unconsciously, weighs most in the
psychology of the Absolutists creed.
In this connection the reader will recall the passage quoted from Adlers
The Neurotic Constitution, in which it was shown that the fictitious
"guiding-lines" or rational systems of both the neurotic and normal are
motivated by this craving for security. But it makes all the difference in the
world whether the system of ideas is used, as in science and common sense,
to solve real problems in an objective world, or is created to be an artificial
and imaginary defense of the ego against a subjective feeling of insecurity;
whether, in a word, the craving for security moves one to do something
calculated to render the forces with which he must deal concretely more
congenial and hospitable to his will, or makes him content to withdraw and
file a demur to the challenge of the environment in the form of theoretical
denial of the reality of the situation.
There is no denying the fact that Absolute Idealism, if not taken too
seriously, may have the function for some people of steadying their nerves
in the battle of life. And though, as I believe, logically untenable, it not
infrequently serves as a rationalization of faith-values which work out
beneficially, and, quite apart from their metaphysical trappings, may be
even indispensable. Yet when carried to its logical conclusions such
thinking inevitably distorts the meaning of personal living, robs our world
and our acts of their feeling of reality, serves as an instrument for
"regression" or withdrawal of interest from the real tasks and objects of
living men and women, and in fact functions for much the same purpose, if
not precisely in the same way, as do the ideal systems of the psychopath.
In justice to idealism it should be added that this is by no means the
only species of Rationalism which may lead to such psychic results. There
are various paths by which the craving for artificial security may lead to
such attempts to reduce the whole of possible experience to logical unity
that the realities of time and change and of individual experience are
denied. How many deterministic theories, with all their scientific jargon, are
really motivated by an inability to accept a world with an element of chance
in it. There is a sense in which all science by subsuming like individuals in
a common class, and thus ignoring their individuality, in so far as they are
alike in certain respects, gains added power over all of them. There is a
sense, too, in which science, by discovering that whenever a given
combination of elements occurs, a definitely foreseen result will follow, is
justified in ignoring time and treating certain futures as if they were already
tucked up the sleeves of the present. It should be remembered that this sort
of determinism is purely methodological, and is, like all thinking, done for a
purpose—that of effecting desirable ends in a world made up of concrete
situations.
When this purpose becomes supplanted by a passion to discount all
future change in general—when one imagines that he has a formula which
enables him to write the equation of the curve of the universe, science has
degenerated into scientificism, or head-in-the-sand philosophy. The magic
formula has precisely the same psychic value as the "absolute." I know a
number of economic determinists, for instance, who just cannot get out of
their heads the notion that social evolution is a process absolutely
underwritten, guaranteed, and predictable, without the least possible doubt.
In such a philosophy of history as this the individual is of course a mere
"product of his environment," and his role as a creator of value is nil. On
this "materialistic" theory, the individual is as truly a mere manifestation of
impersonal evolutionary forces as he is, according to orthodox Platonism, a
mere manifestation of the abstract idea of his species. Notwithstanding the
professed impersonalism of this view, its value for consolation in
minimizing the causes of the spiritual difference in men—that is, its
function for enhancing the self-feeling of some people, is obvious. That
such an idea should become a crowd-idea is not to be wondered at. And this
leads me to my point. It is no mere accident that the crowd takes to
rationalistic philosophies like a duck to water.
The crowd-man, however unsophisticated he may be, is a Platonist at
heart. He may never have heard the word epistemology, but his theory of
knowledge is essentially the same as Platos. Religious crowds are, to one
familiar with the Dialogues, astonishingly Platonic. There is the same habit
of giving ontological rather than functional value to general ideas, the same
other-worldliness, the same moral dilemmas, the same contempt for the
material, for the human body, for selfhood; the same assertion of finality,
and the conformist spirit.
Reformist crowds differ only superficially from religious crowds.
Patriotic crowds make use of a different terminology, but their mental habits
are the same. It has become a cult among crowds with tendencies toward
social revolution to paint their faces with the colors of a borrowed
nineteenth-century materialism. But all this is mere swagger and
"frightfulness," an attempt to make themselves look terrible and frighten the
bourgeois. I am sure that no one who has seen all this radical rigmarole, as I
have had occasion to see it, can be deceived by it. These dreadful
materialist doctrines of the radical crowd are wooden guns, no thicker than
the soap-box. As a matter of fact, the radical crowds are extremely
idealistic. With all their talk of proletarian opposition to intellectualism,
Socialists never become a crowd without becoming as intellectualist as
Fichte or Hegel. There is a sense in which Marx himself never succeeded in
escaping Hegels dilemmas, he only followed the fashion in those days of
turning them upside down.
With radical crowds as with conservative, there is the same substitution
of a closed system of ideas for the shifting phenomena of our empirical
world; the same worship of abstract forms of thought, the same
uncompromising spirit and insistence upon general uniformity of opinions;
the same orthodoxy. All orthodoxy is nothing other than the will of the
crowd to keep itself together. With all kinds of crowds, also, there is the
same diverting of attention from the personal and the concrete to the
impersonal and the general; the same flight from reality to the
transcendental for escape, for consolation, for defense, for vindication; the
same fiction that existence is at bottom a sort of logical proposition, a
magic formula or principle of Being to be correctly copied and learned by
rote; the same attempt to create the world or find reality by thinking rather
than by acting.
The intellectualist bias of the average man is doubtless due in great part
to the fact that theology, and therefore the religious education of the young,
both Christian and Jewish, has throughout the history of these religions
been saturated with Platonism. But then, the universal sway of this
philosopher may be explained by the fact that there is something in his
abstractionism which is congenial to the creed-making propensities of the
crowd-mind. The great a priori thinkers, Plato, St. Augustine, Thomas
Aquinas, Anselm, Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, Green, etc., have often been
called solitary men, but it is significant that their doctrines survive in
popularized form in the creeds and shibboleths of permanent crowds of all
descriptions. 
While 
humanists, 
nominalists, 
empiricists, 
realists,
pragmatists, men like Protagoras, Epicurus, Abelard, Bacon, Locke, Hume,
Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Bergson, James, have always had a hard time of
it. They are considered destructive, for the reason that the tendency of their
teaching is to disintegrate the crowd-mind and call one back to himself.
Their names are seldom mentioned in popular assemblies except to
discredit them. Yet it is on the whole these latter thinkers who orient us in
our real world, make us courageously face the facts with which we have to
deal, stimulate our wills, force us to use our ideas for what they are—
instruments for better living,—inspire us to finer and more correct
valuations of things, and point out the way to freedom for those who dare
walk in it.
All this, however, is the very thing that the crowd-mind is running
headlong away from. As a crowd we do not wish to think empirically. Why
should we seek piecemeal goods by tedious and dangerous effort, when we
have only to do a little trick of attention, and behold The Good, abstract,
perfect, universal, waiting just around the corner in the realm of pure
reason, ready to swallow up and demolish all evil? Are we not even now in
possession of Love, Justice, Beauty, and Truth by the sheer magic of
thinking of them in the abstract, calling them "principles" and writing the
words with the initial letters in capitals? The very mental processes by
which a group of people becomes a crowd change such abstract nouns from
mere class names into copies of supermundane realities.
In wholesome thinking principles are of course necessary. They are
what I might call "leading ideas." Their function is to lead to more
satisfactory thinking—that is, to other ideas which are desired. Or they are
useful in leading us to actions the results of which are intended and wished
for. They may also be principles of valuation guiding us in the choice of
ends. If there were no substantial agreement among us concerning certain
principles we could not relate our conduct to one another at all; social life
would be impossible. But necessary as such leading ideas are, they are
means rather than ends. Circumstances may demand that we alter them or
make exceptions to their application.
To the crowd-mind a principle appears as an end in itself. It must be
vindicated at all costs. To offend against it in one point is to be guilty of
breaking the whole law. Crowds are always uncompromising about their
principles. They must apply to all alike. Crowds are no respecters of
persons.
As crowd-men we never appear without some set of principles or some
cause over our heads. Crowds crawl under their principles like worms under
stones. They cover up the wrigglings of the unconscious, and protect it from
attack. Every crowd uses its principles as universal demands. In this way it
gets unction upon other crowds, puts them in the wrong, makes them give
assent to the crowds real purpose by challenging them to deny the
righteousness of the professed justifications of that purpose. It is said that
the Sioux Indians, some years ago, used to put their women and children in
front of their firing line. The braves could then crouch behind these
innocent ones and shoot at white men, knowing that it would be a violation
of the principles of humanity for the white soldiers to shoot back and risk
killing women and children. Crowds frequently make just such use of their
principles. About each crowd, like the circle of fire which the gods placed
about the sleeping Brunhilde, there is a flaming hedge of logical
abstractions, sanctions, taboos, which none but the intellectually courageous
few dare cross. In this way the slumbering critical faculties of the crowd-
mind are protected against the intrusion of realities from outside the cult.
The intellectual curiosity of the members of the group is kept within proper
bounds. Hostile persons or groups dare not resist us, for in so doing they
make themselves enemies of Truth, of Morality, of Liberty, etc. Both
political parties, by a common impulse, "drape themselves in the Flag." It is
an interesting fact that the most antagonistic crowds profess much the same
set of principles. The "secondary rationalization" of crowds, both Northern
and Southern, at the time of the Civil War, made use of our traditional
principles of American Liberty, and Christian Morality. We have seen both
pacifist and militarist crowds setting forth their manifestoes in terms of
New Testament teaching. Each religious sect exists only to teach "the one
system of doctrine logically deduced from Scripture."
As an illustration of this sort of reasoning, I give here a few passages
from a propagandist publication in which the crowd-will to dominate takes
the typical American method of striving to force its cult ideas upon the
community as a whole by means of restrictive moralist legislation—in this
case attempt is made to prohibit the exhibition of motion pictures on
Sunday. That the demand for such legislation is for the most part a pure
class-crowd phenomenon, designed to enhance the self-feeling and
economic interests of the "reformers," by keeping the poor from having a
good time, is I think, rather obvious. The reasoning here is interesting, as
the real motive is so thinly disguised by pietistic platitudes that the two
follow each other in alternate succession:
(1) Sunday Movies are not needed. The people have six days and six
nights each week on which to attend the movies. Is not that plenty of
time for all?
(2) Sunday Movie Theaters commercialize the Christian Sabbath.
While "the Sabbath was made for man," yet it is Gods day. We have no
right to sell it for business purposes. It is a day for rest and worship,
not a day for greed and gain. Sunday would, of course, be the best day
in the week financially for the movies. It would also be the best day in
the week for the open saloons and horse-racing, but that is no reason
why these should be allowed on Sunday. The Sabbath must not be
commercialized.
(3) Sunday Movie Theaters destroy the rest and quiet of many
people, especially those who live in the residential district of cities and
in the neighborhood where such motion-picture theaters are located.
Great crowds pour along the streets near such theaters, often breaking
the Sunday quiet of that part of the city by loud and boisterous talk.
Thousands of people every year are moving away from the
downtown noisy districts of the cities out into the quiet residential
districts in order to have quiet Sundays. But when a motion-picture
theater comes and locates next to their homes, or in their block, as has
been done in many cases, and great noisy, boisterous crowds surge
back and forth before their homes all Sunday afternoon and evening,
going to the movies, they are being robbed of that for which they paid
their money when they bought a home in that quiet part of the city....
(4) ... Anything that injures the Christian Sabbath injures the
Christian churches, and certainly Sunday motion-picture theaters,
wherever allowed, do injure the Christian Sabbath....
Dr. Wilbur F. Crafts of Washington, D. C., probably the greatest
authority on the Sabbath question in this country, says, "The Sabbath-
keeping nations are the strongest physically, mentally, morally,
financially, and politically." Joseph Cook said," It is no accident that
the nations that keep the Sabbath most carefully are those where there
is the most political freedom." Sabbath-breaking nations gradually
lose their political freedom.
(5) Sunday Movie Theaters injure the Christian Sabbath and thus
injure the morals of the people. Anything that injures the morals of the
people, injures the nation itself. From a patriotic standpoint, we ought
to stand for strict observance of the Christian Sabbath, as past
experience has shown and the testimony of many witnesses proves that
a disregard of the Christian Sabbath produces crime and immorality
and tends to destroy the free institutions which have helped to make
our nation great....
Fundamentally, all such vicious laws are unconstitutional.
Sunday Movie Theaters disregard the rights of labor.... Canon
William Sheafe Chase has aptly said, "No man has the Christ spirit
who wants a better time on Sunday than he is willing to give everyone
else."...
Col. Fairbanks, the famous scale manufacturer, said: "I can tell by
watching the men at work Monday which spent Sunday in sport and
which at home, church, or Sabbath-school. The latter do more and
better work."
Superintendents of large factories in Milwaukee and elsewhere
have said, "When our men go on a Sunday excursion, some cannot
work Monday, and many who work cannot earn their wages, while
those who had no sport Sunday do their best days work Monday."
(Italics mine.)
We need not be surprised to find that the closed ideational system which
in the first instance is a refuge from the real, becomes in turn a device for
imposing ones will upon his fellows. The believers ego is served in both
instances. It is interesting to note also that this self-feeling appears in
crowd-thinking as its very opposite. The greatest enemy of personality is the
crowd. The crowd does not want valuable men; it wants only useful men.
Everyone must justify his existence by appealing to the not-self. One may
do nothing for his own sake. He may not even strive for spiritual excellence
for such a reason. He must live for "principle," for "the great cause," for
impersonal abstractions—which is to say, he must live for his crowd, and so
make it easier for the other members to do the same with a good face.
The complex of ideas in which the crowd-mind as we have seen takes
refuge, being necessarily made up of abstract generalizations, serves the
crowd-will to social dominance through the very claim to universality
which such ideas exert. Grant that an idea is an absolute truth, and it
follows, of course, that it must be true on all occasions and for everyone.
The crowd is justified, therefore, in sacrificing people to its ideal—itself.
The idea is no longer an instrument of living; it is an imperative. It is not
yours to use the idea; the idea is there to use you. You have ceased to be an
end. Anything about you that does not partake of the reality of this idea has
no right to be, any experience of yours which happens to be
incommensurable with this idea loses its right to be; for experience as such
has now only a "phenomenal existence." The crowd, by identifying its will
to power with this idea, becomes itself absolute. Your personal self, as an
end, is quite as unwelcome to the Absolute as to the crowd. There must be
no private property in thought or motive. By making everybodys business
my business, I have made my business everybodys business. There may be
only one standard—that of our crowd, which, because of its very universal
and impersonal character is really nobodys.
The absolutism of the crowd-mind with its consequent hostility to
conscious personality finds a perfect rationalization in the ethical
philosophy of Kant. The absolutism of the idea of Duty is less skillfully
elaborated in its popular crowd-manifestations, but in its essentials it is
always present, as propaganda everywhere when carefully analyzed will
show. We must not be deceived by Kants assertion that the individual is an
end. This individual is not you or I, or anyone; it is a mere logical
abstraction. By declaring that everyone is equally an end, Kant ignores all
personal differences, and therefore the fact of individuality as such. We are
each an end in respect to those qualities only in which we are identical—
namely, in that we are "rational beings." But this rational being is not a
personal intelligence; it is a fiction, a bundle of mental faculties assumed a
priori to exist, and then treated as if it were universally and equally
applicable to all actually existing intelligences.
In arguing that "I am never to act otherwise than so that I could also will
that my maxim should become a universal law," Kant may be easily
understood as justifying any crowd in seeking to make its peculiar maxims
universal laws. Who but a Rationalist or a crowd-man presumes to have
found the "universal law," who else would have the effrontery to try to
legislate for every conscience in existence? But this presumption has its
price. In thus universalizing my moral will, I wholly depersonalize it. He
says:
It is of extreme importance to remember that we must not allow
ourselves to think of deducing the reality of this principle from the
particular attributes of human nature. For duty is to be a practical
unconditional necessity of action; it must therefore hold for all rational
beings (to whom an imperative can apply at all), and for this reason
only be also a law for all human wills. On the contrary, whatever it
deduces from the particular natural characteristics of humanity, from
certain feelings and propensions, nay, even if possible from any
particular tendency proper to human reason, and which need not
necessarily hold for the will of every rational being, this may indeed
supply us with a maxim but not with a law; with a subjective principle
on which we may have a propension or inclination to act, but not with
an objective principle on which we should be enjoined to act, even
though all our propensions, inclinations, and natural dispositions were
opposed to it. In fact, the sublimity and intrinsic dignity of the
command in duty are so much the more evident the less subjective
impulses favor it, and the more they oppose it [italics here are mine],
without being able in the slightest degree to weaken the obligation of
the law or to diminish its validity.
... An action done from duty derives its moral worth not from the
purpose which is to be attained by it, but from the maxim by which it
is determined. It (this moral worth) cannot lie anywhere but in the
principle of The Will, without regard to the ends which can be attained
by such action.
This loss of the conscious self in the universal, this turning away from
the empirically known, this demand that an a priori principle be followed to
its deadly practical conclusion regardless of the ends to which it leads, is of
utmost importance for our study. It is precisely what the paranoiac does
after his own fashion. In crowd-thinking it is often made the instrument of
wholesale destruction and human slaughter. The mob is ever motivated by
this logic of negation, and of automatic behavior. It is thus that compulsive
thinking sways vast hordes of men and women, impelling them, in the very
name of truth or righteousness, to actions of the most atrocious character. It
is this which robs most popular movements of their intelligent
purposiveness, unleashes the fanatic and the bigot, and leads men to die and
to kill for a phrase. This way of thinking points straight to Salem,
Massachusetts, to the torture-chamber, the pile of fagots and the mill pond
at Rosmersholm.
The habit of thinking as a crowd is so widespread that it is impossible to
trace the influence of its rationalistic negations in the daily mental habits of
most of us. We play out our lives as if we were but acting a part which some
one had assigned to us. The fact that we are ourselves realities, as inevitable
as falling rain, and with the same right to be as the rocks and hills,
positively startles us. We feel that we must plead extenuation, apologize for
our existence, as if the end and aim of living were to serve or vindicate a
Good which, being sufficient in itself and independent of us, can never be
realized as actually good for anybody. We behave as if we were unprofitable
servants, cringing before wrathful ideas which, though our own creations,
we permit to lord it over us. Our virtues we regard not as expressions of
ourselves or as habitual ways of reaching desirable goods, but as if they
were demanded of us unwillingly by something not self. We should remind
ourselves that these big words we idolize have no eyes to see us and no
hearts to care what we do, that they are but symbols of ideas which we
might find very useful if we dared to become masters of them. The most
common use we make of such ideas is to beat one another and ourselves
into line with them, or enforce upon ourselves and others the collection of a
debt which was contracted only by our unconscious desire to cheat at cards
in the game of civilization.
A conscious recognition of this desire and its more deliberate and
voluntary resistance in ourselves rather than in our neighbors, a candid
facing of the fact of what we really are and really want, and a mutual
readjustment of our relations on this recognized basis would doubtless
deliver us from the compulsion of crowd-thinking in somewhat the same
way that psychoanalysis is said to cure the neurotic by revealing to him his
unconscious wish.
That some such cure is an imperative social need is evident. To-day the
mob lurks just under the skin of most of us, both ignorant and educated. The
ever-increasing frequency of outbreaks of mob violence has its source in the
crowd-thinking which is everywhere encouraged. The mob which may at
any time engulf us is, after all, but the logical conclusion and sudden
ripening of thought processes which are commonly regarded as highly
respectable, idealistic, and moral.
VII.
The Psychology of Revolutionary Crowds
Table of Contents
The crowd-mind is seen at its best and at its worst in revolution. To many
minds, revolution is so essentially a crowd phenomenon that the terms
revolution and crowd-rule are almost synonymous. "Hurrah, the mob rules
Russia," cried certain radicals in the spring of 1917—"Let the people rule
everywhere." Others, more conservative, saw in every extravagant deed and
atrocity alleged to have happened in Russia only the thing logically to be
expected where the mob rules. The idea of revolution is itself so commonly
a crowd-idea that the thinking—if thinking it may be called—of most
people on this subject depends principally upon which crowd we happen to
belong to, the crowd which sustains the ego-feeling of its members by the
hope of revolution, or the crowd which, for similar reason, brands
everything which opposes its interests, real or imaginary, as "anarchy" and
"Bolshevism."
If the word "revolution" be taken to mean fundamental change in mens
habits of thought, and life, and the forms of their relations to one another,
then it may be said that great "revolutions may be and have been achieved
with a relatively small degree of crowd-thinking and mob violence." Much
of the normal development of civilization, for instance, the great scientific
advance of the nineteenth century, the spread of culture, the creation of
artistic values, the rise in the standard of living, is change of this sort. Such
change is, however, gradual. It is brought about by countless concrete
adaptations, by thinking always toward realizable ends. New and often
unforeseeable results are thus reached; but they are reached, as in all
organic growth and in all sound thinking, by a series of successful
adjustments within the real. True progress is doubtless made up of changes
of this sort. But for the course of progress to run on uninterrupted and
undefeated we should have to be, both in our individual and social behavior,
the reasonable beings which certain nineteenth-century utilitarians mistook
us for.
It is the fool thing, the insincere thing, that more commonly happens in
matters social and political. The adjustment reached is not often a solution
of a social problem worked out deliberately on the "greatest-happiness"
principle. It is commonly a status quo, or balance of power among
contending crowds, each inspired by the fiction of its own importance, by
self-idealization, and desire to rule. It is an unstable equilibrium usually
held in place for the time by a dominant crowd. This dominant crowd may
itself be composed of quarreling factions, but these parties, so long as they
share enough of the supremacy to keep up their self-feeling, so long, in fact,
as their members may even be able to make themselves believe that they,
too, are in the upper set, or so long as they continue to hope for success in
the social game as now played, unite in repeating the catchwords which
justify their crowd in its supremacy. The dominant group identifies its own
interests with the general welfare. And in the sense that some sort of order,
or any at all, is to be preferred to social chaos, there is an element of truth in
this identification.
The fact remains, however, that the dominant crowd possesses always
much of the crowd-spirit which originally secured for it its enviable
position. Its ideas, like those of all crowds, are devices for sustaining the
self-feeling of its members, for protecting itself, for keeping the group
together, for justification. They are only secondarily, if at all, instruments
for dealing with new and perplexing social situations. It cannot be denied
that a certain set of opinions, prejudices, mannerisms, ceremonies "go with"
the social position which corresponds to them. They are the ready-made
habits of the "set" or class. They are badges by which the "gentleman" is
distinguished, the evening clothes of the psyche, as it were. Many of these
crowd-forms represent true values of living, some of them are useful in our
dealings with reality; if this were not so, if such spiritual tattooings or
ceremonial forms were wholly harmful, the crowd which performed them
would be at such a disadvantage that it could not hold its own. But that
considerations of utility—other than the function which such ceremonialism
is known to have for the unconscious always—do not directly govern these
forms of thought and behavior is seen in the fact that so many of them, as
Sumner says of "folkways," are either harmful or useless in dealing with
matters of fact.
The dominant crowd, therefore, in just so far as it must remain a crowd
in order to secure its own position of supremacy, must strive to force all
social realities into the forms of its own conflicts and dilemmas. Inevitably
the self-feeling of a great many people, who are forced by the dominant
crowd to conform and labor with no compensation, is hurt. They cannot but
contrast their own lot with that of their more fortunate neighbors. Of all
things, people probably resist most the feeling of inferiority. Any suggestion
that the difference in social position is due to a similar difference in
personal worth or in ability is hotly resented. The resentment is in no wise
abated by the fact that in some cases this suggestion may be true.
Compensations are at once created by the unconscious. In mediæval times
"all men were brothers and were equal before the altars of the Church and
in heaven." Thus distinctions of merit, other than those which prevailed in
the social order, were set up in the interest of the common man.
As the influence of the Renaissance directed general attention from the
realm of the spiritual to practical affairs of earth, these compensations
changed from thoughts of the future world to dreams of the future of this
world. The injured self-feeling dwells upon the economic or political
inequalities which flow from the dominance of the ruling crowd. The
injustices and acts of exploitation, which are certainly neither new nor rare
occurrences in human relations, are seized upon as if it were these things,
not the assumption to superiority, which were the issue at stake.
At the time of the French Revolution the Third Estate, or Bourgeois,
which showed itself quite as capable of exploiting the poor as ever were the
older aristocrats, saw itself only as part of the wronged and exploited
"people." The sufferings of the poor, which it was frequently even then
profiting in quite as heartily, to say the least, as the titled nobility, were
represented as the grievance of all mankind against the hated nobility. That
the ideas of "liberty, equality, and fraternity" which these good tradesmen
preached may easily become the sort of compensatory ideas we have been
discussing is shown by the fact of the genuine astonishment and indignation
of the burghers when later their employees made use of this same phrase in
the struggles between labor and capital. Sans-culottism had quite as many
psychological motives as economic behind it.
How pompous, hateful, and snobbish were those titled folk with their
powdered wigs, carriages, fine clothes, and their exclusive social gatherings
to which honest citizens, often quite as wealthy as themselves, were not
invited. If the "people"—that is, the burghers themselves—only had a
chance they would be just as fine ladies and gentlemen as those who merely
inherited their superiority. Down with the aristocrats! All men were equal
and always had been. There must be fraternity and the carier ouvert les
talents, in other words, brotherhood and free competition.
I am sure, from all I have ever seen or read of social revolt and unrest,
that this injured self-feeling, or defense against the sense of personal
inferiority, while not the only motive, is the most powerful one at work. It
crops out everywhere, in the laymans hatred of the clergy during the
Reformation, in that curious complex of ideas whereby the uneducated
often look upon a college diploma as something little short of magical, and
defend their ego against this ridiculously exaggerated mark of distinction
and accompanying feeling of self-reproach by a slur at "high-brows." Few
people realize how general this feeling is; the trick of making fun of the
educated is one of the commonest forms of crowd-humor in America, both
in vaudeville and in popular oratory. I have previously pointed out the fact
that the religious revival in our day is to a great extent characterized by a
popular resistance to scholars. No one can read Mr. Sundays sermons and
deny this fact. The City of New York gave the largest majority in its history
to the candidate for the office of mayor who made opposition to "experts"
the main issue in his campaign. Scores of times I have heard popular
speakers resort to this trick to gain favor with their audiences, and I cannot
remember ever having known such sentiments to fail to gain applause—I
am not speaking now of strictly academic groups, but of general gatherings.
The point of interest here is that these same people have a most
extravagant notion of the value of the academic training which they
encourage the crowd speaker in ridiculing. I have made it a practice of
talking with a great many people personally and drawing them out on this
point, and I have found that this is almost uniformly the case. F. B., a cigar
maker by trade, says, "Oh, if I had only had sense enough to go on to school
when I had the opportunity!" E. L., a mechanic, says, "I might have been
somebody, if I had been given any chance to get an education." R., a sort of
jack-of-all-trades, says, "If I only had N.s education, Id be a millionaire."
B., a farmer with limited intellectual interests, says, "I tell you, my boys are
not going to be like me; they have got to go to college." G., a waiter, says,
"I dont know much," and then proceeds to impress me with the latest bit of
academic information which he has picked up. C., a printer, who has been
moderately successful, says: "Id give ten thousand dollars right this minute
if I knew Greek; now there is —— and there is ——, neighbors of mine,
theyre highly educated. When Im with them Im ashamed and feel like a
dub."
When, on such occasions, I repeatedly say that the average academic
student really learns hardly anything at all of the classic languages, and cite
the small fruits of my own years of tedious study as an example, the effect
produced is invariably comforting—until I add that one need not attend a
university seven years or even four to become educated, but that nearly
everyone with ability to learn and with genuine intellectual interests may
achieve a remarkable degree of learning. The answer of the perplexed
person is then often an extenuation. "Well, you see, a busy person or a
working man is so tired after the days work that he has no energy left for
study," or it is, "Wait till the working class have more leisure, then they, too,
can be cultivated." Passing over this extenuation, which ignores the fact that
some of the best informed and clearest thinking people one meets are
working people, while the average university graduate leads anything but an
intellectual life, it can hardly be denied, I think, that our crowd cult of anti-
"highbrowism" is really a defense mechanism against an inner feeling of
inferiority. Now the interesting thing about this feeling of inferiority is the
exaggerated notion of the superiority of the college-trained, which is
entertained chiefly by the uneducated themselves. What appears here is in
fact nothing other than a cheapening of the idea of superiority. Personal
excellence is something which anyone may attain; it is not something
congenital, but something to be added on; one "gets an education,"
possesses something of advantage, merely by a few years of conventional
study of books. Anyone might do that, therefore. "I, too, if I only cared to,
or had been given opportunity, might now be famous." "The difference
between myself and the worlds greatest genius is not a spiritual chasm
which I could not myself, at least hypothetically, cross." "It is rather an
acquired character, a mere fruit of special opportunity—which in a few
cases it doubtless may be—but it is something external; at bottom we are all
equal."
Many facts may be advanced to corroborate the results of our analysis
here. The crowd always resents the Carlyle, William James, Nietzsche,
Goethe theory of genius. Genius is not congenital superiority. It is the result
of hard work. The genius is not a unique personal fact, he is a
"representative man." He says just what his age is thinking. The inarticulate
message of his contemporaries simply becomes articulate in some one, and
behold a genius. In other words, I suppose, all Vienna, messenger boys and
bootblacks especially, were suddenly fascinated by Schillers "Ode to Joy"
and went about whistling improvised musical renderings of the theme of
this poem, till the deaf Beethoven heard and wrote these whistlings down in
the form of the Ninth Symphony.
According to the crowd, Luther did not create the Reformation, or
Petrarch the Renaissance; these movements themselves created their leaders
and founders; all that the genius did was to interpret and faithfully obey the
Peoples will. Ergo, to be a genius one need only study hard enough to be
able to tell the people what they already think. The superiority of genius is
therefore no different from that of any educated person; except in degree of
application. Anyone of us might possess this superiority. In other words, the
"intellectual snobbishness" which the crowd resents is nothing else than the
crowd-mans own fiction of self-importance, projected upon those whose
imagined superiority he envies. It is recognized, even exaggerated by the
unlearned, because it is precisely the sort of superiority which the ignorant
man himself, in his ignorance, imagines that he himself would display if he
"only had the chance," and even now possesses unrecognized.
We have made the foregoing detour because I think it serves to
illustrate, in a way, the psychic processes behind much revolutionary
propaganda and activity. I would not attempt to minimize the extent of the
social injustice and economic slavery which a dominant crowd, whether
ecclesiastical, feudal, or capitalistic, is guilty of in its dealings with its
subjects. But every dominant crowd, certain sections of the "proletariat" as
quickly as any other, will resort to such practices, and will alike justify
them by moral catchwords the minute its supremacy over other crowds
gives it opportunity. Therefore there is a certain amount of tautology in
denouncing the "master class" for its monstrous abuses. That the real point
at issue between the dominant crowd and the under crowd is the assumed
personal superiority of the members of the former, rather than the economic
"exploitation" which it practices, is shown by the fact that the French
Revolution was led by wealthy bourgeois, and that the leading
revolutionary element in the working class to-day consists, not of the "down
and out" victims of capitalist exploitation, but of the members of the more
highly skilled and better paid trades, also of certain intellectuals who are not
"proletarians" at all.
And now we come to our point: the fiction of superiority of the
dominant crowd, just as in the case of the assumed personal superiority of
the intellectuals, is resented by the under crowd because it is secretly
recognized by the under crowd. Of course the dominant crowd, like all
crowds, is obsessed by its feelings of self-importance, and this feeling is
apparently vindicated by its very social position. But the fiction is
recognized at its full face value, and therefore resented by the under
crowds, because that is precisely the sort of personal supremacy to which
they also aspire.
One commonly hears it said to-day, by those who have made the
catchwords of democracy their crowd cult, that the issue in modern society
is between democracy and capitalism. In a sense this may be true, but only
in a superficial sense; the real issue is between the personal self as a social
entity and the crowd. Capitalism is, to my mind, the logical first fruit of so-
called democracy. Capitalism is simply the social supremacy of the trader-
man crowd. For a hundred years and more commercial ability—that of
organizing industry and selling goods—has been rewarded out of all
proportion to any other kind of ability, because, in the first place, it leads to
the kind of success which the ordinary man most readily recognizes and
envies—large houses, fine clothes, automobiles, exclusive clubs, etc. A
Whittier may be ever so great a poet, and yet sit beside the stove in the
general store of his little country village, and no one thinks he is so very
wonderful. Some may envy him his fame, but few will envy and therefore
be fascinated by that in him which they do not understand. But a
multimillionaire in their community is understood; everyone can see and
envy his success; he is at once both envied and admired.
Moreover, the commercial ability is the sort which the average man
most commonly thinks he possesses in some degree. While, therefore, he
grumbles at the unjust inequalities in wealth which exist in modern society,
and denounces the successful business man as an exploiter and fears his
power, the average man will nevertheless endure all this, much in the same
spirit that a student being initiated into a fraternity will take the drubbing,
knowing well that his own turn at the fun will come later. It is not until the
members of the under crowd begin to suspect that their own dreams of
"aping the rich" may never come true that they begin to entertain
revolutionary ideas. In other words, forced to abandon the hope of joining
the present dominating crowd, they begin to dream of supplanting and so
dispossessing this crowd by their own crowd.
That the dominant crowd is just as much to blame for this state of affairs
as the under crowd, perhaps more so, is shown by the history of every
period preceding a revolutionary outbreak. I will dwell at some length on
this fact later. My point here is that, first, a revolution, in the sense that the
word means a violent uprising against the existing order, is a psychological
crowd-phenomenon—and second, that it takes two crowds to make a
revolution.
Writers, like Le Bon, have ignored the part which the dominant crowd
plays in such events. They have thought of revolution only as the behavior
of the under crowd. They have assumed that the crowd and the people were
the same. Their writings are hardly more than conservative warnings
against the excess and wickedness of the popular mind once it is aroused.
Sumner says:
Moral traditions are the guides which no one can afford to neglect.
They are in the mores, and they are lost in every great revolution of the
mores. Then the men are morally lost.
Le Bon says, writing of the French Revolution:
The people may kill, burn, ravage, commit the most frightful cruelties,
glorify its hero to-day and throw him into the gutter to-morrow; it is all
one; the politicians will not cease to vaunt its virtues, its high wisdom,
and to bow to its every decision.
Now in what does this entity really consist, this mysterious fetich
which revolutionists have revered for more than a century?
It may be decomposed into two distinct categories. The first
includes the peasants, traders, and workers of all sorts who need
tranquillity and order that they may exercise their calling. This people
forms the majority, but a majority which never caused a revolution.
Living in laborious silence, it is ignored by historians.
The second category, which plays a capital part in all national
disturbances, consists of a subversive social residue dominated by a
criminal mentality. Degenerates of alcoholism and poverty, thieves,
beggars, destitute "casuals," indifferent workers without employment
—these constitute the dangerous bulk of the armies of insurrection....
To this sinister substratum are due the massacres which stain all
revolutions.... To elements recruited from the lowest dregs of the
populace are added by contagion a host of idle and indifferent persons
who are simply drawn into the movement. They shout because there
are men shouting, and revolt because there is a revolt, without having
the vaguest idea of the cause of the shouting or revolution. The
suggestive power of the environment absolutely hypnotized them.
This idea, which is held with some variation by Sumner, Gobineau,
Faguet, and Conway, is, I believe, both unhistorical and unpsychological,
because it is but a half-truth. This substratum of the population does at the
moment of revolution become a dangerous mob. Such people are
unadjusted to any social order, and the least deviation from the routine of
daily life throws them off their balance. The relaxation of authority at the
moment when one group is supplanting another in position of social
control, is to these people like the two or three days of interregnum between
the pontificates of Julius and Leo, described by Cellini. Those who need
some one to govern them, and they are many, find their opportunity in the
general disturbance. They suddenly react to the revolutionary propaganda
which up to this minute they have not heeded, they are controlled by
revolutionary crowd-ideas in a somnambulistic manner, and like
automatons carry these ideas precipitately to their deadly conclusion. But
this mob is not the really revolutionary crowd and in the end it is always put
back in its place by the newly dominant crowd. The really revolutionary
crowd consists of the group who are near enough the dominant crowd to be
able to envy its "airs" with some show of justification, and are strong
enough to dare try issue with it for supreme position. Madame Rolland, it
will be remembered, justified her opposition to aristocrats on the principle
of equality and fraternity, but she could never forget her resentment at being
made, in the home of a member of this aristocracy, to eat with the servants.
What Le Bon and others seem to ignore is that the ruling class may be
just as truly a crowd as the insurrectionary mob, and that the violent
behavior of revolutionary crowds is simply the logic of crowd-thinking
carried to its swift practical conclusion.
It is generally assumed that a revolution is a sudden and violent change
in the form of government. From what has been said it will be seen that this
definition is too narrow. History will bear me out in this. The Protestant
Reformation was certainly a revolution, as Le Bon has shown, but it
affected more than the government or even the organization of the Church.
The French Revolution changed the form of the government in France
several times before it was done, passing through a period of imperial rule
and even a restoration of the monarchy. But the revolution as such survived.
Even though later a Bourbon or a prince of the House of Orleans sat on the
throne of France, the restored king or his successor was hardly more than a
figurehead. A new class, the Third Estate, remained in fact master of
France. There had been a change in the ownership of the land; power
through the control of vested property rested with the group which in 1789
began its revolt under the leadership of Mirabeau. A new dictatorship had
succeeded the old. And this is what a revolution is—the dictatorship of a
new crowd. The Russian revolutionists now candidly admit this fact in their
use of the phrase "the dictatorship of the proletariat." Of course it is claimed
that this dictatorship is really the dictatorship of "all the people." But this is
simply the old fiction with which every dominant crowd disguises seizure
of power. Capitalist republicanism is also the rule of all the people, and the
pope and the king, deriving their authority from God, are really but "the
servants of all."
As we have seen, the crowd mind as such wills to dominate. Society is
made up of struggle groups, or organized crowds, each seeking the
opportunity to make its catchwords realities and to establish itself in the
position of social control. The social order is always held intact by some
particular crowd which happens to be dominant. A revolution occurs when a
new crowd pushes the old one out and itself climbs into the saddle. When
the new crowd is only another faction within the existing dominant crowd,
like one of our established political parties, the succession will be
accomplished without resort to violence, since both elements of the ruling
crowd recognize the rules of the game. It will also not result in far-reaching
social changes for the same reason. A true revolution occurs when the
difference between the dominant crowd and the one which supplants it is so
great as to produce a general social upheaval. The Reformation, the French
Revolution, and the "Bolshevist" coup detat in Russia, all were of this
nature. A new social leadership was established and secured by a change in
each case in the personnel of the ownership of such property as would give
the owners the desired control. In the first case there was a transfer of
property in the church estates, either to the local congregations, or the state,
or the denomination. In the second case the property transferred was
property in land, and with the Russian revolutionists landed property was
given to the peasants and vested capital turned over to the control of
industrial workers.
Those who lay all emphasis on this transfer of property naturally see
only economic causes in revolutionary movements. Economics, however, is
not a science of impersonal things. It treats rather of mens relations to
things, and hence to one another. It has to do with valuations and principles
of exchange and ownership, all of which need psychological restatement.
The transfer of the ownership of property in times of revolution to a new
class is not an end, it is a means to a new crowds social dominance. The
doctrines, ideals, and principles believed by the revolutionary crowd also
serve this end of securing its dominance, as do the social changes which it
effects, once in power.
Revolutions do not occur directly from abuses of power, for in that case
there would be nothing but revolution all the time, since every dominant
crowd has abused its power. It is an interesting fact that revolution generally
occurs after the abuses of which the revolutionists complain have been in
great measure stopped—that is, after the ruling crowd has begun to make
efforts at reform. The Reformation occurred in the pontificate of Leo X. If it
had been the result of intolerable abuse alone, it would have happened in
the time of Alexander VI, Borgia. The French Revolution fell upon the mild
head of Louis XVI, though the wrongs which it tried to right mostly
happened in the reign of his predecessor. In most cases the abuses, the
existence of which a revolutionary crowd uses for propaganda purposes, are
in turn repeated in new form by itself after it becomes dominant. The
Reformers in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries resorted to much the
same kind of persecution from which they had themselves earlier suffered.
The Constituent Assembly, though it had demanded liberty, soon set up a
more outrageous tyranny through its own committees than any that the
Louies had dreamed of. Bolshevists in capitalist countries are the greatest
advocates of free speech; in Russia they are the authors of a very effective
press-censorship.
No, it is hardly the abuses which men suffer from their ruling crowds
which cause insurrection. People have borne the most terrible outrages and
suffered in silence for centuries. Russia itself is a good example of this.
A revolution occurs when the dominant crowd begins to weaken. I think
we find proof of this in the psychology of revolutionary propaganda. A
general revolution is not made in a day, each such cataclysm is preceded by
a long period of unrest and propaganda of opposition to the existing order
and its beneficiaries. The Roman Republic began going to pieces about a
hundred years before the battle of Actium. The social unrest which followed
the Punic Wars and led to the revolt of the brothers Gracchi was never
wholly checked during the century which followed. The dominant party had
scarcely rid itself of these troublesome "demagogues" than revolt broke out
among the slave population of Sicily. This was followed by the revolt of the
Italian peasants, then again by the insurrection of Spartacus, and this in turn
by the civil war between Marius and Sulla, the conspiracy of Catiline, the
brief triumph of Julius Cæsar over the Senate, the revenge of the latter in
the assassination of Cæsar, and the years of turmoil during the Second
Triumvirate.
It is doubtful if there was at any time a very clear or widespread
consciousness of the issues which successively arose during that unhappy
century. It would seem that first one counter-crowd and then another,
representing various elements of the populace, tried issue with the ruling
crowd. The one factor which remained constant through all this was the
progressive disintegration of the dominant party. The supremacy of the
Patres Conscripti et Equites became in fact a social anachronism the day
that Tiberius Gracchus demanded the expropriation of the landed
aristocracy. The ideas whereby the dominant crowd sought to justify its pre-
emptions began to lose their functional value. Only the undisguised use of
brute force was left. Such ideas ceased to convince. Men of unusual
independence of mind, or men with ambitious motives, who had grown up
within the dominant crowd, began to throw off the spell of its control-ideas,
and, by leaving it, to weaken it further from within. No sooner was this
weakness detected by other groups than every sort of grievance and partisan
interest became a moral justification for efforts to supplant the rulers. The
attempt of the dominant crowd to retain its hold by repeating its traditional
justification-platitudes, unchanged, but with greater emphasis, may be seen
in the orations of Cicero. It would be well if some one besides high-school
students and their Latin teachers were to take up the study of Cicero; the
social and psychological situation which this orator and writer of moral
essays reveals has some suggestive similarities to things which are
happening to-day.
The century and more of unrest which preceded both the Reformation
and the French Revolution is in each instance a long story. But in both there
is the same gradual loss of prestige on the part of the dominant crowd; the
same inability of this crowd to change with the changes of time; to find new
sanctions for itself when the old ones were no longer believed; the same
unadaptability, the same intellectual and moral bankruptcy, therefore, the
same gradual disintegration from within; the same resort to sentimentalism
and ineffective use of force, the same circle of hungry counter-crowds
waiting around with their tongues hanging out, ready to pounce upon that
before which they had previously groveled, and to justify their
ravenousness as devotion to principle; the same growing fearlessness,
beginning as perfectly loyal desire to reform certain abuses incidental to the
existing order, and advancing, with every sign of disillusionment or
weakness, to moral indignation, open attack upon fundamental control
ideas, bitter hostility, augmented by the repressive measures taken by the
dominant crowd to conserve a status quo which no longer gained assent in
the minds of a growing counter-crowd; finally force, and a new dominant
crowd more successful now in justifying old tyrannies by principles not yet
successfully challenged.
In the light of these historical analogies the record of events during the
last seventy-five years in western Europe and America is rather
discomforting reading, and I fear the student of social psychology will find
little to reassure him in the pitiable lack of intellectual leadership, the
tendency to muddle through, the unteachableness and general want of
statesmanlike vision displayed by our present dominant crowds. If a
considerable number of people of all classes, those who desire change as
well as those who oppose it, could free their thinking from the mechanisms
of the crowd-mind, it might be possible to find the working solution of
some of our pressing social problems and save our communities from the
dreadful experience of another revolution. Our hope lies in the socially
minded person who is sufficiently in touch with reality to be also a non-
crowd man.
Anyone who is acquainted with the state of the public mind at present,
knows that a priori arguments against revolution as such are not
convincing, except to those who are already convinced on other ground.
The dominant crowd in each historical epoch gained its original supremacy
by means of revolution. One can hardly make effective use of the
commonplace antirevolutionary propaganda of defense of a certain order
which has among its most ardent supporters people who are proud to call
themselves sons and daughters of the Revolution. Skeptics at once raise the
question whether, according to such abstract social ethics, revolutionists
become respectable only after they are successful or have been a long time
dead. In fact, the tendency to resort to such reasoning is one among many
symptoms that the conservative mind has permitted itself to become quite
as much a crowd-phenomenon as has the radical mind.
The correct approach here is psychological and pragmatic. There is an
increasingly critical social situation, demanding far-reaching reconstructive
change; only the most hopeless crowd-man would presume to deny this
fact. The future all depends upon the mental processes with which we
attempt to meet this situation. Nothing but useless misery can result from
dividing crowd against crowd. Crowd-thinking, as I have said, does not
solve problems. It only creates ideal compensations and defense devices for
our inner conflicts. Conservative crowd-behavior has always done quite as
much as anything else to precipitate a revolutionary outbreak. Radical
crowd-behavior does not resolve the situation, it only inverts it. Any real
solution lies wholly outside present crowd-dilemmas. What the social
situation demands most is a different kind of thinking, a new education, an
increasing number of people who understand themselves and are
intellectually and morally independent of the tyranny of crowd-ideas.
From what has been said above, it follows that revolutionary
propaganda is not directly the cause of insurrection. Such propaganda is
itself an effect of the unconscious reaction between a waning and a crescent
crowd. It is a symptom of the fact that a large number of people have ceased
to believe in or assent to the continued dominance of the present controlling
crowd and are looking to another.
There is always a tendency among conservative crowds to hasten their
own downfall by the manner in which they deal with revolutionary
propaganda. The seriousness of the new issue is denied; the crowd seeks to
draw attention back to the old issue which it fought and won years ago in
the hour of its ascendancy. The fact that the old charms and shibboleths no
longer work, that they do not now apply, that the growing counter-crowd is
able to psychoanalyze them, discover the hidden motives which they
disguise, and laugh at them, is stoutly denied. The fiction is maintained to
the effect that present unrest is wholly uncalled-for, that everything is all
right, that the agitators who "make people discontented" are alien and
foreign and need only be silenced with a time-worn phrase, or, that failing,
shut up by force or deported, and all will be well.
I do not doubt that before the Reformation and the French Revolution
there were ecclesiastics and nobles aplenty who were quite sure that the
masses would never have known they were miserable if meddling
disturbers had not taken the trouble to tell them so. Even an honest critical
understanding of the demands of the opposing crowd is discouraged,
possibly because it is rightly felt that the critical habit of mind is as
destructive of one crowd-complex as the other and the old crowd prefers to
remain intact and die in the last ditch rather than risk dissolution, even with
the promise of averting a revolution. Hence the Romans were willing to
believe that the Christians worshiped the head of an ass. The mediæval
Catholics, even at Leos court, failed to grasp the meaning of the outbreak in
north Germany. Thousands saw in the Reformation only the alleged fact
that the monk Luther wanted to marry a wife. To-day one looks almost in
vain among business men, editors, and politicians for a more intelligent
understanding of socialism. A crowd goes down to its death fighting bogies,
and actually running upon the sword of its real enemy, because a crowd,
once its constellation of ideas is formed, never learns anything.
The crowd-group contains in itself, in the very nature of crowd-
thinking, the germs which sooner or later lay it low. When a crowd first
becomes dominant, it carries into a place of power a number of
heterogeneous elements which have, up to this time, been united in a great
counter-crowd because of their common dissatisfaction with the old order.
Gradually the special interests of these several groups become separated.
The struggle for place is continued as a factional fight within the newly
ruling crowd. This factional struggle greatly complicates every
revolutionary movement. We witness this in the murderously hostile
partisan conflicts which broke out in the revolutionary Assemblies in
France. It is seen again in the Reformation, which had hardly established
itself when the movement was rent by intense sectarian rivalries of all sorts.
The same is true of Russia since the fall of the Tsar, and of Mexico ever
since the overthrow of the Diaz regime. If these factional struggles go so far
as to result in schism—that is, in a conscious repudiation by one or more
factions of the revolutionary creed which had formerly united them all,
there is disintegration and in all probability a return to the old ruling crowd.
This reaction may also be made possible by a refusal of one faction to
recognize the others as integral parts of the newly triumphant crowd. If the
new crowd after its victory can hold itself together, the revolution is
established. It then becomes the task of the leading faction in the newly
dominant crowd to grab the lions share of the spoils for itself, give the other
factions only so much prestige as will keep alive in their minds the belief
that they, too, share in the new victory for "humanity" and hold the new
social order together, while at the same time justifying its own leadership
by the compulsive power of the idea which they all alike believe. This
belief, as we have seen, is the sine qua non of the continued existence of
any crowd. A dominant crowd survives so long as its belief is held
uncritically and repeated and acted upon automatically both by the
members of the crowd and its victims. When the factions which have been
put at a disadvantage by the leading faction renounce the belief, or awake to
the fact that they "have been cheated," disintegration begins.
Between the crowds professed belief and the things which it puts into
practice there is a great chasm. Yet the fiction is uniformly maintained that
the things done are the correct and faithful application of the great
principles to which the crowd is devoted. We saw in our study of crowd-
ideas in general that such ideas are not working programs, but are screens
which disguise and apparently justify the real unconscious motive of
crowd-behavior. The crowd secures its control, first, by proclaiming in the
most abstract form certain generally accepted principles, such as freedom,
righteousness, brotherly love—as though these universal "truths" were its
own invention and exclusive monopoly. Next, certain logical deductions are
made from these principles which, when carried to their logical conclusions
regardless of fact or the effect produced, make the thing which the crowd
really wants and does appear to be a vindication of the first principles. It is
these inferences which go to make up the conscious thinking or belief of the
crowd. Thus in the revolutionary convention in France all agree to the
principles of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity. Fidelity to these principles
would to a non-crowd mean that the believer should not try to dictate to his
fellows what they must believe and choose, that he would exercise good
will in his dealings with them and show them the same respect which he
wished them to have for himself. But the crowd does not understand
principles in this manner. Do all agree to the great slogan of the revolution?
Well, then, fidelity to Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity demands that the
enemies of these principles and the crowds definition of them be
overthrown. The Mountain is the truly faithful party, hence to the guillotine
with the Gironde. This chasm between crowd faith and crowd practice is
well illustrated in the case of those Southern patriots in America who were
ready to fight and die for the rights of man as expressed in the Declaration
of Independence, but refused to apply the principle of the inalienable rights
of all men to their own black slaves. Or, again in the case of nineteenth-
century capitalism, liberty must be given to all alike. Liberty means equal
opportunity. Equal opportunity means free competition in business. Free
competition exists only where there is an "incentive"; hence the investor
must be encouraged and his gains protected by law. Therefore anti-
capitalistic doctrines must be suppressed as subversive of our free
institutions. Immigrants to whom for a generation we have extended the
hospitality of our slums and labor camps, and the opportunity of freely
competing with our well-intrenched corporations, must be made to feel their
ingratitude if they are so misguided as to conclude, from the fact that
hundreds of leading radicals have been made to serve jail sentences, while
after thirty years of enforcing the antitrust law not a single person has ever
been sent to prison, that possibly this is not a free land.
Or again—one convicts himself of being a crowd-man who shows
partiality among crowds—the principle of democracy is generally accepted.
Then there should be industrial democracy as well as political—hence the
"Dictatorship of the Proletariat"—for the workers are "the people."
Parliamentary assemblies elected by all the people do not necessarily
represent labor. Organized labor, therefore, though a minority of the whole,
should establish "industrial democracy" by force. So, according to
Bolshevist crowd-logic, democracy means the rule of a minority by means
of force.
Now it is this fictitious, paranoiac, crowd-logic which one must be able
to dispel before he can extricate himself from the clutches of his crowd. If
he subjects the whole fabric of abstractions to critical analysis, revalues it,
puts himself above it, assumes a pragmatic attitude toward whatever truths
it contains, dares to test these truths by their results in experience and to use
them for desired ends; if, in short, he scrutinizes his own disguised
impulses, brings them to consciousness as what they are, and refuses to be
deceived as to their real import, even when they appear dressed in such
sheeps clothing as absolutes and first principles, he becomes a non-crowd
man, a social being in the best sense.
Those, however, who continue to give assent to the crowds first
principles, who still accept its habit of a priori reasoning, merely
substituting for its accepted deductions others of their own which in turn
serve to conceal and justify their own unconscious desires, will turn from
the old crowd only to be gobbled up by a new and counter-crowd. Such
people have not really changed. They denounce the old crowd on the
ground that "it has not lived up to its principles." It is a significant fact that
a crowds rule is generally challenged in the name of the very abstract ideas
of which it has long posed as the champion.
For instance, there is liberty. Every crowd demands it when it is seeking
power; no crowd permits it when it is in power. A crowd which is struggling
for supremacy is really trying to free itself and as many people as possible
from the control of another crowd. Naturally, the struggle for power appears
to consciousness as a struggle for liberty as such. The controlling crowd is
correctly seen to be a tyrant and oppressor. What the opposition crowd does
not recognize is its own wish to oppress, hidden under its struggle for
power. We have had occasion to note the intolerance of the crowd-mind as
such. A revolutionary crowd, with all its lofty idealism about liberty, is
commonly just as intolerant as a reactionary crowd. It must be so in order to
remain a crowd. Once it is triumphant it may exert its pressure in a different
direction, but the pinch is there just the same. Like its predecessor, it must
resort to measures of restraint, possibly even a "reign of terror," in order
that the new-won "liberty"—which is to say, its own place at the head of the
procession—may be preserved. The denial of freedom appears therefore as
its triumph, and for a time people are deceived. They think they are free
because everyone is talking about liberty.
Eventually some one makes the discovery that people do not become
free just by repeating the magic word "liberty." A disappointed faction of
the newly emancipated humanity begins to demand its "rights." The crowd
hears its own catchwords quoted against itself. It proceeds to prove that
freedom exists by denouncing the disturbers and silencing them, if
necessary, by force. The once radical crowd has now become reactionary.
Its dream of world emancipation is seen to be a hoax. Lovers of freedom
now yoke themselves in a new rebel crowd so that oppressed humanity may
be liberated from the liberators. Again, the will to power is clothed in the
dream symbols of an emancipated society, and so on around and around the
circle, until people learn that with crowds freedom is impossible. For men
to attain to mastery of themselves is as abhorrent to one crowd as to
another. The crowd merely wants freedom to be a crowd—that is, to set up
its own tyranny in the place of that which offends the self-feeling of its
members.
The social idealism of revolutionary crowds is very significant for our
view of the crowd-mind. There are certain forms of revolutionary belief
which are repeated again and again with such uniformity that it would seem
the unconscious of the race changes very little from age to age. The wish-
fancy which motivates revolutionary activity always appears to
consciousness as the dream of an ideal society, a world set free; the reign of
brotherly love, peace, and justice. The folly and wickedness of man is to
cease. There will be no more incentive for men to do evil. The lion and the
lamb shall lie down together. Old extortions and tyrannies are to be left
behind. There is to be a new beginning, poverty is to be abolished, Gods
will is to be done in earth, or men are at last to live according to reason, and
the inalienable rights of all are to be secured; or the co-operative
commonwealth is to be established, with no more profit-seeking and each
working gladly for the good of all. In other words, the mind of
revolutionary crowds is essentially eschatological, or Messianic. The crowd
always imagines its own social dominance is a millennium. And this trait is
common to revolutionary crowds in all historical periods.
We have here the psychological explanation of the Messianic faith
which is set forth with tremendous vividness in Biblical literature. The
revolutionary import of the social teaching of both the Hebrew and
Christian religions is so plain that I do not see how any honest and well-
informed person can even attempt to deny it. The telling effectiveness with
which this element in religious teaching may be used by clever radicals to
convict the apologists of the present social order by the words out of their
own mouths is evident in much of the socialist propaganda to-day. The
tendency of the will to revolt, to express itself in accepted religious
symbols, is a thing to be expected if the unconscious plays the important
part in crowd-behavior that we have contended that it does.
The eighth-century Hebrew prophet mingles his denunciations of those
who join house to house and field to field, who turn aside the way of the
meek, and sit in Samaria in the corner of a couch and on the silken cushions
of a bed, who have turned justice to wormwood and cast down
righteousness to the earth, etc., etc.,—reserving his choicest woes of course
for the foreign oppressors of "my people"—with promises of "the day of the
Lord" with all that such a day implies, not only of triumph of the oppressed
over their enemies, but of universal happiness.
Similarly the same complex of ideas appears in the writings which deal
with the Hebrew "Captivity" in the sixth century B.C., with the revolt of the
Maccabeans, and again in the impotent hatred against the Romans about the
time of the origin of Christianity.
The New Testament dwells upon some phase of this theme on nearly
every page. Blessed are ye poor, and woe unto you who are rich, you who
laugh now. The Messiah has come and with him the Kingdom of the
Heavens, but at present the kingdom is revealed only to the believing few,
who are in the world, but not of it. However, the Lord is soon to return; in
fact, this generation shall not pass away until all these things be
accomplished. After a period of great trial and suffering there is to be a new
world, and a new and holy Jerusalem, coming down from the skies and
establishing itself in place of the old. All the wicked, chiefly those who
oppress the poor, shall be cast into a lake of fire. There shall be great
rejoicing, and weeping and darkness and death shall be no more.
The above sketch of the Messianic hope is so brief as to be hardly more
than a caricature, but it will serve to make my point clear, that Messianism
is a revolutionary crowd phenomenon. This subject has been presented in
great detail by religious writers in recent years, so that there is hardly a
member of the reading public who is not more or less familiar with the
"social gospel." My point is that all revolutionary propaganda is "social
gospel." Even when revolutionists profess an antireligious creed, as did the
Deists of the eighteenth century, and as do many modern socialists with
their "materialist interpretation of history," nevertheless the element of
irreligion extends only to the superficial trappings of the revolutionary
crowd-faith, and even here is not consistent. At bottom the revolutionists
dream of a new world is religious.
I am using the word "religious" in this connection in its popular sense,
meaning no more than that the revolutionary crowd rationalizes its dream of
a new world-order in imagery which repeats over and over again the
essentials of the Biblical "day of the Lord," or "kingdom of heaven" to be
established in earth. This notion of cosmic regeneration is very evident in
the various "utopian" socialist theories. The Fourierists and St. Simonists of
the early part of the nineteenth century were extremely Messianic. So-called
"scientific socialists" are now inclined to ridicule such idealistic
speculation, but one has only to scratch beneath the surface of present-day
socialist propaganda to find under its materialist jargon the same old dream
of the ages. A great world-change is to come suddenly. With the triumph of
the workers there will be no more poverty or ignorance, no longer any
incentive to men to do evil to one another. The famous "Manifesto" is filled
with such ideas. Bourgeois society is doomed and about to fall. Forces of
social evolution inevitably point to the world-wide supremacy of the
working class, under whose mild sway the laborer is to be given the full
product of his toil, the exploitation of children is to cease, true liberty will
be achieved, prostitution, which is somehow a bourgeois institution, is to be
abolished, everyone will be educated, production increased till there is
enough for all, the cities shall no more lord it over the rural communities,
all alike will perform useful labor, waste places of the earth will become
cultivated lands and the fertility of the soil will be increased in accordance
with a common plan, the state, an instrument of bourgeois exploitation, will
cease to exist; in fact, the whole wicked past is to be left behind, for as
The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional
property relations, no wonder that its development involves the most
radical rupture with traditional ideas.
In fine,
In place of the old bourgeois society with its classes and class
antagonisms we shall have an association in which the free
development of each is the condition for the free development of all.
Le Bon says of the French Revolution:
The principles of the Revolution speedily inspired a wave of mystic
enthusiasm analogous to those provoked by the various religious
beliefs which had preceded it. All they did was to change the
orientation of a mental ancestry which the centuries had solidified.
So there is nothing astonishing in the savage zeal of the men of the
Convention. Their mystic mentality was the same as that of the
Protestants at the time of the Reformation. The principal heroes of the
Terror—Couthon, Saint Just, Robespierre, etc.—were apostles. Like
Polyeuctes destroying the altars of the false gods to propagate his faith,
they dreamed of converting the globe.... The mystic spirit of the
leaders of the Revolution was betrayed in the least details of their
public life. Robespierre, convinced that he was supported by the
Almighty, assured his hearers in a speech that the Supreme Being had
"decreed the Republic since the beginning of time."
A recent writer, after showing that the Russian revolution has failed to
put the Marxian principles into actual operation, says of Lenin and his
associates:
They have caught a formula of glittering words; they have learned the
verbal cadences which move the masses to ecstasy; they have learned
to paint a vision of heaven that shall outflare in the minds of their
followers the shabby realities of a Bolshevik earth. They are master
phraseocrats, and in Russia they have reared an empire on
phraseocracy.
The alarmists who shriek of Russia would do well to turn their
thoughts from Russias socialistic menace. The peril of Russia is not to
our industries, but to our states. The menace of the Bolsheviki is not an
economic one, it is a political menace. It is the menace of fanatic
armies, drunken with phrases and sweeping forward under Lenin like a
Muscovite scourge. It is the menace of intoxicated proletarians, goaded
by invented visions to seek to conquer the world.
In Nicolai Lenin the Socialist, we have naught to fear. In Nicolai
Lenin the political chief of Russias millions, we may well find a
menace, for his figure looms over the world. His Bolshevik
abracadabra has seduced the workers of every race. His stealthy
propaganda has shattered the morale of every army in the world. His
dreams are winging to Napoleonic flights, and well he may dream of
destiny; for in an age when we bow to phrases, it is Lenin who is the
master phraseocrat of the world.
Passing over the question of Lenins personal ambitions, and whether
our own crowd-stupidity, panic, and wrong-headed Allied diplomacy may
not have been contributing causes of the menace of Bolshevism, it can
hardly be denied that Bolshevism, like all other revolutionary crowd-
movements, is swayed by a painted vision of heaven which outflares the
miseries of earth. Every revolutionary crowd of every description is a
pilgrimage set out to regain our lost Paradise.
Now it is this dream of paradise, or ideal society, which deserves
analytical study. Why does it always appear the minute a crowd is
sufficiently powerful to dream of world-power? It will readily be conceded
that this dream has some function in creating certain really desirable social
values. But such values cannot be the psychogenesis of the dream. If the
dream were ever realized, I think William James was correct in saying that
we should find it to be but a "sheeps heaven and lubberland of joy," and that
life in it would be so "mawkish and dishwatery" that we should gladly
return to this world of struggle and challenge, or anywhere else, if only to
escape the deadly inanity.
We have already noted the fact that this dream has the function of
justifying the crowd in its revolt and will to rule. But this is by no means
all. The social idealism has well been called a dream, for that is just what it
is, the daydream of the ages. It is like belief in fairies, or the Cinderella
myth. It is the Jack-and-the-beanstalk philosophy. The dream has exactly
the same function as the Absolute, and the ideal world-systems of the
paranoiac; it is an imaginary refuge from the real. Like all other dreams, it
is the realization of a wish. I have long been impressed with the static
character of this dream; not only is it much the same in all ages, but it is
always regarded as the great culmination beyond which the imagination
cannot stretch. Even those who hold the evolutionary view of reality and
know well that life is continuous change, and that progress cannot be fixed
in any passing moment, however sweet, are generally unable to imagine
progress going on after the establishment of the ideal society and leaving it
behind.
Revolutionary propaganda habitually stops, like the nineteenth-century
love story, with a general statement, "and so they lived happily ever after."
It is really the end, not the beginning or middle of the story. It is the divine
event toward which the whole creation moves, and having reached it, stops.
Evolution having been wound up to run to just this end, time and change
and effort may now be discontinued. There is nothing further to do. In other
words, the ideal is lifted clear out of time and all historical connections. As
in other dreams, the empirically known sequence of events is ignored.
Whole centuries of progress and struggle and piecemeal experience are
telescoped into one imaginary symbolic moment. The moment now stands
for the whole process, or rather it is substituted for the process. We have
taken refuge from the real into the ideal. The "Kingdom of Heaven,"
"Paradise," "The Return to Man in the State of Nature," "Back to Primitive
New Testament Christianity," "The Age of Reason," "Utopia," the
"Revolution," the "Co-operative Commonwealth," all mean psychologically
the same thing. And that thing is not at all a scientific social program, but a
symbol of an easier and better world where desires are realized by magic,
and everyones check drawn upon the bank of existence is cashed. Social
idealism of revolutionary crowds is a mechanism of compensation and
escape for suppressed desires.
Is there any easier way of denying the true nature and significance of
our objective world than by persuading ourselves that that world is even
now doomed, and is bound suddenly to be transformed into the land of our
hearts desire? Is it not to be expected that people would soon learn how to
give those desires greater unction, and to encourage one another in holding
to the fictions by which those desires could find their compensation and
escape, by resorting to precisely the crowd-devices which we have been
discussing?
The Messianists of Bible times expected the great transformation and
world cataclysm to come by means of a divine miracle. Those who are
affected by the wave of premillennialism which is now running through
certain evangelical Christian communions are experiencing a revival of this
faith with much of its primitive terminology.
Evolutionary social revolutionists expect the great day to come as the
culmination of a process of economic evolution. This is what is meant by
"evolutionary and revolutionary socialism." The wish-fancy is here
rationalized as a doctrine of evolution by revolution. Thus the difference
between the social revolutionist and the Second Adventist is much smaller
than either of them suspects. As Freud would doubtless say, the difference
extends only to the "secondary elaboration of the manifest dream
formation"—the latent dream thought is the same in both cases. The
Adventist expresses the wish in the terminology of a prescientific age,
while the social revolutionist makes use of modern scientific jargon. Each
alike finds escape from reality in the contemplation of a new-world system.
The faith of each is a scheme of redemption—that is, of "compensation."
Each contemplates the sudden, cataclysmic destruction of the "present evil
world," and its replacement by a new order in which the meek shall inherit
the earth. To both alike the great event is destined, in the fullness of time, to
come as a thief in the night. In the one case it is to come as the fulfillment
of prophecy; in the other the promise is underwritten and guaranteed by
impersonal forces of "economic evolution."
This determinism is in the one case what Bergson calls "radical
finalism," and in the other "radical mechanism." But whether the universe
exists but to reel off a divine plan conceived before all worlds, or be but the
mechanical swinging of the shuttle of cause and effect, what difference is
there if the point arrived at is the same? In both cases this point was fixed
before the beginning of time, and the meaning of the universe is just that
and nothing else, since that is what it all comes to in the end.
Whether the hand which turns the crank of the world-machine be called
that of God or merely "Evolution," it is only a verbal difference; it is in both
cases "a power not ourselves which makes for righteousness." And the
righteousness? Why, it is just the righteousness of our own crowd—in other
words, the crowds bill of rights painted in the sky by our own wish-fancy,
and dancing over our heads like an aurora borealis. It is the history of all
crowds that this dazzling pillar of fire in the Arctic night is hailed as the
"rosy-fingered dawn" of the Day of the Lord.
Or, to change the figure somewhat, the faithful crowd has but to follow
its fiery cloud to the promised land which flows with milk and honey; then
march for an appointed time about the walls of the wicked bourgeois
Jericho, playing its propaganda tune until the walls fall down by magic and
the world is ours. No revolution is possible without a miracle and a brass
band.
I have no desire to discourage those who have gone to work at the real
tasks of social reconstruction—certainly no wish to make this study an
apology for the existing social order. In the face of the ugly facts which on
every hand stand as indictments of what is called "capitalism," it is doubtful
if anyone could defend the present system without recourse to a certain
amount of cynicism or cant. The widespread social unrest which has
enlisted in its service so much of the intellectual spirit of this generation
surely could never have come about without provocation more real than the
work of a mere handful of "mischief-making agitators." The challenge to
modern society is not wholly of crowd origin.
But it is one thing to face seriously the manifold problems of
reconstruction of our social relations, and it is quite another thing to
persuade oneself that all these entangled problems have but one imaginary
neck which is waiting to be cut with a single stroke of the sword of
revolution in the hands of "the people." Hundreds of times I have heard
radicals, while discussing certain evils of present society, say, "All these
things are but symptoms, effects; to get rid of them you must remove the
cause." That cause is always, in substance, the present economic system.
If this argument means that, instead of thinking of the various phases of
social behavior as isolated from one another, we should conceive of them as
so interrelated as to form something like a more or less causally connected
organic whole, I agree. But if it means something else—and it frequently
does—the argument is based upon a logical fallacy. The word "system" is
not a causal term; it is purely descriptive. The facts referred to, whatever
connections we may discover among them, are not the effects of a
mysterious "system" behind the facts of human behavior; the facts
themselves, taken together, are the system.
The confusion of causal and descriptive ideas is a habit common to both
the intellectualist philosopher and the crowd-minded. It enables people to
turn their gaze from the empirical Many to the fictitious One, from the real
to the imaginary. The idea of a system behind, over, outside, and something
different from the related facts which the term "system" is properly used to
describe, whether that system be a world-system, a logical system, or a
social system, whether it be capitalism or socialism, "system" so conceived
is a favorite crowd-spook. It is the same logical fallacy as if one spoke of
the temperature of this May day as the effect of the climate, when all know
that the term climate is simply (to paraphrase James) the term by which we
characterize the temperature, weather, etc., which we experience on this and
other days. We have already seen to what use the crowd-mind puts all such
generalizations.
A popular revolutionary philosophy of history pictures the procession of
the ages as made up of a pageant of spook-social systems, each distinct
from the others and coming in its appointed time. But social systems do not
follow in a row, like elephants in a circus parade—each huge beast with its
trunk coiled about the end of his predecessors tail. The greater part of this
"evolutionary and revolutionary" pageantry is simply dream-stuff. Those
who try to march into Utopia in such an imaginary parade are not even
trying to reconstruct society; they are sociological somnambulists.
The crowd-mind clings to such pageantry because, as we saw in another
connection, the crowd desires to believe that evolution guarantees its own
future supremacy. It then becomes unnecessary to solve concrete problems.
One need only possess an official program of the order of the parade. In
other words, the crowd must persuade itself that only one solution of the
social problem is possible, and that one inevitable—its own.
Such thinking wholly misconceives the nature of the social problem.
Like all the practical dilemmas of life, this problem, assuming it to be in
any sense a single problem, is real just because more than one solution is
possible. The task here is like that of choosing a career. Whole series of
partially foreseen possibilities are contingent upon certain definite choices.
Aside from our choosing, many sorts of futures may be equally possible.
Our intervention at this or that definite point is an act by which we will one
series of possibilities rather than another into reality. But the act of
intervention is never performed once for all. Each intervention leads only to
new dilemmas, among which we must again choose and intervene. It is
mainly in order to escape from the necessity of facing this terrifying series
of unforeseeable dilemmas that the crowd-man walketh in a vain show.
In pointing out the futility of present-day revolutionary crowd-thinking,
I am only striving to direct, in however small a degree, our thought and
energies into channels which lead toward desired results. It is not by
trombones that we are to redeem society, nor is the old order going to
tumble down like the walls of Jericho, and a complete new start be given.
Civilization cannot be wiped out and begun all over again. It constitutes the
environment within which our reconstructive thinking must, by tedious
effort, make certain definite modifications. Each such modification is a
problem in itself, to be dealt with, not by belief in miracle, but by what
Dewey calls "creative intelligence." Each such modification must be
achieved by taking all the known facts, which are relevant, into account. As
such it is a new adaptation, and the result of a series of such adaptations
may be as great and radical a social transformation as one may have the
courage to set as the goal of a definite policy of social effort. But there is a
world of difference between social thinking of this kind, where faith is a
working hypothesis, and that which ignores the concrete problems that must
be solved to reach the desired goal, and, after the manner of crowds, dreams
of entering fairyland, or of pulling a new world en bloc down out of the
blue, by the magic of substituting new tyrannies for old.
Revolutionary crowd-thinking is not "creative intelligence." It is hocus-
pocus, a sort of social magic formula like the "mutabor" in the Arabian
Nights; it is an Aladdins-lamp philosophy. And here we may sum up this
part of our argument. The idea of the revolution is to the crowd a symbol,
the function of which is compensation for the burdens of the struggle for
existence, for the feeling of social inferiority, and for desires suppressed by
civilization. It is an imaginary escape from hard reality, a new-world system
in which the ego seeks refuge, a defense mechanism under the compulsive
influence of which crowds behave like somnambulistic individuals. It is the
apotheosis of the under crowd itself and the transcendental expression and
justification of its will to rule. It is made up of just those broad
generalizations which are of use in keeping that crowd together. It gives the
new crowd unction in its fight with the old, since it was precisely these
same dream-thoughts which the old crowd wrote on its banners in the day
when it, too, was blowing trumpets outside the walls of Jericho.
VIII.
The Fruits of Revolution—New Crowd-Tyrannies
for Old
Table of Contents
So much for the psychology of the revolutionary propaganda. Now let us
look at what happens in the moment of revolutionary outbreak. We have
dwelt at some length on the fact that a revolution occurs when a new crowd
succeeds in displacing an old one in position of social control. At first there
is a general feeling of release and of freedom. There is a brief period of
ecstasy, of good will, a strange, almost mystical magnanimity. A flood of
oratory is released in praise of the "new day of the people." Everyone is a
"comrade." Everyone is important. There is an inclination to trust everyone.
This Easter-morning state of mind generally lasts for some days—until
people are driven by the pinch of hunger to stop talking and take up again
the routine tasks of daily living. We have all read how the "citizens" of the
French Revolution danced in the streets for sheer joy in their new-won
liberty. Those who were in Petrograd during the days which immediately
followed the downfall of the Tsar bear witness to a like almost mystical
sense of the general goodness of human kind and of joy in human
fellowship.
With the return to the commonplace tasks of daily life, some effort, and
indeed further rationalization, is needed to keep up the feeling that the new
and wonderful age has really come to stay. Conflicts of interest and special
grievances are viewed as involving the vital principles of the Revolution.
People become impatient and censorious. There is a searching of hearts.
People watch their neighbors, especially their rivals, to make sure that
nothing in their behavior shall confirm the misgivings which are vaguely
felt in their own minds. The rejoicing and comradeship which before were
spontaneous are now demanded. Intolerance toward the vanquished crowd
reappears with increased intensity, not a little augmented by the knowledge
that the old enemies are now at "the peoples" mercy.
There is a demand for revenge for old abuses. The displaced crowd
likely as not, foreseeing the doom which awaits its members, seeks escape
by attempting a counter-revolution. A propaganda of sympathy is carried on
among members of this same class who remain in the dominant crowd in
communities not affected by the revolution. There is secret plotting and
suspicion of treason on every hand. People resort to extravagant expressions
of their revolutionary principles, not only to keep up their own faith in
them, but to show their loyalty to the great cause. The most fanatical and
uncompromising members of the group gain prominence because of their
excessive devotion. By the very logic of crowd-thinking, leadership passes
to men who are less and less competent to deal with facts and more and
more extreme in their zeal. Hence the usual decline from the Mirabeaus to
the Dantons and Cariers, and from these to the Marats and Robespierres,
from the Milukoffs to the Kerenskys and from the Kerenskys to the
Trotzkys. With each excess the crowd must erect some still new defense
against the inevitable disclosure of the fact that the people are not behaving
at all as if they were living in the kingdom of heaven. With each farther
deviation from the plain meaning of facts, the revolution must resort to
more severe measures to sustain itself, until finally an unsurmountable
barrier is reached, such as the arrival on the scene of a Napoleon. Then the
majority are forced to abandon the vain hope of really attaining Utopia, and
content themselves with fictions to the effect that what they have really is
Utopia—or with such other mechanisms as will serve to excuse and
minimize the significance of existing facts and put off the complete
realization of the ideal until some future stage of progress. It is needless to
add that those who have most profited by the revolutionary change are also
most ready to take the lead in persuading their neighbors to be content with
these rational compromises.
Meanwhile, however, the revolutionary leaders have set up a
dictatorship of their own, which, while necessary to "save the revolution," is
itself a practical negation of the revolutionary dream of a free world. This
dictatorship, finally passing into the hands of the more competent element
of the revolutionary crowd, justifies itself to the many; professing and
requiring of all a verbal assent to the revolutionary creed of which its very
existence is a fundamental repudiation. This group becomes in time the
nucleus about which society finally settles down again in comparative
peace and equilibrium.
In general, then, it may be said that a revolution does not and cannot
realize the age-long dream of a world set free. Its results may be summed
up as follows: a newly dominant crowd, a new statement of old beliefs, new
owners of property in the places of the old, new names for old tyrannies.
Looking back over the history of the several great tidal waves of revolution
which have swept over the civilization which is to-day ours, it would appear
that one effect of them has been to intensify the hold which crowd-thinking
has upon all of us, also to widen the range of the things which we submit to
the crowd-mind for final judgment. In confirmation of this it is to be noted
that it is on the whole those nations which have been burnt over by both the
Reformation and the eighteenth-century revolution which exhibit the most
chauvian brand of nationalism and crowd-patriotism. It is these same
nations also which have most highly depersonalized their social
relationships, political structures, and ideals. It is these nations also whose
councils are most determined by spasms of crowd-propaganda.
The modern man doubtless has a sense of self in a degree unknown—
except by the few—in earlier ages, but along with this there exists in
"modern ideas," a complete system of crowd-ideas with which the
conscious self comes into conflict at every turn. Just how far the
revolutionary crowds of the past have operated to provide the stereotyped
forms in which present crowd-thinking is carried on, it is almost impossible
to learn. But that their influence has been great may be seen by anyone who
attempts a psychological study of "public opinion."
Aside from the results mentioned, I think the deposit of revolutionary
movements in history has been very small. It may be that, in the general
shake-up of such a period, a few vigorous spirits are tossed into a place
where their genius has an opportunity which it would otherwise have failed
to get. But it would seem that on the whole the idea that revolutions help
the progress of the race is a hoax. Where advancement has been achieved in
freedom, in intelligence, in ethical values, in art or science, in consideration
for humanity, in legislation, it has in each instance been achieved by unique
individuals, and has spread chiefly by personal influence, never gaining
assent except among those who have power to recreate the new values won
in their own experience.
Whenever we take up a new idea as a crowd, we at once turn it into a
catchword and a fad. Faddism, instead of being merely a hunger for the new
is rather an expression of the crowd-will to uniformity. To be "old-
fashioned" and out of date is as truly to be a nonconformist as to be a freak
or an originator. Faddism is neither radicalism nor a symptom of progress.
It is a mark of the passion for uniformity or the conservatism of the crowd-
mind. It is change; but its change is insignificant.
It is often said that religious liberty is the fruit of the Reformation. If so
it is an indirect result and one which the reformers certainly did not desire.
They sought liberty only for their own particular propaganda, a fact which
is abundantly proved by Calvins treatment of Servetus and of the
Anabaptists, by Luthers attitude toward the Saxon peasants, by the
treatment of Catholics in England, by the whole history of Cromwells rule,
by the persecution of Quakers and all other "heretics" in our American
colonies—Pennsylvania, I believe, excepted—down to the date of the
American Revolution.
It just happened that Protestantism as the religion of the bourgeois fell
into the hands of a group, who, outside their religious-crowd interests were
destined to be the greatest practical beneficiaries of the advancement of
applied science. Between applied science and science as a cultural
discipline—that is, science as a humanistic study—the line is hard to draw.
The Humanist spirit of the sciences attained a certain freedom,
notwithstanding the fact that the whole Reformation was really a
reactionary movement against the Renaissance; in spite, moreover, of the
patent fact that the Protestant churches still, officially at least, resist the free
spirit of scientific culture.
It is to the free spirits of the Italian Renaissance, also to the Jeffersons
and Franklins and Paines, the Lincolns and Ingersolls, the Huxleys and
Darwins and Spencers, the men who dared alone to resist the religious
crowd-mind and to undermine the abstract ideas in which it had intrenched
itself, to whom the modern world owes its religious and intellectual liberty.
The same is true of political liberty. England, which is the most free
country in the world to-day, never really experienced the revolutionary
crowd-movement of the eighteenth century. Instead, the changes came by a
process of gradual reconstruction. And it is with just such an opportunist
reconstructive process that England promises now to meet and solve the
problems of the threatened social revolution. In contrast with Russia,
Socialism in England has much ground for hope of success. The radical
movement in England is on the whole wisely led by men who with few
exceptions can think realistically and pragmatically, and refuse to be swept
off their feet by crowd-abstractions. The British Labor party is the least
crowd-minded of any of the socialistic organizations of our day. The
Rochdale group has demonstrated that if it is co-operation that people desire
as a solution of the economic problem, the way to solve it is to co-operate
along definite and practicable lines; the co-operators have given up belief in
the miracle of Jericho. The British trade-union movement has demonstrated
the fact that organization of this kind succeeds in just the degree that it can
rise above crowd-thinking and deal with a suggestion of concrete problems
according to a statesmanlike policy of concerted action.
To be sure it cannot be denied that the social reconstruction in England
is seriously menaced by the tendency to crowd-behavior. At best it reveals
hardly more than the superior advantage to the whole community of a
slightly less degree of crowd-behavior; but when compared with the
Socialist movement in Russia, Germany, and the United States, it would
seem that radicalism in England has at least a remote promise of reaching a
working solution of the social problem; and that is more than can at present
be said for the others.
In the light of what has been said about the psychology of revolution, I
think we may hazard an opinion about the vaunted "Dictatorship of the
Proletariat"—an idea that has provided some new catchwords for the crowd
which is fascinated by the soviet revolution in Russia. Granting for the sake
of argument that such a dictatorship would be desirable from any point of
view—I do not see how the mere fact that people work proves their
capacity to rule, horses also work—would it be possible? I think not. Even
the temporary rule of Lenin in Russia can hardly be called a rule of the
working class. Bolshevist propaganda will have it that such a dictatorship of
the working class is positively necessary if we are ever to get away from the
abuses of present "capitalistic society." Moreover, it is argued that this
dictatorship of the organized workers could not be undemocratic, for since
vested property is to be abolished and everyone forced to work for his
living, all will belong to the working class, and therefore the dictatorship of
the proletariat is but the dictatorship of all.
In the first place, assuming that it is the dictatorship of all who survive
the revolution, this dictatorship of all over each is not liberty for anyone; it
may leave not the tiniest corner where one may be permitted to be master of
himself. The tyranny of all over each is as different from freedom as is
pharisaism from spiritual living.
Again, what is there to show that this imagined dictatorship of all is to
be shared equally by all, and if not have we not merely set up a new
privileged class—the very thing which the Socialist Talmud has always
declared it is the mission of the workers to destroy forever? While the
workers are still a counter-crowd, struggling for power against the present
ruling class, they are of course held together by a common cause—namely,
their opposition to capital. But with labors triumph, everybody becomes a
worker, and there is no one longer to oppose. That which held the various
elements of labor together in a common crowd of revolt has now ceased to
exist, "class consciousness" has therefore no longer any meaning. Labor
itself has ceased to exist as a class by reason of its very triumph. What then
remains to hold its various elements together in a common cause? Nothing
at all. The solidarity of the workers vanishes, when the struggle which gave
rise to that solidarity ceases. There remains now nothing but the
humanitarian principle of the solidarity of the human race. Solidarity has
ceased to be an economic fact, and has become purely "ideological."
Since by hypothesis everyone is a worker, the dictatorship of the
workers is a dictatorship based not on labor as such, but upon a universal
human quality. It would be quite as truly a dictatorship of everyone if based
upon any other common human quality—say, the fact that we are all bipeds,
that we all have noses, or the fact of the circulation of the blood. As the
purely proletarian character of this dictatorship becomes meaningless, the
crowd-struggle switches from that of labor as a whole against capital, to a
series of struggles within the dominant labor group itself.
The experience of Russia has even now shown that if the soviets are to
save themselves from nation-wide bankruptcy, specially trained men must
be found to take charge of their industrial and political activities. Long
training is necessary for the successful management of large affairs, and
becomes all the more indispensable as industry, education, and political
affairs are organized on a large scale. Are specially promising youths to be
set apart from early childhood to prepare themselves for these positions of
authority? Or shall such places be filled by those vigorous few who have
the ambition and the strength to acquire the necessary training while at the
same time working at their daily tasks? In either case an intellectual class
must be developed. Does anyone imagine that this new class of rulers will
hesitate to make use of every opportunity to make itself a privileged class?
"But what opportunity can there be," is the reply, "since private capital
is to be abolished?" Very well, there have been ruling classes before in
history who did not enjoy the privilege of owning private property. The
clergy of the Middle Ages was such a class, and their dominance was quite
as effective and as enduring as is that of our commercial classes today. But
let us not deceive ourselves; in a soviet republic there would be opportunity
aplenty for exploitation. As the solidarity of labor vanished, each important
trade-group would enter into rivalry with the others for leadership in the co-
operative commonwealth. Every economic advantage which any group
possessed would be used in order to lord it over the rest.
For instance, let us suppose that the workers in a strategic industry, such
as the railways, or coal mines, should make the discovery that by going on a
strike they could starve the community as a whole into submission and gain
practically anything they might demand. Loyalty to the rest of labor would
act no more as a check to such ambitions than does loyalty to humanity in
general now. As we have seen, the crowd is always formed for the
unconscious purpose of relaxing the social control by mechanisms which
mutually justify such antisocial conduct on the part of members of the
crowd. There is every reason, both economic and psychological, why the
workers in each industry would become organized crowds seeking to gain
for their particular groups the lions share of the spoils of the social
revolution. What would there be, then, to prevent the workers of the
railroads or some other essential industry from exploiting the community
quite as mercilessly as the capitalists are alleged to do at present? Nothing
but the rivalry of other crowds who were seeking the same dominance. In
time a modus vivendi would doubtless be reached whereby social control
would be shared by a few of the stronger unions—and their leaders.
The strike has already demonstrated the fact that in the hands of a well-
organized body of laborers, especially in those trades where the number of
apprentices may be controlled, industrial power becomes a much more
effective weapon than it is in the hands of the present capitalistic owners.
A new dictatorship, therefore, must inevitably follow the social
revolution, in support of which a favored minority will make use of the
industrial power of the community, just as earlier privileged classes used
military power and the power of private property. And this new dominance
would be just as predatory, and would justify itself, as did the others, by the
platitudes of crowd-thinking. The so-called dictatorship turns out, on
examination, to be the dictatorship of one section of the proletariat over the
rest of it. The dream of social redemption by such means is a pure crowd-
idea.
IX.
Freedom and Government by Crowds
Table of Contents
The whole philosophy of politics comes down at last to a question of four
words. Who is to govern? Compared with this question the problem of the
form of government is relatively unimportant. Crowd-men, whatever
political faith they profess, behave much the same when they are in power.
The particular forms of political organization through which their power is
exerted are mere incidentals. There is the same self-laudation, the same
tawdry array of abstract principles, the same exploitation of under crowds,
the same cunning in keeping up appearances, the same preference of the
charlatan for positions of leadership and authority. Machiavellis Prince, or
Dostoievskys Grand Inquisitor, would serve just as well as the model for
the guidance of a Cæsar Borgia, a leader of Tammany Hall, a chairman of
the National Committee of a political party, or a Nicolai Lenin.
Ever since the days of Rousseau certain crowds have persisted in the
conviction that all tyrannies were foisted upon an innocent humanity by a
designing few. There may have been a few instances in history where such
was the case, but tyrannies of that kind have never lasted long. For the most
part the tyrant is merely the instrument and official symbol of a dominant
crowd. His acts are his crowds acts, and without his crowd to support him
he very soon goes the way of the late Sultan of Turkey. The Cæsars were
hardly more than "walking delegates," representing the ancient Roman
Soldiers soviet. They were made and unmade by the army which, though
Cæsars might come and Cæsars might go, continued to lord it over the
Roman world. While the army was pagan, even the mild Marcus Aurelius
followed Neros example of killing Christians. When finally the army itself
became largely Christian, and the fiction that the Christians drank human
blood, worshiped the head of an ass, and were sexually promiscuous was no
longer good patriotic propaganda, the Emperor Constantine began to see
visions of the Cross in the sky. The Pope, who is doubtless the most
absolute monarch in the Occident, is, however, "infallible" only when he
speaks ex-cathedra—that is, as the "Church Herself." His infallibility is that
of the Church. All crowds in one way or another claim infallibility. The
tyrant Robespierre survived only so long as did his particular revolutionary
crowd in France.
The fate of Savonarola was similar. From his pulpit he could rule
Florence with absolute power just so long as he told his crowd what it
wished to hear, and so long as his crowd was able to keep itself together and
remain dominant. The Stuarts, Hohenzollerns, Hapsburgs, and Romanoffs,
with all their claims to divine rights, were little more than the living
symbols of their respective nation-crowds. They vanished when they ceased
to represent successfully the crowd-will.
In general, then, it may be said that where the crowd is, there is tyranny.
Tyranny may be exercised through one agent or through many, but it nearly
always comes from the same source—the crowd. Crowd-rule may exist in a
monarchical form of government, or in a republic. The personnel of the
dominant crowd will vary with a change in the form of the state, but the
spirit will be much the same. Conservative writers are in the habit of
assuming that democracy is the rule of crowds pure and simple. Whether
crowd-government is more absolute in a democracy than in differently
constituted states is a question. The aim of democratic constitutions like our
own is to prevent any special crowd from intrenching itself in a position of
social control and thus becoming a ruling class. As the experiment has
worked out thus far it can hardly be said that it has freed us from the rule of
crowds. It has, however, multiplied the number of mutually suspicious
crowds, so that no one of them has for long enjoyed a sufficiently great
majority to make itself clearly supreme, though it must be admitted that up
to the present the business-man crowd has had the best of the deal. The
story of the recent Eighteenth Amendment shows how easy it is for a
determined crowd, even though in a minority, to force its favorite dogmas
upon the whole community. We shall doubtless see a great deal more of this
sort of thing in the future than we have in the past. And if the various labor
groups should become sufficiently united in a "proletarian" crowd there is
nothing to prevent their going to any extreme.
We are passing through a period of socialization. All signs point to the
establishment of some sort of social state or industrial commonwealth. No
one can foresee the extent, to which capital now privately owned is to be
transferred to the public. It is doubtful if anything can be done to check this
process. The tendency is no sooner blocked along one channel than it
begins to seep through another. In itself there need be nothing alarming
about this transition. If industry could be better co-ordinated and more
wisely administered by non-crowd men for the common good, the change
might work out to our national advantage.
It is possible to conceive of a society in which a high degree of social
democracy, even communism, might exist along with a maximum of
freedom and practical achievement. But we should first have to get over our
crowd-ways of thinking and acting. People would have to regard the state as
a purely administrative affair. They would have to organize for definite
practical ends, and select their leaders and administrators very much as
certain corporations now do, strictly on the basis of their competency.
Political institutions would have to be made such that they could not be
seized by special groups to enhance themselves at the expense of the rest.
Partisanship would have to cease. Every effort would have to be made to
loosen the social control over the individuals personal habits. The kind of
people who have an inner gnawing to regulate their neighbors, the kind who
cannot accept the fact of their psychic inferiority and must consequently
make crowds by way of compensation, would have to be content to mind
their own business. Police power would have to be reduced to the minimum
necessary to protect life and keep the industries running. People would have
to become much more capable of self-direction as well as of voluntary co-
operation than they are now. They would have to be more resentful of petty
official tyranny, more independent in their judgments and at the same time
more willing to accept the advice and authority of experts. They would have
to place the control of affairs in the hands of the type of man against whose
dominance the weaker brethren have in all ages waged war—that is, the
free spirits and natural masters of men. All pet dogmas and cult ideas that
clashed with practical considerations would have to be swept away.
Such a conception of society is, of course, wholly utopian. It could not
possibly be realized by people behaving and thinking as crowds. With our
present crowd-making habits, the process of greater socialization of
industry means only increased opportunities for crowd-tyranny. In the
hands of a dominant crowd an industrial state would be indeed what
Herbert Spencer called the "coming slavery."
As it is, the state has become overgrown and bureaucratic. Commissions
of all sorts are being multiplied year by year. Public debts are piled up till
they approach the point of bankruptcy. Taxes are increasing in the same
degree. Statutes are increased in number until one can hardly breathe
without violating some decree, ordinance, or bit of sumptuary legislation.
Every legislative assembly is constantly besieged by the professional
lobbyists of a swarm of reformist crowds. Busybodies of every description
twist the making and the enforcement of law into conformity with their
peculiar prejudices. Censorships of various kinds are growing in number
and effrontery. Prohibition is insincerely put forth as a war measure.
Ignorant societies for the "suppression of vice" maul over our literature and
our art. Parents of already more children than they can support may not be
permitted lawfully to possess scientific knowledge of the means of the
prevention of conception. The government, both state and national, takes
advantage of the war for freedom to pass again the hated sort of "alien and
sedition" laws from which the country thought it had freed itself a century
ago. A host of secret agents and volunteer "guardians of public safety" are
ready to place every citizen under suspicion of disloyalty to the
government. Any advocacy of significant change in established political
practices is regarded as sedition. An inquisition is set up for the purpose of
inquiring into peoples private political opinions. Reputable citizens are, on
the flimsiest hearsay evidence or rumor that they entertain nonconformist
views, subjected to public censure by notoriety-seeking "investigation
commissions"—and by an irresponsible press. Only members of an
established political party in good standing are permitted to criticize the acts
of the President of the United States. Newspapers and magazines are
suppressed and denied the privilege of the mails at the whim of opinionated
post-office officers or of ignorant employees of the Department of Justice.
An intensely patriotic weekly paper in New York, which happened to hold
unconventional views on the subject of religion, has had certain issues of its
paper suppressed for the offense of publishing accounts of the alleged
misconduct of the Y. M. C. A.
The stupidity and irresponsibility of the Russian spy-system which has
grown up in this country along with our overweening state is illustrated by
an amusing little experience which happened to myself several months after
the signing of the armistice with Germany. All through the trying months of
the war the great audience at Cooper Union had followed me with a loyalty
and tolerance which was truly wonderful. Though I knew that many had not
always been in hearty accord with my rather spontaneous and outspoken
Americanism, the Cooper Union Forum was one of the few places in
America where foreign and labor elements were present in large numbers in
which there was no outbreak or demonstration of any kind which could
possibly be interpreted as un-American. We all felt that perhaps the Peoples
Institute with its record of twenty years work behind it had been of some
real service to the nation in adhering strictly to its educational method and
keeping its discussions wholly above the level of any sort of crowd-
propaganda.
However, in the course of our educational work, it became my task to
give to a selected group of advanced students a course of lectures upon the
Theory of Knowledge. The course was announced with the title, "How Free
Men Think," and the little folder contained the statement that it was to be a
study of the Humanist logic, with Professor F. C. S. Schiller's philosophical
writings to be used as textbooks. The publication of this folder announcing
the course was held up by the printer, and we learned that he had been told
not to print it by some official personage whose identity was not revealed.
Notwithstanding the fact that Schiller is professor of philosophy in Corpus
Christi College, Oxford, and is one of the best-known philosophical writers
in the English-speaking world, and holds views practically identical with
what is called the "American School," led by the late William James, it
developed that the government agents—or whoever they were—objected to
the publication of the announcement on the ground that they thought
Schiller was a German. Such is our intellectual freedom regarding matters
which have no political significance whatever, in a world made "safe for
democracy." But we must not permit ourselves to despair or grow weary of
life in this "safety first" world—waves of pseudo-patriotic panic often
follow on the heels of easily won victory. Crowd-phenomena of such
intensity are usually of short duration, as these very excesses soon produce
the inevitable reaction.
The question, however, arises, is democracy more conducive to freedom
than other forms of political organization? To most minds the terms
"liberty" and "democracy" are almost synonymous. Those who consider
that liberty consists in having a vote, in giving everyone a voice regardless
of whether he has anything to say, will have no doubts in the matter. But to
those whose thinking means more than the mere repetition of eighteenth-
century crowd-ideas, the question will reduce itself to this: Is democracy
more conducive to crowd-behavior than other forms of government? Le
Bon and those who identify the crowd with the masses would answer with
an a priori affirmative. I do not believe the question may be answered in
any such off-hand manner. It is a question of fact rather than of theory.
Theoretically, since we have demonstrated I think that the crowd is not the
common people as such, but is a peculiar form of psychic behavior, it
would seem that there is no logical necessity for holding that democracy
must always and everywhere be the rule of the mob. And we have seen that
other forms of society may also suffer from crowd-rule. I suspect that the
repugnance which certain aristocratic, and bourgeois writers also, show for
democracy is less the horror of crowd-rule as such, than dislike of seeing
control pass over to a crowd other than their own. Theoretically at least,
democracy calls for a maximum of self-government and personal freedom.
The fact that democracy is rapidly degenerating into tyranny of all over
each may be due, not to the democratic ideal itself, but the growing
tendency to crowd-behavior in modern times. It may be that certain
democratic ideals are not so much causes as effects of crowd-thinking and
action. It cannot be denied that such ideals come in very handy these days
in the way of furnishing crowds with effective catchwords for their
propaganda and of providing them with ready-made justifications for their
will to power. I should say that democracy has indirectly permitted, rather
than directly caused, an extension in the range of thought and behavior over
which the crowd assumes dictatorship.
In comparing democracy with more autocratic forms of government,
this extent or range of crowd-control over the individual is important. Of
course, human beings will never permit to one another a very large degree
of personal freedom. It is to the advantage of everyone in the struggle for
existence to reduce his neighbors as much as possible to automatons. In this
way ones own adjustment to the behavior of others is made easier. If we can
induce or compel all about us to confine their actions to perfect routine,
then we may predict with a fair degree of accuracy their future behavior,
and be prepared in advance to meet it. We all dread the element of the
unexpected, and nowhere so much as in the conduct of our neighbors. If we
could only get rid of the humanly unexpected, society would be almost
fool-proof. Hence the resistance to new truths, social change, progress,
nonconformity of any sort; hence our orthodoxies and conventions; hence
our incessant preaching to our neighbors to "be good"; hence the fanaticism
with which every crowd strives to keep its believers in line. Much of this
insistence on regularity is positively necessary. Without it there could be no
social or moral order at all. It is in fact the source and security of the
accepted values of civilization, as Schiller has shown.
But the process of keeping one another in line is carried much farther
than is necessary to preserve the social order. It is insisted upon to the
extent that will guarantee the survival, even the dominance, of the
spiritually sick, the morally timid, the trained-animal men, those who would
revert to savagery, or stand utterly helpless the moment a new situation
demanded that they do some original thinking in the place of performing
the few stereotyped tricks which they have acquired; the dog-in-the-manger
people, who because they can eat no meat insist that all play the dyspeptic
lest the well-fed outdistance them in the race of life or set them an example
in following which they get the stomach ache; the people who, because they
cannot pass a saloon door without going in and getting drunk, cannot see a
moving-picture, or read a modern book, or visit a bathing beach without
being tormented with their gnawing promiscuous eroticism, insist upon
setting up their own perverted dilemmas as the moral standard for
everybody.
Such people exist in great numbers in every society. They are always
strong for "brotherly love," for keeping up appearances, for removing
temptation from the path of life, for uniform standards of belief and
conduct. Each crowd, in its desire to become the majority, to hold the
weaker brethren within its fold, and especially as everyone of us has a
certain amount of this "little brother" weakness in his own nature, which
longs to be pampered if only the pampering can be done without hurting our
pride—the crowd invariably plays to this sort of thing and bids for its
support. As the little brother always expresses his survival-values in terms
of accepted crowd-ideas, no crowd can really turn him down without
repudiating its abstract principles. In fact, it is just this weakness in our
nature which, as we have seen, leads us to become crowd-men in the first
place. Furthermore, we have seen that any assertion of personal
independence is resented by the crowd because it weakens the crowd-faith
of all.
The measure of freedom granted to men will depend, therefore, upon
how many things the crowd attempts to consider its business. There is a law
of inertia at work here. In monarchical forms of government, where the
crowd-will is exercised through a single human agent, the monarch may be
absolute in regard to certain things which are necessary to his own and his
crowds survival. In such matters "he can do no wrong"; there is little or no
appeal from his decisions. But the very thoroughness with which he hunts
down nonconformity in matters which directly concern his authority, leaves
him little energy for other things. Arbitrary power is therefore usually
limited to relatively few things, since the autocrat cannot busy himself with
everything that is going on. Within the radius of the things which the
monarch attempts to regulate he may be an intolerable tyrant, but so long as
he is obeyed in these matters, so long as things run on smoothly on the
surface, there are all sorts of things which he would prefer not to have
brought to his attention, as witness, for instance, the letter of Trajan to the
younger Pliny.
With a democracy it is different. While the exercise of authority is never
so inexorable—indeed democratic states frequently pass laws for the
purpose of placing the community on record "for righteousness," rather than
with the intention of enforcing such laws—the number of things which a
democracy will presume to regulate is vastly greater than in monarchical
states. As sovereignty is universal, everybody becomes lawmaker and
regulator of his neighbors. As the lawmaking power is present everywhere,
nothing can escape its multieyed scrutiny. All sorts of foibles, sectional
interests, group demands, class prejudices become part of the law of the
land. A democracy is no respecter of persons and can, under its dogma of
equality before the law, admit of no exceptions. The whole body politic is
weighed down with all the several bits of legislation which may be
demanded by any of the various groups within it. An unusual inducement
and opportunity are thus provided for every crowd to force its own crowd-
dilemmas upon all.
The majority not only usurps the place of the king, but it tends to
subject the whole range of human thought and behavior to its authority—
everything, in fact, that anyone, disliking in his neighbors or finding
himself tempted to do, may wish to "pass a law against." Every personal
habit and private opinion becomes a matter for public concern. Custom no
longer regulates; all is rationalized according to the logic of the crowd-
mind. Public policy sits on the doorstep of every mans personal conscience.
The citizen in us eats up the man. Not the tiniest personal comfort may yet
be left us in private enjoyment. All that cannot be translated into
propaganda or hold its own in a legislative lobby succumbs. If we are to
preserve anything of our personal independence, we must organize
ourselves into a crowd like the rest and get out in the streets and set up a
public howl. Unless some one pretty soon starts a pro-tobacco crusade and
proves to the newspaper-reading public that the use of nicotine by
everybody in equal amount is absolutely necessary for the preservation of
the American home, for economic efficiency and future military supremacy,
we shall doubtless all soon be obliged to sneak down into the cellar and
smoke our pipes in the dark.
Here we see the true argument for a written constitution, and also, I
think, a psychological principle which helps us to decide what should be in
a constitution and what should not. The aim of a constitution is to put a
limit to the number of things concerning which a majority-crowd may lord
it over the individual. I am aware that the appeal to the Constitution is often
abused by predatory interests which skulk behind its phraseology in their
defense of special economic privilege. But, nevertheless, people in a
democracy may be free only so long as they submit to the dictation of the
majority in just and only those few interests concerning which a monarch,
were he in existence, would take advantage of them for his personal ends.
There are certain political and economic relations which cannot be left to
the chance exploitation of any individual or group that happens to come
along. Some one is sure to come along, for you may be sure that if there is a
possible opportunity to take advantage, some one will do it sooner or later.
Now because people have discovered that there is no possible individual
freedom in respect to certain definite phases of their common life which are
always exposed to seizure by exploiters, democrats have substituted a
tyranny of the majority for the tyranny of the one or the favored few which
would otherwise be erected at these points. Since it is necessary to give up
freedom in these regions anyway, there is some compensation in spreading
the tyrannizing around so that each gets a little share of it. But every effort
should be made to limit the tyranny of the majority to just these points. And
the line limiting the number of things that the majority may meddle with
must be drawn as hard and fast as possible, since every dominant crowd, as
we have seen, will squeeze the life out of everything human it can get its
hands on. The minute a majority finds that it can extend its tyranny beyond
this strictly constitutionally limited sphere, nothing remains to stop it; it
becomes worse than an autocracy. Tyranny is no less abhorrent just because
the number of tyrants is increased. A nation composed of a hundred million
little tyrants snooping and prying into every corner may be democratic, but,
personally, if that ever comes to be the choice I think I should prefer one
tyrant. He might occasionally look the other way and leave me a free man,
long enough at least for me to light my pipe.
True democrats will be very jealous of government. Necessary as it is,
there is no magic about government, no saving grace. Government cannot
redeem us from our sins; it will always require all the decency we possess
to redeem the government. Government always represents the moral
dilemmas of the worst people, not the best. It cannot give us freedom; it can
give or grant us nothing but what it first takes from us. It is we who grant to
the government certain powers and privileges necessary for its proper
functioning. We do not exist for the government; it exists for us. We are not
its servants; it is our servant. Government at best is a useful and necessary
machine, a mechanism by which we protect ourselves from one another. It
has no more rights and dignities of its own than are possessed by any other
machine. Its laws should be obeyed, for the same reason that the laws of
mechanics should be obeyed—otherwise the machine will not run.
As a matter of fact it is not so much government itself against which the
democrat must be on guard, but the various crowds which are always
seeking to make use of the machinery of government in order to impose
their peculiar tyranny upon all and invade the privacy of everyone. By
widening the radius of governmental control, the crowd thus pinches down
the individuality of everyone with the same restrictions as are imposed by
the crowd upon its own members.
Conway says:
Present-day Democracy rests on a few organized parties. What would
a democracy be like if based on millions of independent Joneses each
of whom decided to vote this or that way as he pleased? The dominion
of the crowd would be at an end, both for better and for worse. We
shall not behold any such revolution in the world as we know it....
Thus we must conclude that the crowd by its very nature tends, and
always must tend, to diminish (if possible, to the vanishing point) the
freedom of its members, and not in one or two respects alone, but in
all. The crowds desire is to swallow up the individuality of its
members and reduce them one and all to the condition of crowd units
whose whole life is lived according to the crowd-pattern and is
sacrificed and devoted to crowd-interests....
An excellent illustration of this crowd-dominance crops up in my
afternoon paper.... It appears that in certain parts of the country
artisans, by drinking too much alcohol, are reducing their capacity of
doing their proper work, which happens at the moment to be of great
importance to the country at war. Many interferences with liberty are
permitted in war time by general consent. It is accordingly proposed to
put difficulties in the way of these drinkers by executive orders. One
would suppose that the just way to do this would be to make a list of
the drinkers and prohibit their indulgence. But this is not the way the
crowd works. To it everyone of its constituent members is like another,
and all must be drilled and controlled alike.... Whatever measure is
adopted must fall evenly on all classes, upon club, restaurant and hotel
as upon public house. Could anything be more absurd? Lest a
gunmaker or a shipbuilder in Glasgow should drink too much, Mr.
Asquith must not take a glass of sherry with his lunch at the
Athenæum!...
We live in days when crowd dominion over individuals has been
advancing at a headlong pace.... If he is not to drink in London lest a
Glasgow engineer should get drunk, why should not his eating be alike
limited? Why not the style and cut of his clothes? Why not the size and
character of his house? He must cause his children to be taught at least
the minimum of muddled information which the government calls
education. He must insure for his dependents the attention of an all-
educated physician, and the administration of drugs known to be
useless. If the crowd had its way every mother and infant would be
under the orders of inspectors, regardless of the capacity of the parent.
We should all be ordered about in every relation of life from infancy to
manhood.... Freedom would utterly vanish, and this, not because the
crowd can arrange things better than the individual. It cannot. It lacks
the individuals brains. The ultimate reason for all this interference is
the crowds desire to swallow up and control the unit. The instinct of all
crowds is to dominate, to capture and overwhelm the individual, to
make him their slave, to absorb all his life for their service.
The criticism has often been made of democracy that it permits too
much freedom; the reverse of this is nearer the truth. It was de Tocqueville,
I think, who first called attention to the "tyranny of the majority" in
democratic America. Probably one of the most comprehensive and
discriminating studies that have ever been made of the habits and
institutions of any nation may be found in the work of this observing young
Frenchman who visited our country at the close of its first half century of
political independence. De Tocquevilles account of Democracy in America
is still good reading, much of it being applicable to the present. This writer
was in no sense an unfriendly critic. He praised much that he saw, but even
in those days (the period of 1830) he was not taken in by the fiction that,
because the American people live under laws of their own making, they are
therefore free. Much of the following passages taken here and there from
Chapters XIV and XV is as true today as it was when it was written:
America is therefore a free country in which, lest anybody be hurt by
your remarks, you are not allowed to speak freely of private
individuals, of the State, or the citizens, or the authorities, of public or
private undertakings, in short of anything at all, except perhaps the
climate and the soil, and even then Americans will be found ready to
defend both as if they had concurred in producing them.
The American submits without a murmur to the authority of the
pettiest magistrate. This truth prevails even in the trivial details of
national life. An American cannot converse—he speaks to you as if he
were addressing a meeting. If an American were condemned to confine
himself to his own affairs, he would be robbed of one-half of his
existence; his wretchedness would be unbearable....
The moral authority of the majority in America is based on the
notion that there is more intelligence and wisdom in a number of men
united than in a single individual.... The theory of equality is thus
applied to the intellects of men.
The French, under the old regime, held it for a maxim that the King
could do no wrong. The Americans entertain the same opinion with
regard to the majority.
In the United States, all parties are willing to recognize the rights
of the majority, because they all hope at some time to be able to
exercise them to their own advantage. The majority therefore in that
country exercises a prodigious actual authority and a power of opinion
which is nearly as great (as that of the absolute autocrat). No obstacles
exist which can impair or even retard its progress so as to make it heed
the complaints of those whom it crushes upon its path. This state of
things is harmful in itself and dangerous for the future.
As the majority is the only power which it is important to court, all
its projects are taken up with the greatest ardor; but no sooner is its
attention distracted than all this ardor ceases.
There is no power on earth so worthy of honor in itself, or clothed
with rights so sacred, that I would admit its uncontrolled and all-
predominant authority.
In my opinion the main evil of the present democratic institutions
of the United States does not arise, as is so often asserted in Europe,
from their weakness, but from their irresistible strength.... I am not so
much alarmed by the excessive liberty which reigns in that country, as
by the inadequate securities which one finds against tyranny. When an
individual or party is wronged in the United States, to whom can he
apply for redress?
It is in the examination of the exercise of thought in the United
States that we clearly perceive how far the power of the majority
surpasses all the powers with which we are acquainted in Europe. At
the present time the most absolute monarchs in Europe cannot prevent
certain opinions hostile to their authority from circulating in secret
through their dominions and even in their courts.
It is not so in America. So long as the majority is undecided,
discussion is carried on, but as soon as its decision is announced
everyone is silent....
I know of no country in which there is so little independence of
mind and real freedom of discussion as in America. In America the
majority raises formidable barriers around the liberty of opinion.
Within these barriers an author may write what he pleases, but woe to
him if he goes beyond them. Not that he is in danger of an auto-da-fe,
but he is exposed to continued obloquy and persecution. His political
career is closed for ever. Every sort of compensation, even that of
celebrity, is refused him. Those who think like him have not the
courage to speak out, and abandon him to silence. He yields at length,
overcome by the daily effort which he has to make, and subsides into
silence as if he felt remorse for having spoken the truth.
Fetters and headsmen were coarse instruments ... but civilization
has perfected despotism itself. Under absolute despotism of one man,
the body was attacked to subdue the soul, but the soul escaped the
blows and rose superior. Such is not the course adopted in democratic
republics; there the body is left free, but the soul is enslaved....
The ruling power in the United States is not to be made game of.
The smallest reproach irritates its sensibilities. The slightest joke
which has any foundation in truth renders it indignant. Everything
must be the subject of encomium. No writer, whatever his eminence,
can escape paying his tribute of adoration to his fellow citizens.
The majority lives in the perpetual utterance of self-applause, and
there are certain truths which Americans can only learn from strangers,
or from experience. If America has not yet had any great writers, the
reason is given in these facts—there can be no literary genius without
freedom of opinion, and freedom of opinion does not exist in America.
Such passages as the above, quoted from the words of a friendly student
of American democracy, show the impression which, notwithstanding our
popular prattle about freedom, thoughtful foreigners have since the
beginning received. And de Tocqueville wrote long before crowd-thinking
had reached anything like the development we see at present. To-day the
tyrannizing is not confined to the majority-crowd. All sorts of minority-
crowds, impatient of waiting until they can by fair means persuade the
majority to agree with them, begin to practice coercion upon everyone
within reach the minute they fall into possession of some slight advantage
which may be used as a weapon. From the industrial side we were first
menaced by the "invisible government" of organized vested interests; now,
by a growing tendency to government by strikes. Organized gangs of all
sorts have at last learned the amusing trick of pointing a pistol at the publics
head and threatening it with starvation, and up go its hands, and the gang
gains whatever it wants for itself, regardless of anyone else. But this "hold-
up game" is by no means confined to labor. Capitalistic soviets have since
the beginning of the war taken advantage of situations to enhance their
special crowd-interests. The following, quoted from a letter written during
the war to the Atlantic Monthly, by a thoroughly American writer, Charles
D. Stewart, describes a type of mob rule which existed in almost every part
of the nation while we were fighting for freedom abroad:
Carlyle said that "Of all forms of government, a government of
busybodies is the worst." This is true. It is worse than Prussianism,
because that is one form of government, at least; and worse than
Socialism, because Socialism would be run by law, anyway. But
government by busybodies has neither head nor tail; working outside
the law, it becomes lawless; and having no law to support it, it finally
depends for its enforcement upon hoodlums and mob rule. When the
respectable and wealthy elements are resorting to this sort of
government, abetted by the newspapers and by all sorts of busybody
societies intent upon "government by public sentiment," we finally
have a new thing in the world and a most obnoxious one—mob rule by
the rich; with the able assistance of the hoodlums—always looking for
a chance.
It starts as follows:
The government wishes a certain amount of money. It therefore
appeals to local pride; it sets a "quota," which has been apportioned to
each locality, and promises of a fine "over-the-top" flag to be hoisted
over the courthouse. All well and good; local pride is a very fine thing,
competition is wholesome.
But the struggle that ensues is not so much local pride as it looks to be.
Milwaukee, for instance, a big manufacturing center, is noted for
its German population. This, the local proprietors fear, may affect its
trade. It may be boycotted to some extent. A traveling man comes back
and says that a certain dealer in stoves refuses to buy stoves made in
Milwaukee!
Ha!—Milwaukee must redeem its reputation; it must always go
over the top: it must be able to affix this stamp to all its letters.
Now, as the state has a quota, and the county and city has each its
quota, so each individual must have his quota. Each individual must be
"assessed" to buy a certain quota [government war loan] of bonds.
Success must be made sure: the manufacturers must see the honor of
Milwaukee, and Wisconsin, maintained.
It is not compulsory to give a certain "assessed" amount to the Y.
M. C. A.; and the government does not make a certain quota of bonds
compulsory on citizens—oh, no! it is not compulsory, only you must
abide by your assessment. And we will see that you do. No excuse
accepted....
Picture to yourself the following "collection committee" traveling
out of the highly civilized, "kultured" city of Milwaukee.
Twenty-five automobiles containing sixty to seventy respectable
citizens of Milwaukee.
One color guard (a flag at the head) with two home guardsmen in
citizens clothes.
Two deputy sheriffs.
One "official" photographer.
One "official" stenographer.
One banker (this personage to make arrangements to lend a farmer
the money in case he protests that he has subscribed too much
already).
This phalanx, entirely lawless, moves down upon a farmer who is
urging two horses along a cloddy furrow, doing his fall plowing.
They form a semicircle about him; the speechmaker says, "Let us
salute the flag" (watching him to see that he does it promptly); and
while his horses stand there the speechmaker delivers a speech. He
must subscribe his "assessed" amount—no excuses accepted. If he
owes for the farm, and has just paid his interest, and has only fifteen
dollars to go on with, it makes no difference. He must subscribe the
amount of his "assessment," and "sign here."
If not, what happens? The farmer all the time, of course, is
probably scared out of his wits, or does not know what to make of this
delegation of notables bearing down upon his solitary task in the
fields. But if he argues too much, he finds this. They have a large
package of yellow placards reading:
THE OCCUPANT OF THESE PREMISES HAS REFUSED TO
TAKE HIS JUST SHARE OF LIBERTY BONDS.
And they put them all over his place. He probably signs.
Now bear in mind that this method is not practiced merely against
farmers who have made unpatriotic remarks, or have refused to
support the war. It is practiced against a farmer who has taken only one
hundred dollars when he was assessed a hundred and fifty—and this is
to make him "come across" with the remainder.
You might ask, Is this comic opera or is it government?
And now we come to the conclusion. Imagine yourself either a
workman in Milwaukee, or a farmer out in the country. You are dealt
with in this entirely Prussian manner—possibly the committee, which
knows little of your financial difficulties in your home, has just
assessed you arbitrarily.
Your constitutional rights do not count. There is no remedy. If you
are painted yellow, the District Attorney will pass the buck—he knows
what the manufacturer expects of him, and the financier. The state
officers of these drives, Federal representatives, are always Milwaukee
bankers.
But for you there is no remedy if you are "assessed" too high.
With the Y. M. C. A., and other religious society drives, the same
assessment scheme is worked. You cannot give to the Y. M. C. A. You
are told right off how much you are to pay.
It would seem that in our democracy freedom consists first of freedom
to vote; second, of freedom to make commercial profit; third, of freedom to
make propaganda; fourth, of freedom from intellectual and moral
responsibility. Each of these "liberties" is little more than a characteristic
form of crowd-behavior. The vote, our most highly prized modern right, is
nearly always so determined by crowd-thinking that as an exercise of
individual choice it is a joke. Men are herded in droves and delivered by
counties in almost solid blocks by professional traders of political influence.
Before each election a campaign of crowd-making is conducted in which
every sort of vulgarity and insincerity has survival value, in which real
issues are so lost in partisan propaganda as to become unrecognizable.
When the vote is cast it is commonly a choice between professional crowd-
leaders whose competency consists in their ability to Billy Sundayize the
mob rather than in any marked fitness for the office to which they aspire—
also between the horns of a dilemma which wholly misstates the issue
involved and is trumped up chiefly for purposes of political advertising.
Time and again the franchise thus becomes an agency by which rival
crowds may fasten their own tyrannies upon one another.
Freedom to make commercial profit, to get ahead of others in the race
for dollars, is what democracy generally means by "opportunity." Nothing is
such a give-away of the modern man as the popular use of the word
"individualism." It is no longer a philosophy of becoming something
genuine and unique, but of getting something and using it according to your
own whims and for personal ends regardless of the effect upon others. This
pseudo-individualism encourages the rankest selfishness and exploitation to
go hand in hand with the most deadly spiritual conformity and inanity. Such
"individualism" is, as I have pointed out, a crowd-idea, for it is motivated
by a cheaply disguised ideal of personal superiority through the mere fact of
possessing things. Paradoxical as it may appear at first sight, this is really
the old crowd notion of "equality," for, great as are the differences of wealth
which result, every man may cherish the fiction that he possesses the sort of
ability necessary for this kind of social distinction. Such superiority thus
has little to do with personal excellence; it is the result of the external
accident of success. One man may still be "as good as another."
Against this competitive struggle now there has grown up a counter-
crowd ideal of collectivism. But here also the fiction of universal spiritual
equality is maintained; the competitive struggle is changed from an
individual to a gang struggle, while the notion that personal worth is the
result of the environment and may be achieved by anyone whose belly is
filled still persists. Proletarians for the most part wish, chinch-bug fashion,
to crawl into the Elysian fields now occupied by the hated capitalists. The
growing tendency to industrial democracy will probably in the near future
cut off this freedom to make money, which has been the chief "liberty" of
political democracy until now, but whether liberty in general will be the
gainer thereby remains to be seen. One rather prominent Socialist in New
York declares that liberty is a "myth." He is correct, in so far as the
democratic movement, either political or social, is a crowd-phenomenon.
Socialist agitators are always demanding "liberty" nevertheless, but the
liberty which they demand is little more than freedom to make their own
propaganda. And this leads us to the third liberty permitted by modern
democracy.
The "freedom of speech" which is everywhere demanded in the name of
democracy is not at all freedom in the expression of individual opinion. It is
only the demand for advertising space on the part of various crowds for the
publication of their shibboleths and propaganda. Each crowd, while
demanding this freedom for itself, seeks to deny it to other crowds, and all
unite in denying it to the non-crowd man wherever possible. The Puritans
"right to worship according to the dictates of a mans own conscience" did
not apply to Quakers, Deists, or Catholics. When Republicans were "black
abolitionists" they would have regarded any attempt to suppress The
Liberator, as edited by William Lloyd Garrison, as an assault upon the
constitutional liberties of the whole nation. But they are not now
particularly interested in preserving the constitutional liberties of the nation
as represented in the right of circulation of The Liberator, edited by Max
Eastman. In Jeffersons time, when Democrats were accused of
"Jacobinism," they invoked the "spirit of 1776" in opposition to the alien
and sedition laws under which their partisan propaganda suffered limitation.
To-day, when they are striving to outdo the Republicans in
"Americanization propaganda," they actually stand sponsor for an
espionage law which would have made Jefferson or Andrew Jackson froth
at the mouth. Socialists are convinced that liberty is dead because Berger
and Debs are convicted of uttering opinions out of harmony with
temporarily dominant crowd-ideas of patriotism. But when Theodore
Dreiser was put under the ban for the crime of writing one of the few good
novels produced in America, I do not recall that Socialists held any
meetings of protest in Madison Square Garden. I have myself struggled in
vain for three hours or more on a street corner in Green Point trying to tell
liberty-loving Socialists the truth about the Gary schools. When the
politicians in our legislative assemblies were tricked into passing the
obviously unliberal Eighteenth Amendment, I was much interested in
learning how the bulk of the Socialists in the Cooper Union audiences felt
about it. As I had expected, they regarded it as an unpardonable
infringement of personal freedom, as a typical piece of American Puritan
hypocrisy and pharisaism. But they were, on the whole, in favor of it
because they thought it would be an aid to Bolshevist propaganda, since it
would make the working class still more discontented! Such is liberty in a
crowd-governed democracy.... It is nothing but the liberty of crowds to be
crowds.
The fourth liberty in democratic society to-day is freedom from moral
and intellectual responsibility. This is accomplished by the magic of
substituting the machinery of the law for self-government, bureaucratic
meddlesomeness for conscience, crowd-tyranny for personal decency.
Professor Faguet has called democracy the "cult of incompetence" and the
"dread of responsibility." He is not far wrong, but these epithets apply not
so much to democracy as such as to democracy under the heel of the crowd.
The original aim of democracy, so far as its philosophical thinkers
conceived of it, was to set genius free from the trammels of tradition,
realize a maximum of self-government, and make living something of an
adventure. But crowds do not so understand democracy. Every crowd looks
upon democracy simply as a scheme whereby it may have its own way. We
have seen that the crowd-mind as such is a device for "kidding" ourselves,
for representing the easiest path to the enhancement of our self-feeling as
something highly moral, for making our personal right appear like universal
righteousness, for dressing up our will to lord it over others, as if it were
devotion to impersonal principle. As we have seen, the crowd therefore
insists upon universal conformity; goodness means only making everyone
alike. By taking refuge in the abstract and ready-made system of crowd-
ideas, the unconscious will to power is made to appear what it is not; the
burden of responsibility is transferred to the group with its fiction of
absolute truth. Le Bon noted the fact of the irresponsibility of crowds, but
thought that such irresponsibility was due to the fact that the crowd, being
an anonymous gathering, the individual could lose his identity in the
multitude. The psychology of the unconscious has provided us with what I
think is a better explanation, but the fact of irresponsibility remains and is
evident in all the influence of crowd-thinking upon democratic institutions.
The crowd-ideal of society is one in which every individual is protected not
only against exploitation, but against temptation—protected therefore
against himself. The whole tendency of democracy in our times is toward
just such inanity. Without the least critical analysis of accepted moral
dilemmas, we are all to be made moral in spite of ourselves, regardless of
our worth, without effort on our part, moral in the same way that machines
are moral, by reducing the will to mere automatic action, leaving no place
for choice and uncertainty, having everyone wound up and oiled and
regulated to run at the same speed. Each crowd therefore strives to make its
own moral ideas the law of the land. Law becomes thus a sort of anthology
of various existing crowd-hobbies. In the end moral responsibility is passed
over to legislatures, commissions, detectives, inspectors, and bureaucrats.
Anything that "gets by" the public censor, however rotten, we may wallow
in with a perfect feeling of respectability. The right and necessity of
choosing our way is superseded by a system of statutory taboos, which as
often as not represent the survival values of the meanest little people in the
community—the kind who cannot look upon a nude picture without a
struggle with their perverted eroticism, or entertain a significant idea
without losing their faith.
The effect of all this upon the intellectual progress and the freedom of
art in democratic society is obvious, and is just what, to one who
understands the mechanisms of the crowd-mind, might be expected. No
wonder de Tocqueville said he found less freedom of opinion in America
than elsewhere. Explain it as you will, the fact is here staring us in the face.
Genius in our democracy is not free. It must beg the permission of little
crowd-men for its right to exist. It must stand, hat in hand, at the window of
the commissioner of licenses and may gain a permit for only so much of its
inspiration as happens to be of use-value to the uninspired. It must play the
conformist, pretend to be hydra-headed rather than unique, useful rather
than genuine, a servant of the "least of these" rather than their natural
master. It must advertise, but it may not prophesy. It may flatter and
patronize the stupid, but it may not stand up taller than they. In short,
democracy everywhere puts out the eyes of its Samson, cuts off his golden-
rayed locks, and makes him grind corn to fill the bellies of the Philistines.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century until now it has been
chiefly the business man, the political charlatan, the organizer of trade, the
rediscoverer of popular prejudices who have been preferred in our free
modern societies. Keats died of a broken heart; Shelley and Wagner were
exiled; Beethoven and Schubert were left to starve; Darwin was condemned
to hell fire; Huxley was denied his professorship; Schopenhauer was
ostracized by the élite; Nietzsche ate his heart out in solitude; Walt
Whitman had to be fed by a few English admirers, while his poems were
prohibited as obscene in free America; Emerson was for the greater part of
his life persona non grata at his own college; Ingersoll was denied the
political career which his genius merited; Poe lived and died in poverty;
Theodore Parker was consigned to perdition; Percival Lowell and Simon
Newcomb lived and died almost unrecognized by the American public.
Nearly every artist and writer and public teacher is made to understand
from the beginning that he will be popular in just the degree that he
strangles his genius and becomes a vulgar, commonplace, insincere clown.
On the other hand steel manufacturers and railroad kings, whose
business record will often scarcely stand the light, are rewarded with
fabulous millions and everyone grovels before them. When one turns from
the "commercialism," which everywhere seems to be the dominant and
most sincere interest in democratic society, when one seeks for spiritual
values to counterbalance this weight of materialism, one finds in the
prevailing spirit little more than a cult of naïve sentimentality.
It can hardly be denied that if Shakespeare, Boccaccio, Rabelais,
Montaigne, Cassanova, Goethe, Dostoievsky, Ibsen, Tolstoi, Rousseau, St.
Augustine, Milton, Nietzsche, Swinburne, Rossetti, or even Flaubert, were
alive and writing his masterpiece in America to-day, he would be instantly
silenced by some sort of society for the prevention of vice, and held up to
the public scorn and ridicule as a destroyer of our innocence and a corrupter
of public morals. The guardians of our characters are ceaselessly
expurgating the classics lest we come to harm reading them. I often think
that the only reason why the Bible is permitted to pass through our mails is
because hardly anyone ever reads it.
It is this same habit of crowd-thinking which accounts to a great extent
for the dearth of intellectual curiosity in this country. From what we have
seen to be the nature of the crowd-mind, it is to be expected that in a
democracy in which crowds play an important part the condition described
by de Tocqueville will generally prevail. There is much truth in his
statement that it seems at first as if the minds of all the Americans "were
formed upon the same model." Spiritual variation will be encouraged only
in respect to matters in which one crowd differs from another. The
conformist spirit will prevail in all. Intellectual leadership will inevitably
pass to the "tight-minded." There will be violent conflicts of ideas, but they
will be crowd ideas.
The opinions about which people differ are for the most part ready-
made. They are concerned with the choice of social mechanisms, but hardly
with valuations. With nearly all alike, there is a notion that mankind may be
redeemed by the magic of externally manipulating the social environment.
There is a wearisome monotony of professions of optimism, idealism,
humanitarianism, with little knowledge of what these terms mean.
I am thinking of all those young people who, in the decade and a half
which preceded the war, represented the finished product of our colleges
and universities. What a stretch of imagination is needed before one may
call these young people educated! How little of intellectual interest they
have brought back from school to their respective communities! How little
cerebral activity they have stirred up! Habits of study, of independent
thinking, have seldom been acquired. The "educated" have possibly gained
a little in social grace; they have in some cases learned things which are of
advantage to them in the struggle for position. Out of the confused mass of
unassimilated information which they dimly remember as the education
which they "got," a sum of knowledge doubtless remains which is greater in
extent than that possessed by the average man, but, though greater in extent,
this knowledge is seldom different in kind. There is the same superficiality,
the same susceptibility to crowd-thinking on every subject. The mental
habits of American democracy are probably best reflected to-day by the
"best-seller" novel, the Saturday Evening Post, the Chautauqua, the
Victrola, the moving picture.
Nearly everyone in America can read, for the "schoolhouse is the
bulwark of democratic freedom." However, with the decrease in illiteracy
there has gone a corresponding lowering of literary and intellectual
standards, a growing timidity in telling the truth, and a passion for the
sensationally commonplace. If it be true that before people may be
politically free they must be free to function mentally, one wonders how
much of an aid to liberty the public schools in this country have been, or if,
with their colossal impersonal systems and stereotyped methods of
instruction, they have not rather on the whole succeeded chiefly in making
learning uninteresting, dulling curiosity and killing habits of independent
thinking. There is probably no public institution where the spirit of the
crowd reigns to the extent that it does in the public school. The aim seems
to be to mold the child to type, make him the good, plodding citizen,
teaching him only so much as some one thinks it is to the publics interest
that he should know. I am sure that everyone who is familiar with the
actions of the school authorities in New York City during the two years,
1918 and 1919, will be impelled to look elsewhere for much of that liberty
which is supposed to go with democracy.
Some years ago I conducted a little investigation into the mental habits
of the average high-school graduate. An examination was made of twenty
or more young people who had been out of school one year. This is
doubtless too limited a number to give the findings great general
significance, but I give the results in brief for what they are worth. These
students had been in school for eleven years. I thought that they ought at
least to have a minimum of general cultural information and to be able to
express some sort of opinion about the commonplaces of our spiritual
heritage. The questions asked were such as follow: What is the difference
between the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United
States? What is a dicotyledon? Does the name Darwin mean anything to
you? Have you ever heard of William James? What is the significance of
the battle of Tours? Who was Thomas Jefferson? There were twenty
questions in all. The average grade, even with the most liberal marking, was
44.6. The general average was raised by one pupil who made a grade of 69.
But then we should not be too severe upon the public-school graduate. One
of the brightest college graduates I know left a large Eastern institution
believing that Karl Marx was a philologist. Another, a graduate from a
Western college, thought that Venus de Milo was an Italian count who had
been born without any arms. I know a prominent physician, whose
scientific training is such that he has been a lecturer in a medical college,
who believes that Heaven is located just a few miles up in the sky, beyond
the Milky Way. These are doubtless exceptional cases, but how many
persons with university degrees are there who have really caught the spirit
of the humanistic culture, or have ever stopped to think why the humanities
are taught in our colleges? How many are capable of discriminating
criticism of works of music, or painting, literature, or philosophy? My own
experience convinces me, and I am sure that other public teachers who have
had a like experience will bear witness to the same lamentable fact, that
such little genuine intellectual interest as there is in this country is chiefly
confined to immigrant Jews, our American youth being, on the whole,
innocent of it. The significance of this fact is obvious, as is its cause. Due to
the conformist spirit of the dominant crowd, native-born Americans are
losing their intellectual leadership.
We must not ignore the fact that there is among the educated here a
small and, let us hope, growing group of youthful "intellectuals." But in the
first place the proportion of these to the whole mass is tragically small. In
the second place intellectual liberalism has been content for the most part to
tag along behind the labor movement, as if the chief meaning of the
intellectual awakening were economic. It is no disparagement of labor to
say that the intellect in this country of crowds has also other work to do,
and that, until it strikes out for itself, neither the labor movement nor
anything else will rise above commonplace crowd dilemmas. Too much of
our so-called intellectualism is merely the substitution of ready-made
proletarian crowd-ideas for the traditional crowd-ideas which pass for
thinking among the middle classes.
All the facts which have been pointed out above are the inevitable
consequences of government by crowds. There can be no real liberty with
crowds because there can be no personal independence. The psychic
mechanisms of the crowd are hostile to conscious personality. The
independent thinker cannot be controlled by catchwords. In our day
intellectual freedom is not smothered in actual martyr fires, but it is too
often strangled in the cradle. The existence of new values, a thing which
will inevitably happen where the human spirit is left free in its creative
impulses, is disturbing to the crowd-mind. Education must therefore be
made "safe for democracy"; it must be guarded carefully lest the youth
become an original personal fact, a new spiritual creation. I realize the
element of truth in the statement often made, that there is already too much
spiritual originality in the youths of this generation. I am not contending
that certain phases of egoism should not be checked by education. A solid
intellectual basis must be created which will make social living possible.
The trouble is, however, that this task is done too well. It is the merely
useful man, not the unusual man, whom the crowd loves. Skill is
encouraged, for, whether it be skill in serving or in demanding service, skill
in itself does not upset existing crowd-values. Reflection is "wicked" for it
leads to doubt, and doubt is non-gregarious behavior. Education ceases to
be the path of spiritual freedom; it becomes a device for harnessing the
spirit of youth in the treadmill of the survival-values of the crowd. It is also
the revenge of the old against the young, a way of making them less
troublesome. It teaches the rules for success in a crowd-governed world
while taking advantage of the natural credulity of childhood to draw the
curtain with such terrifying mummery about the figure of wisdom that the
average mind, never having the daring or curiosity to lift it, will remain to
its dying day a dullard and a mental slave without suspecting the fact. Every
"dangerous" thought is denatured and expurgated. The student is skillfully
insulated from any mental shock that might galvanize him into original
intellectual life. The classic languages are taught for purposes of
"discipline." After six or seven years study of Greek literature in the
accepted manner one may be able to repeat most of the rules of Goodwins
Greek Grammar, and pride himself upon being a cultivated person,
knowing in the end less of the language than a bootblack from modern
Athens knows of it, or than a waiter from Bologna knows of English after
one years residence in Greenwich Village. And the all-important thing is
that never once has the student been given a glimpse of the beautiful free
pagan life which all this literature is about.
Science is taught that the student, if he has ability, may learn how to
make a geological survey of oil lands, construct and operate a cement
factory, make poison gas, remove infected tonsils, or grow a culture of
bacteria; but should he cease to hold popular beliefs about the origin of life
or the immortality of the soul it is well for him to keep the tragic fact to
himself. Those who teach history, economics, and political science in such a
way as to stimulate independence of thinking on the part of the students are
likely to be dismissed from their faculties by the practical business men
who constitute the boards of trustees of our institutions of higher learning;
the purpose of these sciences is to make our youth more patriotic. Finally,
the average instructor receives less pay than a policeman, or a headwaiter,
and the unconscious reason for this is all of a piece with the psychology of
the crowd-mind. The ignorant mans resentment toward superiority, or
"highbrowism," is thereby vindicated. Moreover, the integrity of the
complex of ruling crowd-ideas is less endangered. There is less likelihood
of its being undermined in the process of education when vigorous,
independent spirits are diverted from intellectual pursuits by richer prizes
offered in other fields, and the task of instruction therefore left largely to the
underfed and timid who are destined by temperament to trot between the
shafts.
In this discussion of the government of crowds I have ignored
consideration of the mechanisms of political and social organizations which
usually characterize the treatment of this subject. It is not that I wish to
divert attention from the necessity of more practical and just social
arrangements and political forms of organizations. These we must achieve.
But the facts which ultimately make for our freedom or slavery are of the
mind. The statement that we cannot be politically or economically a free
people until we attain mental freedom is a platitude, but it is one which
needs special emphasis in this day when all attention is directed to the
external form of organization.
No tyranny was ever for long maintained by force. All tyrannies begin
and end in the tyranny of ideas uncritically accepted. It is of just such ideas
that the conscious thinking of the crowd consists, and it is ultimately from
the crowd as a psychological mechanism that tyranny as such proceeds.
Democracy in America fails of freedom, not because of our political
constitution, though that would doubtless be modified by a people who
were more free at heart; it fails because freedom of opinion, intellectual
alertness, critical thinking about fundamentals, is not encouraged. There is,
moreover, little promise of greater freedom in the various revolutionary
crowds who to-day want freedom only to add to the number of crowds
which pester us. And for this we have, whether we are radicals or
reactionaries or simply indifferent, no one to blame but ourselves and our
own crowd-thinking.
X.
Education as a Possible Cure for Crowd-Thinking
Table of Contents
We have seen that Democracy in and of itself is no more sure a guarantee of
liberty than other forms of government. This does not necessarily mean that
we have been forced by our psychological study into an argument against
the idea of democracy as such. In fact, it cannot be denied that this form of
human association may have decided advantages, both practical and
spiritual, if we set about in the right way to realize them. It does not follow
that, because the franchise is exercised by all, democracy must necessarily
be an orgy of mob rule. If, under our modern political arrangements, it has
been shown that the crowd presumes to regulate acts and thought processes
hitherto considered purely personal matters, it is also true that the
dominance of any particular crowd has, in the long run, been rendered less
absolute and secure by the more openly expressed hostility of rival crowds.
But crowd-behavior has been known in all historic periods. Democracy
cannot be said to have caused it. It may be a mere accident of history that
the present development of crowd-mindedness has come along with that of
democratic institutions. Democracy has indeed given new kinds of crowds
their hope of dominance. It has therefore been made into a cult for the self-
justification of various modern crowds.
The formula for realizing a more free and humane common life will not
be found in any of the proffered cure-alls and propagandas which to-day
deafen our ears with their din. Neither are we now in such possession of the
best obtainable social order that one would wish to preserve the status quo
against all change, which would mean, in other words, the survival of the
present ruling crowds. Many existing facts belie the platitudes which these
crowds speak in their defense, just as they lay bare the hidden meaning of
the magic remedies which are proposed by counter-crowds. There is no
single formula for social redemption, and the man who has come to himself
will refuse to invest his faith in any such thing—which does not mean,
however, that he will refuse to consider favorably the practical possibilities
of any proposed plan for improving social conditions.
The first and greatest effort must be to free democracy from crowd-
mindedness, by liberating our own thinking. The way out of this complex of
crowd compulsions is the solitary part of self-analysis and intellectual
courage. It is the way of Socrates, and Protagoras, of Peter Abelard, and
Erasmus, and Montaigne, of Cervantes and Samuel Butler, of Goethe, and
Emerson, of Whitman and William James.
Just here I know that certain conservatives will heartily agree with me.
"That is it," they will say; "begin with the individual." Yes, but which
individual shall we begin with? Most of those who speak thus mean, begin
with some other individual. Evangelize the heathen, uplift the poor,
Americanize the Bolshevists, do something to some one which will make
him like ourselves; in other words, bring him into our crowd. The individual
with whom I would begin is myself. Somehow or other if I am to have
individuality at all it will be by virtue of being an individual, a single,
"separate person." And that is a dangerous and at present a more or less
lonely thing to do. But the problem is really one of practical psychology.
We must come out of the crowd-self, just as, before the neurotic may be
normal, he must get over his neurosis. To do that he must trace his malady
back to its source in the unconscious, and learn the meaning of his
conscious behavior as it is related to his unconscious desires. Then he must
do a difficult thing—he must accept the fact of himself at its real worth.
It is much the same with our crowd-mindedness. If psychoanalysis has
therapeutic value by the mere fact of revealing to the neurotic the hidden
meaning of his neurosis, then it would seem that an analysis of crowd-
behavior such as we have tried to make should be of some help in breaking
the hold of the crowd upon our spirits, and thus freeing democracy to some
extent from quackery.
To see behind the shibboleths and dogmas of crowd-thinking the
"cussedness"—that is, the primitive side—of human nature at work is a
great moral gain. At least the "cussedness" cannot deceive us any more. We
have won our greatest victory over it when we drag it out into the light. We
can at least wrestle with it consciously, and maybe, by directing it to
desirable ends, it will cease to be so "cussed," and become a useful servant.
No such good can come to us so long as this side of our nature is allowed its
way only on condition that it paint its face and we encourage it to talk
piously of things which it really does not mean. Disillusionment may be
painful both to the neurotic and to the crowd-man, but the gain is worth the
shock to our pride. The ego, when better understood, becomes at once more
highly personalized because more conscious of itself, and more truly social
because better adjusted to the demands of others. It is this socialized and
conscious selfhood which is both the aim and the hope of true democracy.
Such analysis may possibly give us the gift to see ourselves as others do
not see us, as we have not wished them to see us, and finally enable us to
see ourselves and others and to be seen by them as we really are.
We shall be free when we cease pampering ourselves, stop lying to
ourselves and to one another, and give up the crowd-mummery in which we
indulge because it happens to flatter our hidden weaknesses! In the end we
shall only begin to solve the social problem when we can cease together
taking refuge from reality in systems made up of general ideas that we
should be using as tools in meeting the tasks from which as crowd-men and
neurotics people run away; when we discontinue making use of commonly
accepted principles and ideals as defense formations for shameful things in
which we can indulge ourselves with a clear conscience only by all doing
them together.
There must be an increase in the number of unambitious men, men who
can rise above vulgar dilemmas and are deaf to crowd propaganda, men
capable of philosophical tolerance, critical doubt and inquiry, genuine
companionship, and voluntary co-operation in the achievement of common
ends, free spirits who can smile in the face of the mob, who know the mob
and are not to be taken in by it.
All this sounds much like the old gospel of conviction of sin and
repentance; perhaps it is just that. We must think differently, change our
minds. Again and again people have tried the wide way and the broad gate,
the crowd-road to human happiness, only to find that it led to destruction in
a cul-de-sac. Now let us try the other road, "the strait and narrow path." The
crowd-path leads neither to self-mastery nor social blessedness. People in
crowds are not thinking together; they are not thinking at all, save as a
paranoiac thinks. They are not working together; they are only sticking
together. We have leaned on one another till we have all run and fused into
a common mass. The democratic crowd to-day, with its sweet optimism, its
warm "brotherly love," is a sticky, gooey mass which one can hardly touch
and come back to himself clean. By dissolving everything in "one great
union" people who cannot climb alone expect to ooze into the co-operative
commonwealth or kingdom of heaven. I am sick of this oozing democracy.
There must be something crystalline and insoluble left in democratic
America. Somewhere there must be people with sharp edges that cut when
they are pressed too hard, people who are still solid, who have impenetrable
depths in them and hard facets which reflect the sunlight. They are the hope
of democracy, these infusible ones.
To change the figure, may their tribe increase. And this is the business
of every educator who is not content to be a faker. What we need is not only
more education, but a different kind of education. There is more hope in an
illiterate community where people hate lying than in a high-school educated
nation which reads nothing but trash and is fed up on advertising,
newspapers, popular fiction, and propaganda.
In the foregoing chapter, reference was made to our traditional
educational systems. The subject is so closely related to the mental habits of
democracy that it would be difficult to overemphasize its importance for
our study. Traditional educational methods have more often given
encouragement to crowd-thinking than to independence of judgment.
Thinking has been divorced from doing. Knowledge, instead of being
regarded as the foresight of ends to be reached and the conscious direction
of activity toward such ends, has been more commonly regarded as the
copying of isolated things to be learned. The act of learning has been treated
as if it were the passive reception of information imposed from without.
The subject to be learned has been sequestered and set apart from
experience as a whole, with the result that ideas easily come to be regarded
as things in themselves. Systems of thought are built up with little or no
sense of their connection with everyday problems. Thus our present-day
education prepares in advance both the ready-made logical systems in
which the crowd-mind takes refuge from the concretely real and the
disposition to accept truth second-hand, upon the authority of another,
which in the crowd-man becomes the spirit of conformity.
Even science, taught in this spirit may be destructive of intellectual
freedom. Professor Dewey says that while science has done much to modify
mens thoughts, still
It must be admitted that to a considerable extent the progress thus
procured has been only technical; it has provided more efficient means
for satisfying pre-existent desires rather than modified the quality of
human purposes. There is, for example, no modern civilization which
is the equal of Greek culture in all respects. Science is still too recent
to have been absorbed into imaginative and emotional disposition.
Men move more swiftly and surely to the realization of their ends, but
their ends too largely remain what they were prior to scientific
enlightenment. This fact places upon education the responsibility of
using science in a way to modify the habitual attitude of imagination
and feeling, not leave it just an extension of our physical arms and
legs....
The problem of an educational use of science is then to create an
intelligence pregnant with belief in the possibility of the direction of
human affairs by itself. The method of science ingrained through
education in habit means emancipation from rule of thumb and from
the routine generated by rule of thumb procedure....
That science may be taught as a set of formal and technical
exercises is only too true. This happens whenever information about
the world is made an end in itself. The failure of such instruction to
procure culture is not, however, evidence of the antithesis of natural
knowledge to humanistic concern, but evidence of a wrong educational
attitude.
The new kind of education, the education which is to liberate the mind,
will make much of scientific methods. But let us notice what it is to set a
mind free. Mind does not exist in a vacuum, nor in a world of "pure ideas."
The free mind is the functioning mind, the mind which is not inhibited in its
work by any conflict within itself. Thought is not made free by the mere
substitution of naturalistic for theological dogma. It is possible to make a
cult of science itself. Crowd-propaganda is often full of pseudoscientific
jargon of this sort. Specialization in technical training may produce merely
a high-class trained-animal man, of the purely reflex type, who simply
performs a prescribed trick which he has learned, whenever an expected
motor-cue appears. In the presence of the unexpected such a person may be
as helpless as any other animal. It is possible to train circus dogs, horses,
and even horned toads, to behave in this same way. Much so-called
scientific training in our schools to-day is of this sort. It results not in
freedom, but in what Bergson would call the triumph of mechanism over
freedom.
Science, to be a means of freedom—that is, science as culture—may not
be pursued as pure theorizing apart from practical application. Neither may
a calculating utilitarianism gain freedom to us by ignoring, in the
application of scientific knowledge to given ends, a consideration of the
ends themselves and their value for enriching human experience. It is
human interest which gives scientific knowledge any meaning. Science
must be taught in the humanist spirit. It may not ignore this quality of
human interest which exists in all knowledge. To do so is to cut off our
relations with reality. And the result may become a negation of personality
similar to that with which the crowd compensates itself for its unconscious
ego-mania.
The reference just made to Humanism leads us next to a consideration
of the humanities. It has long been the habit of traditional education to
oppose to the teaching of science the teaching of the classic languages and
the arts, as if there were two irreconcilable principles involved here. Dewey
says that
Humanistic studies when set in opposition to study of nature are
hampered. They tend to reduce themselves to exclusively literary and
linguistic studies, which in turn tend to shrink to "the classics," to
languages no longer spoken.... It would be hard to find anything in
history more ironical than the educational practices which have
identified the "humanities" exclusively with a knowledge of Greek and
Latin. Greek and Roman art and institutions made such important
contributions to our civilization that there should always be the
amplest opportunities for making their acquaintance. But to regard
them as par excellence the humane studies involves a deliberate
neglect of the possibilities of the subject-matter which is accessible in
education to the masses, and tends to cultivate a narrow snobbery—
that of a learned class whose insignia are the accidents of exclusive
opportunity. Knowledge is humanistic in quality not because it is about
human products in the past, but because of what it does in liberating
human intelligence and human sympathy. Any subject-matter which
accomplishes this result is humane and any subject-matter which does
not accomplish it is not even educational.
The point is that it is precisely what a correct knowledge of ancient
civilization through a study of the classics does that our traditional
educators most dread. William James once said that the good which came
from such study was the ability to "know a good man when we see him."
The student would thus become more capable of discriminating
appreciation. He would grow to be a judge of values. He would acquire
sharp likes and dislikes and thus set up his own standards of judgment. He
would become an independent-thinker and therefore an enemy of crowds.
Scholars of the Renaissance knew this well, and that is why in their revolt
against the crowd-mindedness of their day they made use of the litteræ
humanores to smash to pieces the whole dogmatic system of the Middle
Ages.
With the picture of ancient life before him the student could not help
becoming more cosmopolitan in spirit. Here he got a glimpse of a manner
of living in which the controlling ideas and fixations of his contemporary
crowds were frankly challenged. Here were witnesses to values contrary to
those in which his crowd had sought to bring him up in a docile spirit.
Inevitably his thinking would wander into what his crowd considered
forbidden paths. One cannot begin to know the ancients as they really were
without receiving a tremendous intellectual stimulus. After becoming
acquainted with the intellectual freedom and courage and love of life which
are almost everywhere manifest in the literature of the ancients, something
happens to a man. He becomes acquainted with himself as a valuing animal.
Few things are better calculated to make free spirits than these very classics,
once the student "catches on."
But that is just the trouble; from the Renaissance till now, the crowd-
mind, whether interested politically, morally, or religiously; whether
Catholic, or Protestant, or merely Rationalist, has done its level best to keep
the student from "catching on." Educational tradition, which is for the most
part only systematized crowd-thinking, has perverted the classics into
instruments for producing spiritual results of the very opposite nature from
the message which these literatures contain. Latin and Greek are taught for
purposes of discipline. The task of learning them has been made as difficult
and as uninteresting as possible, with the idea of forcing the student to do
something he dislikes, of whipping his spirit into line and rendering him
subservient to intellectual authority. Thus, while keeping up the external
appearance of culture, the effect is to make the whole thing so meaningless
and unpleasant that the student will never have the interest to try to find out
what it is all about.
I have said that the sciences and classics should be approached in the
"humanistic" spirit. The humanist method must be extended to the whole
subject-matter of education, even to a revaluation of knowing itself. I
should not say even, but primarily. It is impossible here to enter into an
extended discussion of the humanist theories of knowledge as contrasted
with the traditional or "intellectualist" theories. But since we have seen that
the conscious thinking of the crowd-mind consists in the main of abstract
and dogmatic logical systems, similar to the "rationalizations" of the
paranoiac, it is important to note the bearing of humanism upon these
logical systems wherever they are found.
A number of years ago, while discussing certain phases of this subject
with one of the physicians in charge of a large hospital for the insane, the
significance of education for healthy mental life was brought out with great
emphasis. It was at the time when psychiatrists were just beginning to make
use of analytical psychology in the treatment of mental and nervous
disorders.
"The trouble with a great many of our patients," said my friend, "is the
fact that they have been wrongly educated."
"Do you mean," I said, "that they have not received proper moral
instruction?"
"Yes, but by the proper moral instruction I do not mean quite the same
thing that most people mean by that. It all depends on the way in which the
instruction is given. Many of these patients are the mental slaves of
convention. They have been terrified by it; its weight crushes them; when
they discover that their own impulses or behavior are in conflict with what
they regard as absolute standards, they cannot bear the shock. They do not
know how to use morality; they simply condemn themselves; they seek
reconciliation by all sorts of crazy ideas which develop into the
psychoneurosis. And the only hope there is of cure for them is re-education.
The physician, when it is not too late, often to do any good has to become
an educator."
The practice of psychoanalysis as a therapeutic method is really hardly
anything more than re-education. The patient must first be led to face the
fact of himself as he really is; then he must be taught to revalue
conventional ideas in such a way that he can use these ideas as instruments
with which he may adjust himself in the various relations of life. This
process of education, in a word, is humanistic. It is pragmatic; the patient is
taught that his thinking is a way of functioning; that ideas are instruments,
ways of acting. He learns to value these tendencies to act and to find
himself through the mastery of his own thinking.
Now we have seen that the neurosis is but one path of escape from this
conflict of self with the imperatives and abstract ideas through which social
control is exercised. The second way is to deny, unconsciously, the true
meaning of these ideas, and this, as we have seen, is crowd-thinking. Here,
as in the other case, the education which is needed is that which acquaints
the subject with the functional nature of his own thinking, which directs his
attention to results, which dissolves the fictions into which the unconscious
takes refuge, by showing that systems of ideas have no other reality than
what they do and no other meaning than the difference which their being
true makes in actual experience somewhere.
We have previously noted the connection between the intellectualist
philosophies with their closed systems of ideas, their absolutists, and the
conscious thinking of crowds. The crowd finds these systems ready-made
and merely backs into them and hides itself like a hermit crab in a deserted
seashell. It follows that the humanist, however social he may be, cannot be
a crowd-man. He, too, will have his ideals, but they are not made-in-
advance goods which all must accept; they are good only as they may be
made good in real experience, true only when verified in fact. To such a
mind there is no unctuousness, by which ideas may be fastened upon others
without their assent. Nothing is regarded as so final and settled that the
spirit of inquiry should be discouraged from efforts to modify and improve
it.
Generalizations, such as justice, truth, liberty, and all other
intellectualist- and crowd-abstractions, become to the humanist not
transcendental things in themselves, but descriptions of certain qualities of
behavior, actual or possible, existing only where they are experienced and
in definite situations. He will not be swept into a howling mob by these big
words; he will stop to see what particular things are they which in a given
instance are to be called just, what particular hypothesis is it which it is
sought to verify and thus add to the established body of truth, whose liberty
is demanded and what, to be definite, is it proposed that he shall do with the
greater opportunity for action? Let the crowd yell itself hoarse, chanting its
abstract nouns made out of adjectives, the humanist will know that these are
but words and that the realities which they point to, if they have any
meaning at all, are what "they are known as."
This humanist doctrine of the concreteness of the real is important. It is
a reaffirmation of the reality of human experience. William James, who
called himself a "radical empiricist," made much of this point. Experience
may not be ruled out for the sake of an a priori notion of what this world
ought to be. As James used to say, we shall never know what this world
really is or is to become until the last mans vote is in and counted. Here, of
course, is an emphasis upon the significance of unique personality which no
crowd will grant. Crowds will admit personality as an abstract principle, but
not as an active will having something of its own to say about the ultimate
outcome of things.
Another important point in which humanism corrects crowd-thinking is
the fact that it regards intellect as an instrument of acting, and not as a mere
copyist of realities earthly or supermundane. Dewey says:
If it be true that the self or subject of experience is part and parcel of
the course of events, it follows that the self becomes a knower. It
becomes a mind in virtue of a distinctive way of partaking in the
course of events. The significant distinction is no longer between a
knower and the world, it is between different ways of being in and of
the movement of things; between a physical way and a purposive
way....
As a matter of fact the pragmatic theory of intelligence means that
the function of mind is to project new and more complex ends to free
experience from routine and caprice. Not the use of thought to
accomplish purposes already given either in the mechanism of the
body or in that of the existent state of society, but the use of
intelligence to liberate and liberalize action, is the pragmatic lesson....
Intelligence as intelligence is inherently forward looking; only by
ignoring its primary function does it become a means for an end
already given. The latter is servile, even when the end is labeled moral,
religious, esthetic. But action directed to ends to which the agent has
not previously been attached inevitably carries with it a quickened and
enlarged spirit. A pragmatic intelligence is a creative intelligence, not a
routine mechanic.
Hence humanism breaks down the conformist spirit of crowds. From the
simplest to the most complex, ideas are regarded as primarily motor, or,
rather, as guides to our bodily movements among other things in our
environment. James says that the stream of life which runs in at our eyes
and ears is meant to run out at our lips, our feet, and our fingertips. Bergson
says that ideas are like snapshots of a man running. However closely they
are taken together, the movement always occurs between them. They
cannot, therefore, give us reality, or the movement of life as such, but only
cross-sections of it, which serve as guides in directing the conscious activity
of life upon matter. According to James again, there are no permanently
existing ideas, or impersonal ones; each idea is an individual activity,
known only in the thinking, and is always thought for a purpose. As all
thinking is purposive, and therefore partial, emphasizing just those aspects
of things which are useful for our present problem, it follows that the sum
total of partial views cannot give us the whole of reality or anything like a
true copy of it. Existence as a whole cannot be reduced to any logical
system. The One and the Absolute are therefore meaningless and are only
logical fictions, useful, says James, by way of allowing us a sort of
temporary irresponsibility, or "moral holiday."
From all this follows the humanist view of Truth. Truth is nothing
complete and existing in itself independent of human purpose. The word is
a noun made out of an adjective, as I have said. An idea becomes true, says
James, when it fits into the totality of our experience; truth is what we say
about an idea when it works. It must be made true, by ourselves—that is,
verified. Truth is therefore of human origin, frankly, man-made. To Schiller
it is the same as the good; it is the attainment of satisfactory relations within
experience. Or, to quote the famous humanist creed of Protagoras, as
Schiller is so fond of doing, "Man is the measure of all things." The
meaning of the world is precisely, for all purposes, its meaning for us. Its
worth, both logical and moral, is not something given, but just what we
through our activity are able to assign to it.
The humanist is thus thrown upon his own responsibility in the midst of
concrete realities of which he as a knowing, willing being is one. His task is
to make such modifications within his environment, physical and social, as
will make his own activity and that of others with him richer and more
satisfactory in the future.
The question arises—it is a question commonly put by crowd-minded
people and by intellectual philosophers; Plato asks it of the Protagoreans—
how, if the individual man is the measure of all things, is there to be any
common measure? How any agreement? May not a thing be good and true
for one and not for another? How, then, shall there be any getting together
without an outside authority and an absolute standard? The answer, as
Schiller and James showed, is obvious; life is a matter of adjustment. We
each constitute a part of the others environment. At certain points our
desires conflict, our valuations are different, and yet our experience at these
points overlaps, as it were. It is to our common advantage to have
agreement at these points. Out of our habitual adjustments to one another, a
body of mutual understanding and agreement grows up which constitutes
the intellectual and moral order of life. But this order, necessary as it is, is
still in the making. It is not something given; it is not a copy of something
transcendent, impersonal, and final which crowds may write upon their
banners and use to gain uniform submission for anything which they may
be able to express in terms which are general and abstract. This order of life
is purely practical; it exists for us, not we for it, and because we have
agreed that certain things shall be right and true, it does not follow that
righteousness and truth are fixed and final and must be worshiped as pure
ideas in such a way that the mere repetition of these words paralyzes our
cerebral hemispheres.
Doubtless one of the greatest aids of the humanist way of thinking in
bringing the individual to self-consciousness is the way in which it orients
us in the world of present-day events. It inspires one to achieve a working
harmony, not a fictitious haven of rest for the mind interested only in its
relations to its own ideas. The unity which life demands of us is not that of
a perfect rational system. It is rather the unity of a healthy organism all the
parts of which can work together.
Cut up as we are into what Emerson called "fragments of men," I think
we are particularly susceptible to crowd-thinking because we are so
disintegrated. Thought and behavior must always be more or less automatic
and compulsory where there is no conscious co-ordination of the several
parts of it. It is partly because we are the heirs of such a patchwork of
civilization that few people to-day are able to think their lives through.
There can be little organic unity in the heterogeneous and unrelated
aggregation of half-baked information, warring interests, and irreconcilable
systems of valuation which are piled together in the modern mans thinking.
Life may not be reduced to a logical unity, but it is an organic whole for
each of us, and we do not reach that organic unity by adding mutually
exclusive partial views of it together.
Something happens to one who grasps the meaning of humanism; he
becomes self-conscious in a new way. His psychic life becomes a
fascinating adventure in a real world. He finds that his choices are real
events. He is "set intellectually on fire," as one of our educators has
correctly defined education. As Jung would doubtless say, he has
"extroverted" himself; his libido, which in the crowd seeks to enhance the
ego feeling by means of the mechanism which we have described, now is
drawn out and attached to the outer world through the intellectual channel.
Selfhood is realized in the satisfactoriness of the results which one is able to
achieve in the very fullness of his activity and the richness of his interests.
Such a free spirit needs no crowds to keep up his faith, and he is truly
social, for he approaches his social relationships with intelligent
discrimination and judgments of worth which are his own. He contributes to
the social, not a copy or an imitation, not a childish wish-fancy furtively
disguised, but a psychic reality and a new creative energy. It is only in the
fellowship of such spirits, whatever political or economic forms their
association may take, that we may expect to see the Republic of the Free.
Public Opinion
(Walter Lippmann)
Table of Contents
To Faye Lippmann
Wading River, Long Island. 1921.
"Behold! human beings living in a sort of underground den, which has a
mouth open towards the light and reaching all across the den; they have
been here from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so
that they cannot move, and can only see before them; for the chains are
arranged in such a manner as to prevent them from turning round their
heads. At a distance above and behind them the light of a fire is blazing, and
between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you will see, if
you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette
players have before them, over which they show the puppets.
I see, he said.
And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying vessels,
which appear over the wall; also figures of men and animals, made of wood
and stone and various materials; and some of the prisoners, as you would
expect, are talking, and some of them are silent?
This is a strange image, he said, and they are strange prisoners.
Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows, or the
shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the opposite wall of the
cave?
True, he said: how could they see anything but the shadows if they were
never allowed to move their heads?
And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would
see only the shadows?
Yes, he said.
And if they were able to talk with one another, would they not suppose
that they were naming what was actually before them?"
—The Republic of Plato, Book Seven.
(Jowett Translation.)
Table of Contents
Part I. Introduction
Chapter I. The World Outside and the Pictures in Our Heads
Part II. Approaches to the World Outside
Chapter II. Censorship and Privacy
Chapter III. Contact and Opportunity
Chapter IV. Time and Attention
Chapter V. Speed, Words, and Clearness
Part III. Stereotypes
Chapter VI. Stereotypes
Chapter VII. Stereotypes as Defense
Chapter VIII. Blind Spots and Their Value
Chapter IX. Codes and Their Enemies
Chapter X. The Detection of Stereotypes
Part IV. Interests
Chapter XI. The Enlisting of Interest
Chapter XII. Self-Interest Reconsidered
Part V. The Making of a Common Will
Chapter XIII. The Transfer of Interest
Chapter XIV. Yes or No
Chapter XV. Leaders and the Rank and File
Part VI. The Image of Democracy
Chapter XVI. The Self-Centered Man
Chapter XVII. The Self-Contained Community
Chapter XVIII. The Role of Force, Patronage and Privilege
Chapter XIX. The Old Image in a New Form: Guild Socialism
Chapter XX. A New Image
Part VII. Newspapers
Chapter XXI. The Buying Public
Chapter XXII. The Constant Reader
Chapter XXIII. The Nature of News
Chapter XXIV. News, Truth, and a Conclusion
Part VIII. Organized Intelligence
Chapter XXV. The Entering Wedge
Chapter XXVI. Intelligence Work
Chapter XXVII. The Appeal to the Public
Chapter XXVIII. The Appeal to Reason
Part I.
Introduction
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
The World Outside and the Pictures in Our Heads
Table of Contents

There is an island in the ocean where in 1914 a few Englishmen,
Frenchmen, and Germans lived. No cable reaches that island, and the
British mail steamer comes but once in sixty days. In September it had not
yet come, and the islanders were still talking about the latest newspaper
which told about the approaching trial of Madame Caillaux for the shooting
of Gaston Calmette. It was, therefore, with more than usual eagerness that
the whole colony assembled at the quay on a day in mid-September to hear
from the captain what the verdict had been. They learned that for over six
weeks now those of them who were English and those of them who were
French had been fighting in behalf of the sanctity of treaties against those of
them who were Germans. For six strange weeks they had acted as if they
were friends, when in fact they were enemies.
But their plight was not so different from that of most of the population
of Europe. They had been mistaken for six weeks, on the continent the
interval may have been only six days or six hours. There was an interval.
There was a moment when the picture of Europe on which men were
conducting their business as usual, did not in any way correspond to the
Europe which was about to make a jumble of their lives. There was a time
for each man when he was still adjusted to an environment that no longer
existed. All over the world as late as July 25th men were making goods that
they would not be able to ship, buying goods they would not be able to
import, careers were being planned, enterprises contemplated, hopes and
expectations entertained, all in the belief that the world as known was the
world as it was. Men were writing books describing that world. They
trusted the picture in their heads. And then over four years later, on a
Thursday morning, came the news of an armistice, and people gave vent to
their unutterable relief that the slaughter was over. Yet in the five days
before the real armistice came, though the end of the war had been
celebrated, several thousand young men died on the battlefields.
Looking back we can see how indirectly we know the environment in
which nevertheless we live. We can see that the news of it comes to us now
fast, now slowly; but that whatever we believe to be a true picture, we treat
as if it were the environment itself. It is harder to remember that about the
beliefs upon which we are now acting, but in respect to other peoples and
other ages we flatter ourselves that it is easy to see when they were in
deadly earnest about ludicrous pictures of the world. We insist, because of
our superior hindsight, that the world as they needed to know it, and the
world as they did know it, were often two quite contradictory things. We
can see, too, that while they governed and fought, traded and reformed in
the world as they imagined it to be, they produced results, or failed to
produce any, in the world as it was. They started for the Indies and found
America. They diagnosed evil and hanged old women. They thought they
could grow rich by always selling and never buying. A caliph, obeying what
he conceived to be the Will of Allah, burned the library at Alexandria.
Writing about the year 389, St. Ambrose stated the case for the prisoner
in Plato's cave who resolutely declines to turn his head. "To discuss the
nature and position of the earth does not help us in our hope of the life to
come. It is enough to know what Scripture states. 'That He hung up the
earth upon nothing' (Job xxvi. 7). Why then argue whether He hung it up in
air or upon the water, and raise a controversy as to how the thin air could
sustain the earth; or why, if upon the waters, the earth does not go crashing
down to the bottom?… Not because the earth is in the middle, as if
suspended on even balance, but because the majesty of God constrains it by
the law of His will, does it endure stable upon the unstable and the void."1
It does not help us in our hope of the life to come. It is enough to know
what Scripture states. Why then argue? But a century and a half after St.
Ambrose, opinion was still troubled, on this occasion by the problem of the
antipodes. A monk named Cosmas, famous for his scientific attainments,
was therefore deputed to write a Christian Topography, or "Christian
Opinion concerning the World."2 It is clear that he knew exactly what was
expected of him, for he based all his conclusions on the Scriptures as he
read them. It appears, then, that the world is a flat parallelogram, twice as
broad from east to west as it is long from north to south., In the center is the
earth surrounded by ocean, which is in turn surrounded by another earth,
where men lived before the deluge. This other earth was Noah's port of
embarkation. In the north is a high conical mountain around which revolve
the sun and moon. When the sun is behind the mountain it is night. The sky
is glued to the edges of the outer earth. It consists of four high walls which
meet in a concave roof, so that the earth is the floor of the universe. There is
an ocean on the other side of the sky, constituting the "waters that are above
the firmament." The space between the celestial ocean and the ultimate roof
of the universe belongs to the blest. The space between the earth and sky is
inhabited by the angels. Finally, since St. Paul said that all men are made to
live upon the "face of the earth" how could they live on the back where the
Antipodes are supposed to be? With such a passage before his eyes, a
Christian, we are told, should not 'even speak of the Antipodes.'"3
Far less should he go to the Antipodes; nor should any Christian prince
give him a ship to try; nor would any pious mariner wish to try. For Cosmas
there was nothing in the least absurd about his map. Only by remembering
his absolute conviction that this was the map of the universe can we begin
to understand how he would have dreaded Magellan or Peary or the aviator
who risked a collision with the angels and the vault of heaven by flying
seven miles up in the air. In the same way we can best understand the furies
of war and politics by remembering that almost the whole of each party
believes absolutely in its picture of the opposition, that it takes as fact, not
what is, but what it supposes to be the fact. And that therefore, like Hamlet,
it will stab Polonius behind the rustling curtain, thinking him the king, and
perhaps like Hamlet add:
"Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
I took thee for thy better; take thy fortune."

Great men, even during their lifetime, are usually known to the public only
through a fictitious personality. Hence the modicum of truth in the old
saying that no man is a hero to his valet. There is only a modicum of truth,
for the valet, and the private secretary, are often immersed in the fiction
themselves. Royal personages are, of course, constructed personalities.
Whether they themselves believe in their public character, or whether they
merely permit the chamberlain to stage-manage it, there are at least two
distinct selves, the public and regal self, the private and human. The
biographies of great people fall more or less readily into the histories of
these two selves. The official biographer reproduces the public life, the
revealing memoir the other. The Charnwood Lincoln, for example, is a
noble portrait, not of an actual human being, but of an epic figure, replete
with significance, who moves on much the same level of reality as Aeneas
or St. George. Oliver's Hamilton is a majestic abstraction, the sculpture of
an idea, "an essay" as Mr. Oliver himself calls it, "on American union." It is
a formal monument to the state-craft of federalism, hardly the biography of
a person. Sometimes people create their own facade when they think they
are revealing the interior scene. The Repington diaries and Margot Asquith's
are a species of self-portraiture in which the intimate detail is most
revealing as an index of how the authors like to think about themselves.
But the most interesting kind of portraiture is that which arises
spontaneously in people's minds. When Victoria came to the throne, says
Mr. Strachey,4 "among the outside public there was a great wave of
enthusiasm. Sentiment and romance were coming into fashion; and the
spectacle of the little girl-queen, innocent, modest, with fair hair and pink
cheeks, driving through her capital, filled the hearts of the beholders with
raptures of affectionate loyalty. What, above all, struck everybody with
overwhelming force was the contrast between Queen Victoria and her
uncles. The nasty old men, debauched and selfish, pigheaded and
ridiculous, with their perpetual burden of debts, confusions, and
disreputabilities—they had vanished like the snows of winter and here at
last, crowned and radiant, was the spring."
M. Jean de Pierrefeu5 saw hero-worship at first hand, for he was an
officer on Joffre's staff at the moment of that soldier's greatest fame:
"For two years, the entire world paid an almost divine homage to the
victor of the Marne. The baggage-master literally bent under the weight of
the boxes, of the packages and letters which unknown people sent him with
a frantic testimonial of their admiration. I think that outside of General
Joffre, no commander in the war has been able to realize a comparable idea
of what glory is. They sent him boxes of candy from all the great
confectioners of the world, boxes of champagne, fine wines of every
vintage, fruits, game, ornaments and utensils, clothes, smoking materials,
inkstands, paperweights. Every territory sent its specialty. The painter sent
his picture, the sculptor his statuette, the dear old lady a comforter or socks,
the shepherd in his hut carved a pipe for his sake. All the manufacturers of
the world who were hostile to Germany shipped their products, Havana its
cigars, Portugal its port wine. I have known a hairdresser who had nothing
better to do than to make a portrait of the General out of hair belonging to
persons who were dear to him; a professional penman had the same idea,
but the features were composed of thousands of little phrases in tiny
characters which sang the praise of the General. As to letters, he had them
in all scripts, from all countries, written in every dialect, affectionate letters,
grateful, overflowing with love, filled with adoration. They called him
Savior of the World, Father of his Country, Agent of God, Benefactor of
Humanity, etc…. And not only Frenchmen, but Americans, Argentinians,
Australians, etc. etc…. Thousands of little children, without their parents'
knowledge, took pen in hand and wrote to tell him their love: most of them
called him Our Father. And there was poignancy about their effusions, their
adoration, these sighs of deliverance that escaped from thousands of hearts
at the defeat of barbarism. To all these naif little souls, Joffre seemed like
St. George crushing the dragon. Certainly he incarnated for the conscience
of mankind the victory of good over evil, of light over darkness.
Lunatics, simpletons, the half-crazy and the crazy turned their darkened
brains toward him as toward reason itself. I have read the letter of a person
living in Sydney, who begged the General to save him from his enemies;
another, a New Zealander, requested him to send some soldiers to the house
of a gentleman who owed him ten pounds and would not pay.
Finally, some hundreds of young girls, overcoming the timidity of their
sex, asked for engagements, their families not to know about it; others
wished only to serve him."
This ideal Joffre was compounded out of the victory won by him, his
staff and his troops, the despair of the war, the personal sorrows, and the
hope of future victory. But beside hero-worship there is the exorcism of
devils. By the same mechanism through which heroes are incarnated, devils
are made. If everything good was to come from Joffre, Foch, Wilson, or
Roosevelt, everything evil originated in the Kaiser Wilhelm, Lenin and
Trotsky. They were as omnipotent for evil as the heroes were omnipotent
for good. To many simple and frightened minds there was no political
reverse, no strike, no obstruction, no mysterious death or mysterious
conflagration anywhere in the world of which the causes did not wind back
to these personal sources of evil.

Worldwide concentration of this kind on a symbolic personality is rare
enough to be clearly remarkable, and every author has a weakness for the
striking and irrefutable example. The vivisection of war reveals such
examples, but it does not make them out of nothing. In a more normal
public life, symbolic pictures are no less governant of behavior, but each
symbol is far less inclusive because there are so many competing ones. Not
only is each symbol charged with less feeling because at most it represents
only a part of the population, but even within that part there is infinitely less
suppression of individual difference. The symbols of public opinion, in
times of moderate security, are subject to check and comparison and
argument. They come and go, coalesce and are forgotten, never organizing
perfectly the emotion of the whole group. There is, after all, just one human
activity left in which whole populations accomplish the union sacrée. It
occurs in those middle phases of a war when fear, pugnacity, and hatred
have secured complete dominion of the spirit, either to crush every other
instinct or to enlist it, and before weariness is felt.
At almost all other times, and even in war when it is deadlocked, a
sufficiently greater range of feelings is aroused to establish conflict, choice,
hesitation, and compromise. The symbolism of public opinion usually
bears, as we shall see,6 the marks of this balancing of interest. Think, for
example, of how rapidly, after the armistice, the precarious and by no
means successfully established symbol of Allied Unity disappeared, how it
was followed almost immediately by the breakdown of each nation's
symbolic picture of the other: Britain the Defender of Public Law, France
watching at the Frontier of Freedom, America the Crusader. And think then
of how within each nation the symbolic picture of itself frayed out, as party
and class conflict and personal ambition began to stir postponed issues. And
then of how the symbolic pictures of the leaders gave way, as one by one,
Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George, ceased to be the incarnation of human
hope, and became merely the negotiators and administrators for a
disillusioned world.
Whether we regret this as one of the soft evils of peace or applaud it as
a return to sanity is obviously no matter here. Our first concern with fictions
and symbols is to forget their value to the existing social order, and to think
of them simply as an important part of the machinery of human
communication. Now in any society that is not completely self-contained in
its interests and so small that everyone can know all about everything that
happens, ideas deal with events that are out of sight and hard to grasp. Miss
Sherwin of Gopher Prairie,7 is aware that a war is raging in France and tries
to conceive it. She has never been to France, and certainly she has never
been along what is now the battlefront.
Pictures of French and German soldiers she has seen, but it is
impossible for her to imagine three million men. No one, in fact, can
imagine them, and the professionals do not try. They think of them as, say,
two hundred divisions. But Miss Sherwin has no access to the order of
battle maps, and so if she is to think about the war, she fastens upon Joffre
and the Kaiser as if they were engaged in a personal duel. Perhaps if you
could see what she sees with her mind's eye, the image in its composition
might be not unlike an Eighteenth Century engraving of a great soldier. He
stands there boldly unruffled and more than life size, with a shadowy army
of tiny little figures winding off into the landscape behind. Nor it seems are
great men oblivious to these expectations. M. de Pierrefeu tells of a
photographer's visit to Joffre. The General was in his "middle class office,
before the worktable without papers, where he sat down to write his
signature. Suddenly it was noticed that there were no maps on the walls.
But since according to popular ideas it is not possible to think of a general
without maps, a few were placed in position for the picture, and removed
soon afterwards."8
The only feeling that anyone can have about an event he does not
experience is the feeling aroused by his mental image of that event. That is
why until we know what others think they know, we cannot truly
understand their acts. I have seen a young girl, brought up in a Pennsylvania
mining town, plunged suddenly from entire cheerfulness into a paroxysm of
grief when a gust of wind cracked the kitchen window-pane. For hours she
was inconsolable, and to me incomprehensible. But when she was able to
talk, it transpired that if a window-pane broke it meant that a close relative
had died. She was, therefore, mourning for her father, who had frightened
her into running away from home. The father was, of course, quite
thoroughly alive as a telegraphic inquiry soon proved. But until the
telegram came, the cracked glass was an authentic message to that girl.
Why it was authentic only a prolonged investigation by a skilled
psychiatrist could show. But even the most casual observer could see that
the girl, enormously upset by her family troubles, had hallucinated a
complete fiction out of one external fact, a remembered superstition, and a
turmoil of remorse, and fear and love for her father.
Abnormality in these instances is only a matter of degree. When an
Attorney-General, who has been frightened by a bomb exploded on his
doorstep, convinces himself by the reading of revolutionary literature that a
revolution is to happen on the first of May 1920, we recognize that much
the same mechanism is at work. The war, of course, furnished many
examples of this pattern: the casual fact, the creative imagination, the will
to believe, and out of these three elements, a counterfeit of reality to which
there was a violent instinctive response. For it is clear enough that under
certain conditions men respond as powerfully to fictions as they do to
realities, and that in many cases they help to create the very fictions to
which they respond. Let him cast the first stone who did not believe in the
Russian army that passed through England in August, 1914, did not accept
any tale of atrocities without direct proof, and never saw a plot, a traitor, or
a spy where there was none. Let him cast a stone who never passed on as
the real inside truth what he had heard someone say who knew no more
than he did.
In all these instances we must note particularly one common factor. It is
the insertion between man and his environment of a pseudo-environment.
To that pseudo-environment his behavior is a response. But because it is
behavior, the consequences, if they are acts, operate not in the pseudo-
environment where the behavior is stimulated, but in the real environment
where action eventuates. If the behavior is not a practical act, but what we
call roughly thought and emotion, it may be a long time before there is any
noticeable break in the texture of the fictitious world. But when the stimulus
of the pseudo-fact results in action on things or other people, contradiction
soon develops. Then comes the sensation of butting one's head against a
stone wall, of learning by experience, and witnessing Herbert Spencer's
tragedy of the murder of a Beautiful Theory by a Gang of Brutal Facts, the
discomfort in short of a maladjustment. For certainly, at the level of social
life, what is called the adjustment of man to his environment takes place
through the medium of fictions.
By fictions I do not mean lies. I mean a representation of the
environment which is in lesser or greater degree made by man himself. The
range of fiction extends all the way from complete hallucination to the
scientists' perfectly self-conscious use of a schematic model, or his decision
that for his particular problem accuracy beyond a certain number of decimal
places is not important. A work of fiction may have almost any degree of
fidelity, and so long as the degree of fidelity can be taken into account,
fiction is not misleading. In fact, human culture is very largely the selection,
the rearrangement, the tracing of patterns upon, and the stylizing of, what
William James called "the random irradiations and resettlements of our
ideas."9 The alternative to the use of fictions is direct exposure to the ebb
and flow of sensation. That is not a real alternative, for however refreshing
it is to see at times with a perfectly innocent eye, innocence itself is not
wisdom, though a source and corrective of wisdom. For the real
environment is altogether too big, too complex, and too fleeting for direct
acquaintance. We are not equipped to deal with so much subtlety, so much
variety, so many permutations and combinations. And although we have to
act in that environment, we have to reconstruct it on a simpler model before
we can manage with it. To traverse the world men must have maps of the
world. Their persistent difficulty is to secure maps on which their own need,
or someone else's need, has not sketched in the coast of Bohemia.

The analyst of public opinion must begin then, by recognizing the triangular
relationship between the scene of action, the human picture of that scene,
and the human response to that picture working itself out upon the scene of
action. It is like a play suggested to the actors by their own experience, in
which the plot is transacted in the real lives of the actors, and not merely in
their stage parts. The moving picture often emphasizes with great skill this
double drama of interior motive and external behavior. Two men are
quarreling, ostensibly about some money, but their passion is inexplicable.
Then the picture fades out and what one or the other of the two men sees
with his mind's eye is reënacted. Across the table they were quarreling
about money. In memory they are back in their youth when the girl jilted
him for the other man. The exterior drama is explained: the hero is not
greedy; the hero is in love.
A scene not so different was played in the United States Senate. At
breakfast on the morning of September 29, 1919, some of the Senators read
a news dispatch in the Washington Post about the landing of American
marines on the Dalmatian coast. The newspaper said:
FACTS NOW ESTABLISHED
"The following important facts appear already established. The orders
to Rear Admiral Andrews commanding the American naval forces in the
Adriatic, came from the British Admiralty via the War Council and Rear
Admiral Knapps in London. The approval or disapproval of the American
Navy Department was not asked….
WITHOUT DANIELS' KNOWLEDGE
"Mr. Daniels was admittedly placed in a peculiar position when cables
reached here stating that the forces over which he is presumed to have
exclusive control were carrying on what amounted to naval warfare without
his knowledge. It was fully realized that the British Admiralty might desire
to issue orders to Rear Admiral Andrews to act on behalf of Great Britain
and her Allies, because the situation required sacrifice on the part of some
nation if D'Annunzio's followers were to be held in check.
"It was further realized that under the new league of nations plan
foreigners would be in a position to direct American Naval forces in
emergencies with or without the consent of the American Navy
Department…." etc. (Italics mine).
The first Senator to comment is Mr. Knox of Pennsylvania. Indignantly
he demands investigation. In Mr. Brandegee of Connecticut, who spoke
next, indignation has already stimulated credulity. Where Mr. Knox
indignantly wishes to know if the report is true, Mr. Brandegee, a half a
minute later, would like to know what would have happened if marines had
been killed. Mr. Knox, interested in the question, forgets that he asked for
an inquiry, and replies. If American marines had been killed, it would be
war. The mood of the debate is still conditional. Debate proceeds. Mr.
McCormick of Illinois reminds the Senate that the Wilson administration is
prone to the waging of small unauthorized wars. He repeats Theodore
Roosevelt's quip about "waging peace." More debate. Mr. Brandegee notes
that the marines acted "under orders of a Supreme Council sitting
somewhere," but he cannot recall who represents the United States on that
body. The Supreme Council is unknown to the Constitution of the United
States. Therefore Mr. New of Indiana submits a resolution calling for the
facts.
So far the Senators still recognize vaguely that they are discussing a
rumor. Being lawyers they still remember some of the forms of evidence.
But as red-blooded men they already experience all the indignation which is
appropriate to the fact that American marines have been ordered into war by
a foreign government and without the consent of Congress. Emotionally
they want to believe it, because they are Republicans fighting the League of
Nations. This arouses the Democratic leader, Mr. Hitchcock of Nebraska.
He defends the Supreme Council: it was acting under the war powers. Peace
has not yet been concluded because the Republicans are delaying it.
Therefore the action was necessary and legal. Both sides now assume that
the report is true, and the conclusions they draw are the conclusions of their
partisanship. Yet this extraordinary assumption is in a debate over a
resolution to investigate the truth of the assumption. It reveals how difficult
it is, even for trained lawyers, to suspend response until the returns are in.
The response is instantaneous. The fiction is taken for truth because the
fiction is badly needed.
A few days later an official report showed that the marines were not
landed by order of the British Government or of the Supreme Council. They
had not been fighting the Italians. They had been landed at the request of
the Italian Government to protect Italians, and the American commander
had been officially thanked by the Italian authorities. The marines were not
at war with Italy. They had acted according to an established international
practice which had nothing to do with the League of Nations.
The scene of action was the Adriatic. The picture of that scene in the
Senators' heads at Washington was furnished, in this case probably with
intent to deceive, by a man who cared nothing about the Adriatic, but much
about defeating the League. To this picture the Senate responded by a
strengthening of its partisan differences over the League.

Whether in this particular case the Senate was above or below its normal
standard, it is not necessary to decide. Nor whether the Senate compares
favorably with the House, or with other parliaments. At the moment, I
should like to think only about the world-wide spectacle of men acting upon
their environment, moved by stimuli from their pseudo-environments. For
when full allowance has been made for deliberate fraud, political science
has still to account for such facts as two nations attacking one another, each
convinced that it is acting in self-defense, or two classes at war each certain
that it speaks for the common interest. They live, we are likely to say, in
different worlds. More accurately, they live in the same world, but they
think and feel in different ones.
It is to these special worlds, it is to these private or group, or class, or
provincial, or occupational, or national, or sectarian artifacts, that the
political adjustment of mankind in the Great Society takes place. Their
variety and complication are impossible to describe. Yet these fictions
determine a very great part of men's political behavior. We must think of
perhaps fifty sovereign parliaments consisting of at least a hundred
legislative bodies. With them belong at least fifty hierarchies of provincial
and municipal assemblies, which with their executive, administrative and
legislative organs, constitute formal authority on earth. But that does not
begin to reveal the complexity of political life. For in each of these
innumerable centers of authority there are parties, and these parties are
themselves hierarchies with their roots in classes, sections, cliques and
clans; and within these are the individual politicians, each the personal
center of a web of connection and memory and fear and hope.
Somehow or other, for reasons often necessarily obscure, as the result of
domination or compromise or a logroll, there emerge from these political
bodies commands, which set armies in motion or make peace, conscript
life, tax, exile, imprison, protect property or confiscate it, encourage one
kind of enterprise and discourage another, facilitate immigration or obstruct
it, improve communication or censor it, establish schools, build navies,
proclaim "policies," and "destiny," raise economic barriers, make property
or unmake it, bring one people under the rule of another, or favor one class
as against another. For each of these decisions some view of the facts is
taken to be conclusive, some view of the circumstances is accepted as the
basis of inference and as the stimulus of feeling. What view of the facts, and
why that one?
And yet even this does not begin to exhaust the real complexity. The
formal political structure exists in a social environment, where there are
innumerable large and small corporations and institutions, voluntary and
semi-voluntary associations, national, provincial, urban and neighborhood
groupings, which often as not make the decision that the political body
registers. On what are these decisions based?
"Modern society," says Mr. Chesterton, "is intrinsically insecure
because it is based on the notion that all men will do the same thing for
different reasons…. And as within the head of any convict may be the hell
of a quite solitary crime, so in the house or under the hat of any suburban
clerk may be the limbo of a quite separate philosophy. The first man may be
a complete Materialist and feel his own body as a horrible machine
manufacturing his own mind. He may listen to his thoughts as to the dull
ticking of a clock. The man next door may be a Christian Scientist and
regard his own body as somehow rather less substantial than his own
shadow. He may come almost to regard his own arms and legs as delusions
like moving serpents in the dream of delirium tremens. The third man in the
street may not be a Christian Scientist but, on the contrary, a Christian. He
may live in a fairy tale as his neighbors would say; a secret but solid fairy
tale full of the faces and presences of unearthly friends. The fourth man
may be a theosophist, and only too probably a vegetarian; and I do not see
why I should not gratify myself with the fancy that the fifth man is a devil
worshiper…. Now whether or not this sort of variety is valuable, this sort of
unity is shaky. To expect that all men for all time will go on thinking
different things, and yet doing the same things, is a doubtful speculation. It
is not founding society on a communion, or even on a convention, but
rather on a coincidence. Four men may meet under the same lamp post; one
to paint it pea green as part of a great municipal reform; one to read his
breviary in the light of it; one to embrace it with accidental ardour in a fit of
alcoholic enthusiasm; and the last merely because the pea green post is a
conspicuous point of rendezvous with his young lady. But to expect this to
happen night after night is unwise…."10
For the four men at the lamp post substitute the governments, the
parties, the corporations, the societies, the social sets, the trades and
professions, universities, sects, and nationalities of the world. Think of the
legislator voting a statute that will affect distant peoples, a statesman
coming to a decision. Think of the Peace Conference reconstituting the
frontiers of Europe, an ambassador in a foreign country trying to discern the
intentions of his own government and of the foreign government, a
promoter working a concession in a backward country, an editor demanding
a war, a clergyman calling on the police to regulate amusement, a club
lounging-room making up its mind about a strike, a sewing circle preparing
to regulate the schools, nine judges deciding whether a legislature in
Oregon may fix the working hours of women, a cabinet meeting to decide
on the recognition of a government, a party convention choosing a
candidate and writing a platform, twenty-seven million voters casting their
ballots, an Irishman in Cork thinking about an Irishman in Belfast, a Third
International planning to reconstruct the whole of human society, a board of
directors confronted with a set of their employees' demands, a boy choosing
a career, a merchant estimating supply and demand for the coming season, a
speculator predicting the course of the market, a banker deciding whether to
put credit behind a new enterprise, the advertiser, the reader of
advertisments…. Think of the different sorts of Americans thinking about
their notions of "The British Empire" or "France" or "Russia" or "Mexico."
It is not so different from Mr. Chesterton's four men at the pea green lamp
post.

And so before we involve ourselves in the jungle of obscurities about the
innate differences of men, we shall do well to fix our attention upon the
extraordinary differences in what men know of the world.11 I do not doubt
that there are important biological differences. Since man is an animal it
would be strange if there were not. But as rational beings it is worse than
shallow to generalize at all about comparative behavior until there is a
measurable similarity between the environments to which behavior is a
response.
The pragmatic value of this idea is that it introduces a much needed
refinement into the ancient controversy about nature and nurture, innate
quality and environment. For the pseudo-environment is a hybrid
compounded of "human nature" and "conditions." To my mind it shows the
uselessness of pontificating about what man is and always will be from
what we observe man to be doing, or about what are the necessary
conditions of society. For we do not know how men would behave in
response to the facts of the Great Society. All that we really know is how
they behave in response to what can fairly be called a most inadequate
picture of the Great Society. No conclusion about man or the Great Society
can honestly be made on evidence like that.
This, then, will be the clue to our inquiry. We shall assume that what
each man does is based not on direct and certain knowledge, but on pictures
made by himself or given to him. If his atlas tells him that the world is flat
he will not sail near what he believes to be the edge of our planet for fear of
falling off. If his maps include a fountain of eternal youth, a Ponce de Leon
will go in quest of it. If someone digs up yellow dirt that looks like gold, he
will for a time act exactly as if he had found gold. The way in which the
world is imagined determines at any particular moment what men will do. It
does not determine what they will achieve. It determines their effort, their
feelings, their hopes, not their accomplishments and results. The very men
who most loudly proclaim their "materialism" and their contempt for
"ideologues," the Marxian communists, place their entire hope on what? On
the formation by propaganda of a class-conscious group. But what is
propaganda, if not the effort to alter the picture to which men respond, to
substitute one social pattern for another? What is class consciousness but a
way of realizing the world? National consciousness but another way? And
Professor Giddings' consciousness of kind, but a process of believing that
we recognize among the multitude certain ones marked as our kind?
Try to explain social life as the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of
pain. You will soon be saying that the hedonist begs the question, for even
supposing that man does pursue these ends, the crucial problem of why he
thinks one course rather than another likely to produce pleasure, is
untouched. Does the guidance of man's conscience explain? How then does
he happen to have the particular conscience which he has? The theory of
economic self-interest? But how do men come to conceive their interest in
one way rather than another? The desire for security, or prestige, or
domination, or what is vaguely called self-realization? How do men
conceive their security, what do they consider prestige, how do they figure
out the means of domination, or what is the notion of self which they wish
to realize? Pleasure, pain, conscience, acquisition, protection, enhancement,
mastery, are undoubtedly names for some of the ways people act. There
may be instinctive dispositions which work toward such ends. But no
statement of the end, or any description of the tendencies to seek it, can
explain the behavior which results. The very fact that men theorize at all is
proof that their pseudo-environments, their interior representations of the
world, are a determining element in thought, feeling, and action. For if the
connection between reality and human response were direct and immediate,
rather than indirect and inferred, indecision and failure would be unknown,
and (if each of us fitted as snugly into the world as the child in the womb),
Mr. Bernard Shaw would not have been able to say that except for the first
nine months of its existence no human being manages its affairs as well as a
plant.
The chief difficulty in adapting the psychoanalytic scheme to political
thought arises in this connection. The Freudians are concerned with the
maladjustment of distinct individuals to other individuals and to concrete
circumstances. They have assumed that if internal derangements could be
straightened out, there would be little or no confusion about what is the
obviously normal relationship. But public opinion deals with indirect,
unseen, and puzzling facts, and there is nothing obvious about them. The
situations to which public opinions refer are known only as opinions. The
psychoanalyst, on the other hand, almost always assumes that the
environment is knowable, and if not knowable then at least bearable, to any
unclouded intelligence. This assumption of his is the problem of public
opinion. Instead of taking for granted an environment that is readily known,
the social analyst is most concerned in studying how the larger political
environment is conceived, and how it can be conceived more successfully.
The psychoanalyst examines the adjustment to an X, called by him the
environment; the social analyst examines the X, called by him the pseudo-
environment.
He is, of course, permanently and constantly in debt to the new
psychology, not only because when rightly applied it so greatly helps
people to stand on their own feet, come what may, but because the study of
dreams, fantasy and rationalization has thrown light on how the pseudo-
environment is put together. But he cannot assume as his criterion either
what is called a "normal biological career"12 within the existing social
order, or a career "freed from religious suppression and dogmatic
conventions" outside.13 What for a sociologist is a normal social career? Or
one freed from suppressions and conventions? Conservative critics do, to be
sure, assume the first, and romantic ones the second. But in assuming them
they are taking the whole world for granted. They are saying in effect either
that society is the sort of thing which corresponds to their idea of what is
normal, or the sort of thing which corresponds to their idea of what is free.
Both ideas are merely public opinions, and while the psychoanalyst as
physician may perhaps assume them, the sociologist may not take the
products of existing public opinion as criteria by which to study public
opinion.

The world that we have to deal with politically is out of reach, out of sight,
out of mind. It has to be explored, reported, and imagined. Man is no
Aristotelian god contemplating all existence at one glance. He is the
creature of an evolution who can just about span a sufficient portion of
reality to manage his survival, and snatch what on the scale of time are but
a few moments of insight and happiness. Yet this same creature has
invented ways of seeing what no naked eye could see, of hearing what no
ear could hear, of weighing immense masses and infinitesimal ones, of
counting and separating more items than he can individually remember. He
is learning to see with his mind vast portions of the world that he could
never see, touch, smell, hear, or remember. Gradually he makes for himself
a trustworthy picture inside his head of the world beyond his reach.
Those features of the world outside which have to do with the behavior
of other human beings, in so far as that behavior crosses ours, is dependent
upon us, or is interesting to us, we call roughly public affairs. The pictures
inside the heads of these human beings, the pictures of themselves, of
others, of their needs, purposes, and relationship, are their public opinions.
Those pictures which are acted upon by groups of people, or by individuals
acting in the name of groups, are Public Opinion with capital letters. And so
in the chapters which follow we shall inquire first into some of the reasons
why the picture inside so often misleads men in their dealings with the
world outside. Under this heading we shall consider first the chief factors
which limit their access to the facts. They are the artificial censorships, the
limitations of social contact, the comparatively meager time available in
each day for paying attention to public affairs, the distortion arising because
events have to be compressed into very short messages, the difficulty of
making a small vocabulary express a complicated world, and finally the
fear of facing those facts which would seem to threaten the established
routine of men's lives.
The analysis then turns from these more or less external limitations to
the question of how this trickle of messages from the outside is affected by
the stored up images, the preconceptions, and prejudices which interpret,
fill them out, and in their turn powerfully direct the play of our attention,
and our vision itself. From this it proceeds to examine how in the individual
person the limited messages from outside, formed into a pattern of
stereotypes, are identified with his own interests as he feels and conceives
them. In the succeeding sections it examines how opinions are crystallized
into what is called Public Opinion, how a National Will, a Group Mind, a
Social Purpose, or whatever you choose to call it, is formed.
The first five parts constitute the descriptive section of the book. There
follows an analysis of the traditional democratic theory of public opinion.
The substance of the argument is that democracy in its original form never
seriously faced the problem which arises because the pictures inside
people's heads do not automatically correspond with the world outside. And
then, because the democratic theory is under criticism by socialist thinkers,
there follows an examination of the most advanced and coherent of these
criticisms, as made by the English Guild Socialists. My purpose here is to
find out whether these reformers take into account the main difficulties of
public opinion. My conclusion is that they ignore the difficulties, as
completely as did the original democrats, because they, too, assume, and in
a much more complicated civilization, that somehow mysteriously there
exists in the hearts of men a knowledge of the world beyond their reach.
I argue that representative government, either in what is ordinarily
called politics, or in industry, cannot be worked successfully, no matter
what the basis of election, unless there is an independent, expert
organization for making the unseen facts intelligible to those who have to
make the decisions. I attempt, therefore, to argue that the serious acceptance
of the principle that personal representation must be supplemented by
representation of the unseen facts would alone permit a satisfactory
decentralization, and allow us to escape from the intolerable and
unworkable fiction that each of us must acquire a competent opinion about
all public affairs. It is argued that the problem of the press is confused
because the critics and the apologists expect the press to realize this fiction,
expect it to make up for all that was not foreseen in the theory of
democracy, and that the readers expect this miracle to be performed at no
cost or trouble to themselves. The newspapers are regarded by democrats as
a panacea for their own defects, whereas analysis of the nature of news and
of the economic basis of journalism seems to show that the newspapers
necessarily and inevitably reflect, and therefore, in greater or lesser
measure, intensify, the defective organization of public opinion. My
conclusion is that public opinions must be organized for the press if they are
to be sound, not by the press as is the case today. This organization I
conceive to be in the first instance the task of a political science that has
won its proper place as formulator, in advance of real decision, instead of
apologist, critic, or reporter after the decision has been made. I try to
indicate that the perplexities of government and industry are conspiring to
give political science this enormous opportunity to enrich itself and to serve
the public. And, of course, I hope that these pages will help a few people to
realize that opportunity more vividly, and therefore to pursue it more
consciously.
1. Hexaemeron, i. cap 6, quoted in The Mediæval Mind, by Henry Osborn Taylor, Vol. i, p. 73.
2. Lecky, Rationalism in Europe, Vol. I, pp. 276-8.
3. Id.
4. Lytton Strachey, Queen Victoria, p. 72.
5. Jean de Pierrefeu, G. Q. G. Trois ans au Grand Quartier General, pp 94-95.
6. Part V.
7. See Sinclair Lewis, Main Street.
8. Op. cit., p. 99.
9. James, Principles of Psychology, Vol. II, p. 638
10. G. K. Chesterton, "The Mad Hatter and the Sane Householder," Vanity Fair, January, 1921, p.

11. Cf. Wallas, Our Social Heritage, pp. 77 et seq.
12. Edward J. Kempf, Psychopathology, p. 116.
13. Id., p. 151.
Part II.
Approaches to the World Outside
Table of Contents
Chapter II.
Censorship and Privacy
Table of Contents

The picture of a general presiding over an editorial conference at the most
terrible hour of one of the great battles of history seems more like a scene
from The Chocolate Soldier than a page from life. Yet we know at first hand
from the officer who edited the French communiqués that these conferences
were a regular part of the business of war; that in the worst moment of
Verdun, General Joffre and his cabinet met and argued over the nouns,
adjectives, and verbs that were to be printed in the newspapers the next
morning.
"The evening communiqué of the twenty-third (February 1916)" says
M. de Pierrefeu,14 "was edited in a dramatic atmosphere. M. Berthelot, of
the Prime Minister's office, had just telephoned by order of the minister
asking General Pellé to strengthen the report and to emphasize the
proportions of the enemy's attack. It was necessary to prepare the public for
the worst outcome in case the affair turned into a catastrophe. This anxiety
showed clearly that neither at G. H. Q. nor at the Ministry of War had the
Government found reason for confidence. As M. Berthelot spoke, General
Pellé made notes. He handed me the paper on which he had written the
Government's wishes, together with the order of the day issued by General
von Deimling and found on some prisoners, in which it was stated that this
attack was the supreme offensive to secure peace. Skilfully used, all this
was to demonstrate that Germany was letting loose a gigantic effort, an
effort without precedent, and that from its success she hoped for the end of
the war. The logic of this was that nobody need be surprised at our
withdrawal. When, a half hour later, I went down with my manuscript, I
found gathered together in Colonel Claudel's office, he being away, the
major-general, General Janin, Colonel Dupont, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Renouard. Fearing that I would not succeed in giving the desired
impression, General Pellé had himself prepared a proposed communiqué. I
read what I had just done. It was found to be too moderate. General Pellé's,
on the other hand, seemed too alarming. I had purposely omitted von
Deimling's order of the day. To put it into the communiqué would be to
break with the formula to which the public was accustomed, would be to
transform it into a kind of pleading. It would seem to say: 'How do you
suppose we can resist?' There was reason to fear that the public would be
distracted by this change of tone and would believe that everything was
lost. I explained my reasons and suggested giving Deimling's text to the
newspapers in the form of a separate note.
"Opinion being divided, General Pellé went to ask General de Castelnau
to come and decide finally. The General arrived smiling, quiet and good
humored, said a few pleasant words about this new kind of literary council
of war, and looked at the texts. He chose the simpler one, gave more weight
to the first phrase, inserted the words 'as had been anticipated,' which
supply a reassuring quality, and was flatly against inserting von Deimling's
order, but was for transmitting it to the press in a special note … " General
Joffre that evening read the communiqué carefully and approved it.
Within a few hours those two or three hundred words would be read all
over the world. They would paint a picture in men's minds of what was
happening on the slopes of Verdun, and in front of that picture people would
take heart or despair. The shopkeeper in Brest, the peasant in Lorraine, the
deputy in the Palais Bourbon, the editor in Amsterdam or Minneapolis had
to be kept in hope, and yet prepared to accept possible defeat without
yielding to panic. They are told, therefore, that the loss of ground is no
surprise to the French Command. They are taught to regard the affair as
serious, but not strange. Now, as a matter of fact, the French General Staff
was not fully prepared for the German offensive. Supporting trenches had
not been dug, alternative roads had not been built, barbed wire was lacking.
But to confess that would have aroused images in the heads of civilians that
might well have turned a reverse into a disaster. The High Command could
be disappointed, and yet pull itself together; the people at home and abroad,
full of uncertainties, and with none of the professional man's singleness of
purpose, might on the basis of a complete story have lost sight of the war in
a melee of faction and counter-faction about the competence of the officers.
Instead, therefore, of letting the public act on all the facts which the
generals knew, the authorities presented only certain facts, and these only in
such a way as would be most likely to steady the people.
In this case the men who arranged the pseudo-environment knew what
the real one was. But a few days later an incident occurred about which the
French Staff did not know the truth. The Germans announced15 that on the
previous afternoon they had taken Fort Douaumont by assault. At French
headquarters in Chantilly no one could understand this news. For on the
morning of the twenty-fifth, after the engagement of the XXth corps, the
battle had taken a turn for the better. Reports from the front said nothing
about Douaumont. But inquiry showed that the German report was true,
though no one as yet knew how the fort had been taken. In the meantime,
the German communiqué was being flashed around the world, and the
French had to say something. So headquarters explained. "In the midst of
total ignorance at Chantilly about the way the attack had taken place, we
imagined, in the evening communiqué of the 26th, a plan of the attack
which certainly had a thousand to one chance of being true." The
communiqué of this imaginary battle read:
"A bitter struggle is taking place around Fort de Douaumont which is an
advanced post of the old defensive organization of Verdun. The position
taken this morning by the enemy, after several unsuccessful assaults that
cost him very heavy losses, has been reached again and passed by our troops
whom the enemy has not been able to drive back."16
What had actually happened differed from both the French and German
accounts. While changing troops in the line, the position had somehow been
forgotten in a confusion of orders. Only a battery commander and a few
men remained in the fort. Some German soldiers, seeing the door open, had
crawled into the fort, and taken everyone inside prisoner. A little later the
French who were on the slopes of the hill were horrified at being shot at
from the fort. There had been no battle at Douaumont and no losses. Nor
had the French troops advanced beyond it as the communiqués seemed to
say. They were beyond it on either side, to be sure, but the fort was in
enemy hands.
Yet from the communiqué everyone believed that the fort was half
surrounded. The words did not explicitly say so, but "the press, as usual,
forced the pace." Military writers concluded that the Germans would soon
have to surrender. In a few days they began to ask themselves why the
garrison, since it lacked food, had not yet surrendered. "It was necessary
through the press bureau to request them to drop the encirclement theme."18

The editor of the French communiqué tells us that as the battle dragged out,
his colleagues and he set out to neutralize the pertinacity of the Germans by
continual insistence on their terrible losses. It is necessary to remember that
at this time, and in fact until late in 1917, the orthodox view of the war for
all the Allied peoples was that it would be decided by "attrition." Nobody
believed in a war of movement. It was insisted that strategy did not count,
or diplomacy. It was simply a matter of killing Germans. The general public
more or less believed the dogma, but it had constantly to be reminded of it
in face of spectacular German successes.
"Almost no day passed but the communiqué…. ascribed to the Germans
with some appearance of justice heavy losses, extremely heavy, spoke of
bloody sacrifices, heaps of corpses, hecatombs. Likewise the wireless
constantly used the statistics of the intelligence bureau at Verdun, whose
chief, Major Cointet, had invented a method of calculating German losses
which obviously produced marvelous results. Every fortnight the figures
increased a hundred thousand or so. These 300,000, 400,000, 500,000
casualties put out, divided into daily, weekly, monthly losses, repeated in all
sorts of ways, produced a striking effect. Our formulae varied little:
'according to prisoners the German losses in the course of the attack have
been considerable' … 'it is proved that the losses' … 'the enemy exhausted
by his losses has not renewed the attack' … Certain formulae, later
abandoned because they had been overworked, were used each day: 'under
our artillery and machine gun fire' … 'mowed down by our artillery and
machine gun fire' … Constant repetition impressed the neutrals and
Germany itself, and helped to create a bloody background in spite of the
denials from Nauen (the German wireless) which tried vainly to destroy the
bad effect of this perpetual repetition."19
The thesis of the French Command, which it wished to establish
publicly by these reports, was formulated as follows for the guidance of the
censors:
"This offensive engages the active forces of our opponent whose
manpower is declining. We have learned that the class of 1916 is already at
the front. There will remain the 1917 class already being called up, and the
resources of the third category (men above forty-five, or convalescents). In
a few weeks, the German forces exhausted by this effort, will find
themselves confronted with all the forces of the coalition (ten millions
against seven millions)."20
According to M. de Pierrefeu, the French command had converted itself
to this belief. "By an extraordinary aberration of mind, only the attrition of
the enemy was seen; it appeared that our forces were not subject to attrition.
General Nivelle shared these ideas. We saw the result in 1917."
We have learned to call this propaganda. A group of men, who can
prevent independent access to the event, arrange the news of it to suit their
purpose. That the purpose was in this case patriotic does not affect the
argument at all. They used their power to make the Allied publics see affairs
as they desired them to be seen. The casualty figures of Major Cointet
which were spread about the world are of the same order. They were
intended to provoke a particular kind of inference, namely that the war of
attrition was going in favor of the French. But the inference is not drawn in
the form of argument. It results almost automatically from the creation of a
mental picture of endless Germans slaughtered on the hills about Verdun.
By putting the dead Germans in the focus of the picture, and by omitting to
mention the French dead, a very special view of the battle was built up. It
was a view designed to neutralize the effects of German territorial advances
and the impression of power which the persistence of the offensive was
making. It was also a view that tended to make the public acquiesce in the
demoralizing defensive strategy imposed upon the Allied armies. For the
public, accustomed to the idea that war consists of great strategic
movements, flank attacks, encirclements, and dramatic surrenders, had
gradually to forget that picture in favor of the terrible idea that by matching
lives the war would be won. Through its control over all news from the
front, the General Staff substituted a view of the facts that comported with
this strategy.
The General Staff of an army in the field is so placed that within wide
limits it can control what the public will perceive. It controls the selection
of correspondents who go to the front, controls their movements at the
front, reads and censors their messages from the front, and operates the
wires. The Government behind the army by its command of cables and
passports, mails and custom houses and blockades increases the control. It
emphasizes it by legal power over publishers, over public meetings, and by
its secret service. But in the case of an army the control is far from perfect.
There is always the enemy's communiqué, which in these days of wireless
cannot be kept away from neutrals. Above all there is the talk of the
soldiers, which blows back from the front, and is spread about when they
are on leave.21 An army is an unwieldy thing. And that is why the naval and
diplomatic censorship is almost always much more complete. Fewer people
know what is going on, and their acts are more easily supervised.

Without some form of censorship, propaganda in the strict sense of the
word is impossible. In order to conduct a propaganda there must be some
barrier between the public and the event. Access to the real environment
must be limited, before anyone can create a pseudo-environment that he
thinks wise or desirable. For while people who have direct access can
misconceive what they see, no one else can decide how they shall
misconceive it, unless he can decide where they shall look, and at what. The
military censorship is the simplest form of barrier, but by no means the
most important, because it is known to exist, and is therefore in certain
measure agreed to and discounted.
At different times and for different subjects some men impose and other
men accept a particular standard of secrecy. The frontier between what is
concealed because publication is not, as we say, "compatible with the public
interest" fades gradually into what is concealed because it is believed to be
none of the public's business. The notion of what constitutes a person's
private affairs is elastic. Thus the amount of a man's fortune is considered a
private affair, and careful provision is made in the income tax law to keep it
as private as possible. The sale of a piece of land is not private, but the price
may be. Salaries are generally treated as more private than wages, incomes
as more private than inheritances. A person's credit rating is given only a
limited circulation. The profits of big corporations are more public than
those of small firms. Certain kinds of conversation, between man and wife,
lawyer and client, doctor and patient, priest and communicant, are
privileged. Directors' meetings are generally private. So are many political
conferences. Most of what is said at a cabinet meeting, or by an ambassador
to the Secretary of State, or at private interviews, or dinner tables, is private.
Many people regard the contract between employer and employee as
private. There was a time when the affairs of all corporations were held to
be as private as a man's theology is to-day. There was a time before that
when his theology was held to be as public a matter as the color of his eyes.
But infectious diseases, on the other hand, were once as private as the
processes of a man's digestion. The history of the notion of privacy would
be an entertaining tale. Sometimes the notions violently conflict, as they did
when the bolsheviks published the secret treaties, or when Mr. Hughes
investigated the life insurance companies, or when somebody's scandal
exudes from the pages of Town Topics to the front pages of Mr. Hearst's
newspapers.
Whether the reasons for privacy are good or bad, the barriers exist.
Privacy is insisted upon at all kinds of places in the area of what is called
public affairs. It is often very illuminating, therefore, to ask yourself how
you got at the facts on which you base your opinion. Who actually saw,
heard, felt, counted, named the thing, about which you have an opinion?
Was it the man who told you, or the man who told him, or someone still
further removed? And how much was he permitted to see? When he informs
you that France thinks this and that, what part of France did he watch? How
was he able to watch it? Where was he when he watched it? What
Frenchmen was he permitted to talk to, what newspapers did he read, and
where did they learn what they say? You can ask yourself these questions,
but you can rarely answer them. They will remind you, however, of the
distance which often separates your public opinion from the event with
which it deals. And the reminder is itself a protection.
14. G. Q. G., pp. 126-129.
15. On February 26, 1916. Pierrefeu, G. Q. G., pp. 133 et seq.
16. This is my own translation: the English translation from London published in the New York
Times of Sunday, Feb. 27, is as follows:
London, Feb. 26 (1916). A furious struggle has been in progress around Fort de
Douaumont which is an advance element of the old defensive organization of Verdun
fortresses. The position captured this morning by the enemy after several fruitless
assaults which cost him extremely heavy losses,17 was reached again and gone beyond
by our troops, which all the attempts of the enemy have not been able to push back."
17. The French text says "pertes tres elevees." Thus the English translation exaggerates the original
text.
18. Pierrefeu, op. cit., pp. 134-5.
19. Op. cit., pp. 138-139.
20. Op. cit., p. 147.
21. For weeks prior to the American attack at St. Mihiel and in the Argonne-Meuse, everybody in
France told everybody else the deep secret.
Chapter III.
Contact and Opportunity
Table of Contents

While censorship and privacy intercept much information at its source, a
very much larger body of fact never reaches the whole public at all, or only
very slowly. For there are very distinct limits upon the circulation of ideas.
A rough estimate of the effort it takes to reach "everybody" can be had
by considering the Government's propaganda during the war. Remembering
that the war had run over two years and a half before America entered it,
that millions upon millions of printed pages had been circulated and untold
speeches had been delivered, let us turn to Mr. Creel's account of his fight
"for the minds of men, for the conquest of their convictions" in order that
"the gospel of Americanism might be carried to every corner of the
globe."22
Mr. Creel had to assemble machinery which included a Division of
News that issued, he tells us, more than six thousand releases, had to enlist
seventy-five thousand Four Minute Men who delivered at least seven
hundred and fifty-five thousand, one hundred and ninety speeches to an
aggregate of over three hundred million people. Boy scouts delivered
annotated copies of President Wilson's addresses to the householders of
America. Fortnightly periodicals were sent to six hundred thousand
teachers. Two hundred thousand lantern slides were furnished for illustrated
lectures. Fourteen hundred and thirty-eight different designs were turned
out for posters, window cards, newspaper advertisements, cartoons, seals
and buttons. The chambers of commerce, the churches, fraternal societies,
schools, were used as channels of distribution. Yet Mr. Creel's effort, to
which I have not begun to do justice, did not include Mr. McAdoo's
stupendous organization for the Liberty Loans, nor Mr. Hoover's far
reaching propaganda about food, nor the campaigns of the Red Cross, the Y.
M. C. A., Salvation Army, Knights of Columbus, Jewish Welfare Board, not
to mention the independent work of patriotic societies, like the League to
Enforce Peace, the League of Free Nations Association, the National
Security League, nor the activity of the publicity bureaus of the Allies and
of the submerged nationalities.
Probably this is the largest and the most intensive effort to carry quickly
a fairly uniform set of ideas to all the people of a nation. The older
proselyting worked more slowly, perhaps more surely, but never so
inclusively. Now if it required such extreme measures to reach everybody in
time of crisis, how open are the more normal channels to men's minds? The
Administration was trying, and while the war continued it very largely
succeeded, I believe, in creating something that might almost be called one
public opinion all over America. But think of the dogged work, the
complicated ingenuity, the money and the personnel that were required.
Nothing like that exists in time of peace, and as a corollary there are whole
sections, there are vast groups, ghettoes, enclaves and classes that hear only
vaguely about much that is going on.
They live in grooves, are shut in among their own affairs, barred out of
larger affairs, meet few people not of their own sort, read little. Travel and
trade, the mails, the wires, and radio, railroads, highways, ships, motor cars,
and in the coming generation aeroplanes, are, of course, of the utmost
influence on the circulation of ideas. Each of these affects the supply and
the quality of information and opinion in a most intricate way. Each is itself
affected by technical, by economic, by political conditions. Every time a
government relaxes the passport ceremonies or the customs inspection,
every time a new railway or a new port is opened, a new shipping line
established, every time rates go up or down, the mails move faster or more
slowly, the cables are uncensored and made less expensive, highways built,
or widened, or improved, the circulation of ideas is influenced. Tariff
schedules and subsidies affect the direction of commercial enterprise, and
therefore the nature of human contracts. And so it may well happen, as it
did for example in the case of Salem, Massachusetts, that a change in the art
of shipbuilding will reduce a whole city from a center where international
influences converge to a genteel provincial town. All the immediate effects
of more rapid transit are not necessarily good. It would be difficult to say,
for example, that the railroad system of France, so highly centralized upon
Paris, has been an unmixed blessing to the French people.
It is certainly true that problems arising out of the means of
communication are of the utmost importance, and one of the most
constructive features of the program of the League of Nations has been the
study given to railroad transit and access to the sea. The monopolizing of
cables,23 of ports, fuel stations, mountain passes, canals, straits, river
courses, terminals, market places means a good deal more than the
enrichment of a group of business men, or the prestige of a government. It
means a barrier upon the exchange of news and opinion. But monopoly is
not the only barrier. Cost and available supply are even greater ones, for if
the cost of travelling or trading is prohibitive, if the demand for facilities
exceeds the supply, the barriers exist even without monopoly.

The size of a man's income has considerable effect on his access to the
world beyond his neighborhood. With money he can overcome almost
every tangible obstacle of communication, he can travel, buy books and
periodicals, and bring within the range of his attention almost any known
fact of the world. The income of the individual, and the income of the
community determine the amount of communication that is possible. But
men's ideas determine how that income shall be spent, and that in turn
affects in the long run the amount of income they will have. Thus also there
are limitations, none the less real, because they are often self-imposed and
self-indulgent.
There are portions of the sovereign people who spend most of their
spare time and spare money on motoring and comparing motor cars, on
bridge-whist and post-mortems, on moving-pictures and potboilers, talking
always to the same people with minute variations on the same old themes.
They cannot really be said to suffer from censorship, or secrecy, the high
cost or the difficulty of communication. They suffer from anemia, from lack
of appetite and curiosity for the human scene. Theirs is no problem of
access to the world outside. Worlds of interest are waiting for them to
explore, and they do not enter.
They move, as if on a leash, within a fixed radius of acquaintances
according to the law and the gospel of their social set. Among men the
circle of talk in business and at the club and in the smoking car is wider
than the set to which they belong. Among women the social set and the
circle of talk are frequently almost identical. It is in the social set that ideas
derived from reading and lectures and from the circle of talk converge, are
sorted out, accepted, rejected, judged and sanctioned. There it is finally
decided in each phase of a discussion which authorities and which sources
of information are admissible, and which not.
Our social set consists of those who figure as people in the phrase
"people are saying"; they are the people whose approval matters most
intimately to us. In big cities among men and women of wide interests and
with the means for moving about, the social set is not so rigidly defined.
But even in big cities, there are quarters and nests of villages containing
self-sufficing social sets. In smaller communities there may exist a freer
circulation, a more genuine fellowship from after breakfast to before dinner.
But few people do not know, nevertheless, which set they really belong to,
and which not.
Usually the distinguishing mark of a social set is the presumption that
the children may intermarry. To marry outside the set involves, at the very
least, a moment of doubt before the engagement can be approved. Each
social set has a fairly clear picture of its relative position in the hierarchy of
social sets. Between sets at the same level, association is easy, individuals
are quickly accepted, hospitality is normal and unembarrassed. But in
contact between sets that are "higher" or "lower," there is always reciprocal
hesitation, a faint malaise, and a consciousness of difference. To be sure in a
society like that of the United States, individuals move somewhat freely out
of one set into another, especially where there is no racial barrier and where
economic position changes so rapidly.
Economic position, however, is not measured by the amount of income.
For in the first generation, at least, it is not income that determines social
standing, but the character of a man's work, and it may take a generation or
two before this fades out of the family tradition. Thus banking, law,
medicine, public utilities, newspapers, the church, large retailing,
brokerage, manufacture, are rated at a different social value from
salesmanship, superintendence, expert technical work, nursing, school
teaching, shop keeping; and those, in turn, are rated as differently from
plumbing, being a chauffeur, dressmaking, subcontracting, or stenography,
as these are from being a butler, lady's maid, a moving picture operator, or a
locomotive engineer. And yet the financial return does not necessarily
coincide with these gradations.

Whatever the tests of admission, the social set when formed is not a mere
economic class, but something which more nearly resembles a biological
clan. Membership is intimately connected with love, marriage and children,
or, to speak more exactly, with the attitudes and desires that are involved. In
the social set, therefore, opinions encounter the canons of Family Tradition,
Respectability, Propriety, Dignity, Taste and Form, which make up the
social set's picture of itself, a picture assiduously implanted in the children.
In this picture a large space is tacitly given to an authorized version of what
each set is called upon inwardly to accept as the social standing of the
others. The more vulgar press for an outward expression of the deference
due, the others are decently and sensitively silent about their own
knowledge that such deference invisibly exists. But that knowledge,
becoming overt when there is a marriage, a war, or a social upheaval, is the
nexus of a large bundle of dispositions classified by Trotter24 under the
general term instinct of the herd.
Within each social set there are augurs like the van der Luydens and
Mrs. Manson Mingott in "The Age of Innocence,"25 who are recognized as
the custodians and the interpreters of its social pattern. You are made, they
say, if the van der Luydens take you up. The invitations to their functions
are the high sign of arrival and status. The elections to college societies,
carefully graded and the gradations universally accepted, determine who is
who in college. The social leaders, weighted with the ultimate eugenic
responsibility, are peculiarly sensitive. Not only must they be watchfully
aware of what makes for the integrity of their set, but they have to cultivate
a special gift for knowing what other social sets are doing. They act as a
kind of ministry of foreign affairs. Where most of the members of a set live
complacently within the set, regarding it for all practical purposes as the
world, the social leaders must combine an intimate knowledge of the
anatomy of their own set with a persistent sense of its place in the hierarchy
of sets.
The hierarchy, in fact, is bound together by the social leaders. At any
one level there is something which might almost be called a social set of the
social leaders. But vertically the actual binding together of society, in so far
as it is bound together at all by social contact, is accomplished by those
exceptional people, frequently suspect, who like Julius Beaufort and Ellen
Olenska in "The Age of Innocence" move in and out. Thus there come to be
established personal channels from one set to another, through which
Tarde's laws of imitation operate. But for large sections of the population
there are no such channels. For them the patented accounts of society and
the moving pictures of high life have to serve. They may develop a social
hierarchy of their own, almost unnoticed, as have the Negroes and the
"foreign element," but among that assimilated mass which always considers
itself the "nation," there is in spite of the great separateness of sets, a variety
of personal contacts through which a circulation of standards takes place.
Some of the sets are so placed that they become what Professor Ross
has called "radiant points of conventionality."26 Thus the social superior is
likely to be imitated by the social inferior, the holder of power is imitated
by subordinates, the more successful by the less successful, the rich by the
poor, the city by the country. But imitation does not stop at frontiers. The
powerful, socially superior, successful, rich, urban social set is
fundamentally international throughout the western hemisphere, and in
many ways London is its center. It counts among its membership the most
influential people in the world, containing as it does the diplomatic set, high
finance, the upper circles of the army and the navy, some princes of the
church, a few great newspaper proprietors, their wives and mothers and
daughters who wield the scepter of invitation. It is at once a great circle of
talk and a real social set. But its importance comes from the fact that here at
last the distinction between public and private affairs practically disappears.
The private affairs of this set are public matters, and public matters are its
private, often its family affairs. The confinements of Margot Asquith like
the confinements of royalty are, as the philosophers say, in much the same
universe of discourse as a tariff bill or a parliamentary debate.
There are large areas of governments in which this social set is not
interested, and in America, at least, it has exercised only a fluctuating
control over the national government. But its power in foreign affairs is
always very great, and in war time its prestige is enormously enhanced.
That is natural enough because these cosmopolitans have a contact with the
outer world that most people do not possess. They have dined with each
other in the capitals, and their sense of national honor is no mere
abstraction; it is a concrete experience of being snubbed or approved by
their friends. To Dr. Kennicott of Gopher Prairie it matters mighty little
what Winston thinks and a great deal what Ezra Stowbody thinks, but to
Mrs. Mingott with a daughter married to the Earl of Swithin it matters a lot
when she visits her daughter, or entertains Winston himself. Dr. Kennicott
and Mrs. Mingott are both socially sensitive, but Mrs. Mingott is sensitive
to a social set that governs the world, while Dr. Kennicott's social set
governs only in Gopher Prairie. But in matters that effect the larger
relationships of the Great Society, Dr. Kennicott will often be found holding
what he thinks is purely his own opinion, though, as a matter of fact, it has
trickled down to Gopher Prairie from High Society, transmuted on its
passage through the provincial social sets.

It is no part of our inquiry to attempt an account of the social tissue. We
need only fix in mind how big is the part played by the social set in our
spiritual contact with the world, how it tends to fix what is admissible, and
to determine how it shall be judged. Affairs within its immediate
competence each set more or less determines for itself. Above all it
determines the detailed administration of the judgment. But the judgment
itself is formed on patterns27 that may be inherited from the past,
transmitted or imitated from other social sets. The highest social set consists
of those who embody the leadership of the Great Society. As against almost
every other social set where the bulk of the opinions are first hand only
about local affairs, in this Highest Society the big decisions of war and
peace, of social strategy and the ultimate distribution of political power, are
intimate experiences within a circle of what, potentially at least, are
personal acquaintances.
Since position and contact play so big a part in determining what can be
seen, heard, read, and experienced, as well as what it is permissible to see,
hear, read, and know, it is no wonder that moral judgment is so much more
common than constructive thought. Yet in truly effective thinking the prime
necessity is to liquidate judgments, regain an innocent eye, disentangle
feelings, be curious and open-hearted. Man's history being what it is,
political opinion on the scale of the Great Society requires an amount of
selfless equanimity rarely attainable by any one for any length of time. We
are concerned in public affairs, but immersed in our private ones. The time
and attention are limited that we can spare for the labor of not taking
opinions for granted, and we are subject to constant interruption.
22. George Creel, How We Advertised America.
23. Hence the wisdom of taking Yap seriously.
24. W. Trotter, Instincts of the Herd in War and Peace.
25. Edith Wharton, The Age of Innocence.
26. Ross, Social Psychology, Ch. IX, X, XI.
27. Cf. Part III
Chapter IV.
Time and Attention
Table of Contents

Naturally it is possible to make a rough estimate only of the amount of
attention people give each day to informing themselves about public affairs.
Yet it is interesting that three estimates that I have examined agree tolerably
well, though they were made at different times, in different places, and by
different methods.28
A questionnaire was sent by Hotchkiss and Franken to 1761 men and
women college students in New York City, and answers came from all but a
few. Scott used a questionnaire on four thousand prominent business and
professional men in Chicago and received replies from twenty-three
hundred. Between seventy and seventy-five percent of all those who replied
to either inquiry thought they spent a quarter of an hour a day reading
newspapers. Only four percent of the Chicago group guessed at less than
this and twenty-five percent guessed at more. Among the New Yorkers a
little over eight percent figured their newspaper reading at less than fifteen
minutes, and seventeen and a half at more.
Very few people have an accurate idea of fifteen minutes, so the figures
are not to be taken literally. Moreover, business men, professional people,
and college students are most of them liable to a curious little bias against
appearing to spend too much time over the newspapers, and perhaps also to
a faint suspicion of a desire to be known as rapid readers. All that the
figures can justly be taken to mean is that over three quarters of those in the
selected groups rate rather low the attention they give to printed news of the
outer world.
These time estimates are fairly well confirmed by a test which is less
subjective. Scott asked his Chicagoans how many papers they read each
day, and was told that
14 percent read but one paper
46 " " two papers
21 " " three papers
10 " " four papers
3 " " five papers
2 " " six papers
3 " " all the papers (eight at the time of this inquiry).
The two- and three-paper readers are sixty-seven percent, which comes
fairly close to the seventy-one percent in Scott's group who rate themselves
at fifteen minutes a day. The omnivorous readers of from four to eight
papers coincide roughly with the twenty-five percent who rated themselves
at more than fifteen minutes.

It is still more difficult to guess how the time is distributed. The college
students were asked to name "the five features which interest you most."
Just under twenty percent voted for "general news," just under fifteen for
editorials, just under twelve for "politics," a little over eight for finance, not
two years after the armistice a little over six for foreign news, three and a
half for local, nearly three for business, and a quarter of one percent for
news about "labor." A scattering said they were most interested in sports,
special articles, the theatre, advertisements, cartoons, book reviews,
"accuracy," music, "ethical tone," society, brevity, art, stories, shipping,
school news, "current news," print. Disregarding these, about sixty-seven
and a half percent picked as the most interesting features news and opinion
that dealt with public affairs.
This was a mixed college group. The girls professed greater interest
than the boys in general news, foreign news, local news, politics, editorials,
the theatre, music, art, stories, cartoons, advertisements, and "ethical tone."
The boys on the other hand were more absorbed in finance, sports, business
page, "accuracy" and "brevity." These discriminations correspond a little
too closely with the ideals of what is cultured and moral, manly and
decisive, not to make one suspect the utter objectivity of the replies.
Yet they agree fairly well with the replies of Scott's Chicago business
and professional men. They were asked, not what features interested them
most, but why they preferred one newspaper to another. Nearly seventy-one
percent based their conscious preference on local news (17.8%), or political
(15.8%) or financial (11.3%), or foreign (9.5%), or general (7.2%), or
editorials (9%). The other thirty percent decided on grounds not connected
with public affairs. They ranged from not quite seven who decided for
ethical tone, down to one twentieth of one percent who cared most about
humor.
How do these preferences correspond with the space given by
newspapers to various subjects? Unfortunately there are no data collected
on this point for the newspapers read by the Chicago and New York groups
at the time the questionnaires were made. But there is an interesting
analysis made over twenty years ago by Wilcox. He studied one hundred
and ten newspapers in fourteen large cities, and classified the subject matter
of over nine thousand columns.
Averaged for the whole country the various newspaper matter was
found to fill:
{ (a) War News 17.9
{ { Foreign 1.2
{ (b) General " 21.8 { Politics 6.4
I. News 55.3 { { Crime 3.1
{ { Misc. 11.1
{
{ { Business 8.2
{ (c) Special " 15.6 { Sport 5.1
{ Society 2.3
II. Illustrations 3.1
III. Literature 2.4 { (a) Editorials 3.9
IV. Opinion 7.1 { (b) Letters & Exchange 3.2
V. Advertisements 32.1
In order to bring this table into a fair comparison, it is necessary to
exclude the space given to advertisements, and recompute the percentages.
For the advertisements occupied only an infinitesimal part of the conscious
preference of the Chicago group or the college group. I think this is
justifiable for our purposes because the press prints what advertisements it
can get,29 whereas the rest of the paper is designed to the taste of its
readers. The table would then read:
{War News 26.4-
{ {Foreign 1.8-
I. News 81.4+{General News 32.0+ {Political 9.4+
{ {Crime 4.6-
{ {Misc. 16.3+
{
{ {Business 12.1-
{Special " 23.0- {Sporting 7.5+
{Society 3.3-
II. Illustrations 4.6-
III. Literature 3.5+
IV. Opinion 10.5- {Editorials 5.8-
{Letters 4.7+
In this revised table if you add up the items which may be supposed to
deal with public affairs, that is to say war, foreign, political, miscellaneous,
business news, and opinion, you find a total of 76.5% of the edited space
devoted in 1900 to the 70.6% of reasons given by Chicago business men in
1916 for preferring a particular newspaper, and to the five features which
most interested 67.5% of the New York College students in 1920.
This would seem to show that the tastes of business men and college
students in big cities to-day still correspond more or less to the averaged
judgments of newspaper editors in big cities twenty years ago. Since that
time the proportion of features to news has undoubtedly increased, and so
has the circulation and the size of newspapers. Therefore, if to-day you
could secure accurate replies from more typical groups than college
students or business and professional men, you would expect to find a
smaller percentage of time devoted to public affairs, as well as a smaller
percentage of space. On the other hand you would expect to find that the
average man spends more than the quarter of an hour on his newspaper, and
that while the percentage of space given to public affairs is less than twenty
years ago the net amount is greater.
No elaborate deductions are to be drawn from these figures. They help
merely to make somewhat more concrete our notions of the effort that goes
day by day into acquiring the data of our opinions. The newspapers are, of
course, not the only means, but they are certainly the principal ones.
Magazines, the public forum, the chautauqua, the church, political
gatherings, trade union meetings, women's clubs, and news serials in the
moving picture houses supplement the press. But taking it all at the most
favorable estimate, the time each day is small when any of us is directly
exposed to information from our unseen environment.
28. July, 1900. D. F. Wilcox, The American Newspaper: A Study in Social Psychology, Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, vol. xvi, p. 56. (The statistical tables are
reproduced in James Edward Rogers, The American Newspaper.)
1916 (?) W. D. Scott, The Psychology of Advertising, pp. 226-248. See also Henry
Foster Adams, Advertising and its Mental Laws, Ch. IV.
1920 Newspaper Reading Habits of College Students, by Prof. George Burton
Hotchkiss and Richard B. Franken, published by the Association of National
Advertisers, Inc., 15 East 26th Street, New York City.
29. Except those which it regards as objectionable, and those which, in rare instances, are crowded
out.
Chapter V.
Speed, Words, and Clearness
Table of Contents

The unseen environment is reported to us chiefly by words. These words
are transmitted by wire or radio from the reporters to the editors who fit
them into print. Telegraphy is expensive, and the facilities are often limited.
Press service news is, therefore, usually coded. Thus a dispatch which
reads,—
"Washington, D. C. June I.—The United States regards the
question of German shipping seized in this country at the
outbreak of hostilities as a closed incident," may pass over
the wires in the following form:
"Washn i. The Uni Stas rgds tq of Ger spg seized in ts cou at
t outbk o hox as a clod incident."30
A news item saying:
"Berlin, June 1, Chancellor Wirth told the Reichstag to-day
in outlining the Government's program that 'restoration and
reconciliation 
would 
be 
the 
keynote 
of 
the 
new
Government's policy.' He added that the Cabinet was
determined disarmament should be carried out loyally and
that disarmament would not be the occasion of the
imposition of further penalties by the Allies."
may be cabled in this form:
"Berlin 1. Chancellor Wirth told t Reichstag tdy in outlining
the gvts pgn tt qn restoration & reconciliation wd b the
keynote f new gvts policy. qj He added ttt cabinet ws dtmd
disarmament sd b carried out loyally & tt disarmament wd n
b. the ocan f imposition of further penalties bi t alis."
In this second item the substance has been culled from a long speech in
a foreign tongue, translated, coded, and then decoded. The operators who
receive the messages transcribe them as they go along, and I am told that a
good operator can write fifteen thousand or even more words per eight hour
day, with a half an hour out for lunch and two ten minute periods for rest.

A few words must often stand for a whole succession of acts, thoughts,
feelings and consequences. We read:
"Washington, Dec. 23—A statement charging Japanese
military authorities with deeds more 'frightful and barbarous'
than anything ever alleged to have occurred in Belgium
during the war was issued here to-day by the Korean
Commission, based, the Commission said, on authentic
reports received by it from Manchuria."
Here eyewitnesses, their accuracy unknown, report to the makers of
'authentic reports'; they in turn transmit these to a commission five thousand
miles away. It prepares a statement, probably much too long for publication,
from which a correspondent culls an item of print three and a half inches
long. The meaning has to be telescoped in such a way as to permit the
reader to judge how much weight to give to the news.
It is doubtful whether a supreme master of style could pack all the
elements of truth that complete justice would demand into a hundred word
account of what had happened in Korea during the course of several
months. For language is by no means a perfect vehicle of meanings. Words,
like currency, are turned over and over again, to evoke one set of images to-
day, another to-morrow. There is no certainty whatever that the same word
will call out exactly the same idea in the reader's mind as it did in the
reporter's. Theoretically, if each fact and each relation had a name that was
unique, and if everyone had agreed on the names, it would be possible to
communicate without misunderstanding. In the exact sciences there is an
approach to this ideal, and that is part of the reason why of all forms of
world-wide cooperation, scientific inquiry is the most effective.
Men command fewer words than they have ideas to express, and
language, as Jean Paul said, is a dictionary of faded metaphors.31 The
journalist addressing half a million readers of whom he has only a dim
picture, the speaker whose words are flashed to remote villages and
overseas, cannot hope that a few phrases will carry the whole burden of
their meaning. "The words of Lloyd George, badly understood and badly
transmitted," said M. Briand to the Chamber of Deputies,32 "seemed to give
the Pan-Germanists the idea that the time had come to start something." A
British Prime Minister, speaking in English to the whole attentive world,
speaks his own meaning in his own words to all kinds of people who will
see their meaning in those words. No matter how rich or subtle—or rather
the more rich and the more subtle that which he has to say, the more his
meaning will suffer as it is sluiced into standard speech and then distributed
again among alien minds.33
Millions of those who are watching him can read hardly at all. Millions
more can read the words but cannot understand them. Of those who can
both read and understand, a good three-quarters we may assume have some
part of half an hour a day to spare for the subject. To them the words so
acquired are the cue for a whole train of ideas on which ultimately a vote of
untold consequences may be based. Necessarily the ideas which we allow
the words we read to evoke form the biggest part of the original data of our
opinions. The world is vast, the situations that concern us are intricate, the
messages are few, the biggest part of opinion must be constructed in the
imagination.
When we use the word "Mexico" what picture does it evoke in a
resident of New York? Likely as not, it is some composite of sand, cactus,
oil wells, greasers, rum-drinking Indians, testy old cavaliers flourishing
whiskers and sovereignty, or perhaps an idyllic peasantry à la Jean Jacques,
assailed by the prospect of smoky industrialism, and fighting for the Rights
of Man. What does the word "Japan" evoke? Is it a vague horde of slant-
eyed yellow men, surrounded by Yellow Perils, picture brides, fans,
Samurai, banzais, art, and cherry blossoms? Or the word "alien"? According
to a group of New England college students, writing in the year 1920, an
alien was the following:34
"A person hostile to this country."
"A person against the government."
"A person who is on the opposite side."
"A native of an unfriendly country."
"A foreigner at war."
"A foreigner who tries to do harm to the country he is in."
"An enemy from a foreign land."
"A person against a country." etc….
Yet the word alien is an unusually exact legal term, far more exact than
words like sovereignty, independence, national honor, rights, defense,
aggression, imperialism, capitalism, socialism, about which we so readily
take sides "for" or "against."

The power to dissociate superficial analogies, attend to differences and
appreciate variety is lucidity of mind. It is a relative faculty. Yet the
differences in lucidity are extensive, say as between a newly born infant and
a botanist examining a flower. To the infant there is precious little
difference between his own toes, his father's watch, the lamp on the table,
the moon in the sky, and a nice bright yellow edition of Guy de
Maupassant. To many a member of the Union League Club there is no
remarkable difference between a Democrat, a Socialist, an anarchist, and a
burglar, while to a highly sophisticated anarchist there is a whole universe
of difference between Bakunin, Tolstoi, and Kropotkin. These examples
show how difficult it might be to secure a sound public opinion about de
Maupassant among babies, or about Democrats in the Union League Club.
A man who merely rides in other people's automobiles may not rise to
finer discrimination than between a Ford, a taxicab, and an automobile. But
let that same man own a car and drive it, let him, as the psychoanalysts
would say, project his libido upon automobiles, and he will describe a
difference in carburetors by looking at the rear end of a car a city block
away. That is why it is often such a relief when the talk turns from "general
topics" to a man's own hobby. It is like turning from the landscape in the
parlor to the ploughed field outdoors. It is a return to the three dimensional
world, after a sojourn in the painter's portrayal of his own emotional
response to his own inattentive memory of what he imagines he ought to
have seen.
We easily identify, says Ferenczi, two only partially similar things:35 the
child more easily than the adult, the primitive or arrested mind more readily
than the mature. As it first appears in the child, consciousness seems to be
an unmanageable mixture of sensations. The child has no sense of time, and
almost none of space, it reaches for the chandelier with the same confidence
that it reaches for its mother's breast, and at first with almost the same
expectation. Only very gradually does function define itself. To complete
inexperience this is a coherent and undifferentiated world, in which, as
someone has said of a school of philosophers, all facts are born free and
equal. Those facts which belong together in the world have not yet been
separated from those which happen to lie side by side in the stream of
consciousness.
At first, says Ferenczi, the baby gets some of the things it wants by
crying for them. This is "the period of magical hallucinatory omnipotence."
In its second phase the child points to the things it wants, and they are given
to it. "Omnipotence by the help of magic gestures." Later, the child learns to
talk, asks for what it wishes, and is partially successful. "The period of
magic thoughts and magic words." Each phase may persist for certain
situations, though overlaid and only visible at times, as for example, in the
little harmless superstitions from which few of us are wholly free. In each
phase, partial success tends to confirm that way of acting, while failure
tends to stimulate the development of another. Many individuals, parties,
and even nations, rarely appear to transcend the magical organization of
experience. But in the more advanced sections of the most advanced
peoples, trial and error after repeated failure has led to the invention of a
new principle. The moon, they learn, is not moved by baying at it. Crops are
not raised from the soil by spring festivals or Republican majorities, but by
sunlight, moisture, seeds, fertilizer, and cultivation.36
Allowing for the purely schematic value of Ferenczi's categories of
response, the quality which we note as critical is the power to discriminate
among crude perceptions and vague analogies. This power has been studied
under laboratory conditions.37 The Zurich Association Studies indicate
clearly that slight mental fatigue, an inner disturbance of attention or an
external distraction, tend to "flatten" the quality of the response. An
example of the very "flat" type is the clang association (cat-hat), a reaction
to the sound and not to the sense of the stimulant word. One test, for
example, shows a 9% increase of clang in the second series of a hundred
reactions. Now the clang is almost a repetition, a very primitive form of
analogy.

If the comparatively simple conditions of a laboratory can so readily flatten
out discrimination, what must be the effect of city life? In the laboratory the
fatigue is slight enough, the distraction rather trivial. Both are balanced in
measure by the subject's interest and self-consciousness. Yet if the beat of a
metronome will depress intelligence, what do eight or twelve hours of
noise, odor, and heat in a factory, or day upon day among chattering
typewriters and telephone bells and slamming doors, do to the political
judgments formed on the basis of newspapers read in street-cars and
subways? Can anything be heard in the hubbub that does not shriek, or be
seen in the general glare that does not flash like an electric sign? The life of
the city dweller lacks solitude, silence, ease. The nights are noisy and
ablaze. The people of a big city are assaulted by incessant sound, now
violent and jagged, now falling into unfinished rhythms, but endless and
remorseless. Under modern industrialism thought goes on in a bath of noise.
If its discriminations are often flat and foolish, here at least is some small
part of the reason. The sovereign people determines life and death and
happiness under conditions where experience and experiment alike show
thought to be most difficult. "The intolerable burden of thought" is a burden
when the conditions make it burdensome. It is no burden when the
conditions are favorable. It is as exhilarating to think as it is to dance, and
just as natural.
Every man whose business it is to think knows that he must for part of
the day create about himself a pool of silence. But in that helter-skelter
which we flatter by the name of civilization, the citizen performs the
perilous business of government under the worst possible conditions. A
faint recognition of this truth inspires the movement for a shorter work day,
for longer vacations, for light, air, order, sunlight and dignity in factories
and offices. But if the intellectual quality of our life is to be improved that is
only the merest beginning. So long as so many jobs are an endless and, for
the worker, an aimless routine, a kind of automatism using one set of
muscles in one monotonous pattern, his whole life will tend towards an
automatism in which nothing is particularly to be distinguished from
anything else unless it is announced with a thunderclap. So long as he is
physically imprisoned in crowds by day and even by night his attention will
flicker and relax. It will not hold fast and define clearly where he is the
victim of all sorts of pother, in a home which needs to be ventilated of its
welter of drudgery, shrieking children, raucous assertions, indigestible food,
bad air, and suffocating ornament.
Occasionally perhaps we enter a building which is composed and
spacious; we go to a theatre where modern stagecraft has cut away
distraction, or go to sea, or into a quiet place, and we remember how
cluttered, how capricious, how superfluous and clamorous is the ordinary
urban life of our time. We learn to understand why our addled minds seize
so little with precision, why they are caught up and tossed about in a kind of
tarantella by headlines and catch-words, why so often they cannot tell
things apart or discern identity in apparent differences.

But this external disorder is complicated further by internal. Experiment
shows that the speed, the accuracy, and the intellectual quality of
association is deranged by what we are taught to call emotional conflicts.
Measured in fifths of a second, a series of a hundred stimuli containing both
neutral and hot words may show a variation as between 5 and 32 or even a
total failure to respond at all.38 Obviously our public opinion is in
intermittent contact with complexes of all sorts; with ambition and
economic interest, personal animosity, racial prejudice, class feeling and
what not. They distort our reading, our thinking, our talking and our
behavior in a great variety of ways.
And finally since opinions do not stop at the normal members of
society, since for the purposes of an election, a propaganda, a following,
numbers constitute power, the quality of attention is still further depressed.
The mass of absolutely illiterate, of feeble-minded, grossly neurotic,
undernourished and frustrated individuals, is very considerable, much more
considerable there is reason to think than we generally suppose. Thus a
wide popular appeal is circulated among persons who are mentally children
or barbarians, people whose lives are a morass of entanglements, people
whose vitality is exhausted, shut-in people, and people whose experience
has comprehended no factor in the problem under discussion. The stream of
public opinion is stopped by them in little eddies of misunderstanding,
where it is discolored with prejudice and far fetched analogy.
A "broad appeal" takes account of the quality of association, and is
made to those susceptibilities which are widely distributed. A "narrow" or a
"special" appeal is one made to those susceptibilities which are uncommon.
But the same individual may respond with very different quality to different
stimuli, or to the same stimuli at different times. Human susceptibilities are
like an alpine country. There are isolated peaks, there are extensive but
separated plateaus, and there are deeper strata which are quite continuous
for nearly all mankind. Thus the individuals whose susceptibilities reach the
rarefied atmosphere of those peaks where there exists an exquisitive
difference between Frege and Peano, or between Sassetta's earlier and later
periods, may be good stanch Republicans at another level of appeal, and
when they are starving and afraid, indistinguishable from any other starving
and frightened person. No wonder that the magazines with the large
circulations prefer the face of a pretty girl to any other trade mark, a face,
pretty enough to be alluring, but innocent enough to be acceptable. For the
"psychic level" on which the stimulus acts determines whether the public is
to be potentially a large or a small one.

Thus the environment with which our public opinions deal is refracted in
many ways, by censorship and privacy at the source, by physical and social
barriers at the other end, by scanty attention, by the poverty of language, by
distraction, by unconscious constellations of feeling, by wear and tear,
violence, monotony. These limitations upon our access to that environment
combine with the obscurity and complexity of the facts themselves to
thwart clearness and justice of perception, to substitute misleading fictions
for workable ideas, and to deprive us of adequate checks upon those who
consciously strive to mislead.
30. Phillip's Code.
31. Cited by White, Mechanisms of Character Formation.
32. Special Cable to The New York Times, May 25, 1921, by Edwin L, James.
33. In May of 1921, relations between England and France were strained by the insurrection of M.
Korfanty in Upper Silesia. The London Correspondence of the Manchester Guardian (May 20,
1921), contained the following item:
"The Franco-English Exchange in Words.
"In quarters well acquainted with French ways and character I find a tendency to think
that undue sensibility has been shown by our press and public opinion in the lively
and at times intemperate language of the French press through the present crisis. The
point was put to me by a well-informed neutral observer in the following manner.
"Words, like money, are tokens of value. They represent meaning, therefore, and just
as money, their representative value goes up and down. The French word 'etonnant'
was used by Bossuet with a terrible weight of meaning which it has lost to-day. A
similar thing can be observed with the English word 'awful.' Some nations
constitutionally tend to understate, others to overstate. What the British Tommy called
an unhealthy place could only be described by an Italian soldier by means of a rich
vocabulary aided with an exuberant mimicry. Nations that understate keep their word-
currency sound. Nations that overstate suffer from inflation in their language.
"Expressions such as 'a distinguished scholar,' 'a clever writer,' must be translated into
French as 'a great savant,' 'an exquisite master.' It is a mere matter of exchange, just as
in France one pound pays 46 francs, and yet one knows that that does not increase its
value at home. Englishmen reading the French press should endeavour to work out a
mental operation similar to that of the banker who puts back francs into pounds, and
not forget in so doing that while in normal times the change was 25 it is now 46 on
account of the war. For there is a war fluctuation on word exchanges as well as on
money exchanges.
"The argument, one hopes, works both ways, and Frenchmen do not fail to realize that
there is as much value behind English reticence as behind their own exuberance of
expression."
34. The New Republic: December 29, 1920, p. 142.
35. Internat. Zeitschr, f. Arztl. Psychoanalyse, 1913. Translated and republished by Dr. Ernest Jones
in S. Ferenczi, Contributions to Psychoanalysis, Ch. VIII, Stages in the Development of the
Sense of Reality.
36. Ferenczi, being a pathologist, does not describe this maturer period where experience is
organized as equations, the phase of realism on the basis of science.
37. See, for example, Diagnostische Assoziation Studien, conducted at the Psychiatric University
Clinic in Zurich under the direction of Dr. C. G. Jung. These tests were carried on principally
under the so-called Krapelin-Aschaffenburg classification. They show reaction time, classify
response to the stimulant word as inner, outer, and clang, show separate results for the first and
second hundred words, for reaction time and reaction quality when the subject is distracted by
holding an idea in mind, or when he replies while beating time with a metronome. Some of the
results are summarized in Jung, Analytical Psychology, Ch. II, transl. by Dr. Constance E. Long.
38. Jung, Clark Lectures.
Part III.
Stereotypes
Table of Contents
Chapter VI.
Stereotypes
Table of Contents

Each of us lives and works on a small part of the earth's surface, moves in a
small circle, and of these acquaintances knows only a few intimately. Of
any public event that has wide effects we see at best only a phase and an
aspect. This is as true of the eminent insiders who draft treaties, make laws,
and issue orders, as it is of those who have treaties framed for them, laws
promulgated to them, orders given at them. Inevitably our opinions cover a
bigger space, a longer reach of time, a greater number of things, than we
can directly observe. They have, therefore, to be pieced together out of what
others have reported and what we can imagine.
Yet even the eyewitness does not bring back a naéve picture of the
scene.39 For experience seems to show that he himself brings something to
the scene which later he takes away from it, that oftener than not what he
imagines to be the account of an event is really a transfiguration of it. Few
facts in consciousness seem to be merely given. Most facts in consciousness
seem to be partly made. A report is the joint product of the knower and
known, in which the role of the observer is always selective and usually
creative. The facts we see depend on where we are placed, and the habits of
our eyes.
An unfamiliar scene is like the baby's world, "one great, blooming,
buzzing confusion."40 This is the way, says Mr. John Dewey,41 that any new
thing strikes an adult, so far as the thing is really new and strange. "Foreign
languages that we do not understand always seem jibberings, babblings, in
which it is impossible to fix a definite, clear-cut, individualized group of
sounds. The countryman in the crowded street, the landlubber at sea, the
ignoramus in sport at a contest between experts in a complicated game, are
further instances. Put an inexperienced man in a factory, and at first the
work seems to him a meaningless medley. All strangers of another race
proverbially look alike to the visiting stranger. Only gross differences of
size or color are perceived by an outsider in a flock of sheep, each of which
is perfectly individualized to the shepherd. A diffusive blur and an
indiscriminately shifting suction characterize what we do not understand.
The problem of the acquisition of meaning by things, or (stated in another
way) of forming habits of simple apprehension, is thus the problem of
introducing (1) definiteness and distinction and (2) consistency or stability
of meaning into what is otherwise vague and wavering."
But the kind of definiteness and consistency introduced depends upon
who introduces them. In a later passage42 Dewey gives an example of how
differently an experienced layman and a chemist might define the word
metal. "Smoothness, hardness, glossiness, and brilliancy, heavy weight for
its size … the serviceable properties of capacity for being hammered and
pulled without breaking, of being softened by heat and hardened by cold, of
retaining the shape and form given, of resistance to pressure and decay,
would probably be included" in the layman's definition. But the chemist
would likely as not ignore these esthetic and utilitarian qualities, and define
a metal as "any chemical element that enters into combination with oxygen
so as to form a base."
For the most part we do not first see, and then define, we define first
and then see. In the great blooming, buzzing confusion of the outer world
we pick out what our culture has already defined for us, and we tend to
perceive that which we have picked out in the form stereotyped for us by
our culture. Of the great men who assembled at Paris to settle the affairs of
mankind, how many were there who were able to see much of the Europe
about them, rather than their commitments about Europe? Could anyone
have penetrated the mind of M. Clemenceau, would he have found there
images of the Europe of 1919, or a great sediment of stereotyped ideas
accumulated and hardened in a long and pugnacious existence? Did he see
the Germans of 1919, or the German type as he had learned to see it since
1871? He saw the type, and among the reports that came to him from
Germany, he took to heart those reports, and, it seems, those only, which
fitted the type that was in his mind. If a junker blustered, that was an
authentic German; if a labor leader confessed the guilt of the empire, he
was not an authentic German.
At a Congress of Psychology in Göttingen an interesting experiment
was
made with a crowd of presumably trained observers.43
"Not far from the hall in which the Congress was sitting there was a
public fete with a masked ball. Suddenly the door of the hall was thrown
open and a clown rushed in madly pursued by a negro, revolver in hand.
They stopped in the middle of the room fighting; the clown fell, the negro
leapt upon him, fired, and then both rushed out of the hall. The whole
incident hardly lasted twenty seconds.
"The President asked those present to write immediately a report since
there was sure to be a judicial inquiry. Forty reports were sent in. Only one
had less than 20% of mistakes in regard to the principal facts; fourteen had
20% to 40% of mistakes; twelve from 40% to 50%; thirteen more than
50%. Moreover in twenty-four accounts 10% of the details were pure
inventions and this proportion was exceeded in ten accounts and diminished
in six. Briefly a quarter of the accounts were false.
"It goes without saying that the whole scene had been arranged and
even photographed in advance. The ten false reports may then be relegated
to the category of tales and legends; twenty-four accounts are half
legendary, and six have a value approximating to exact evidence."
Thus out of forty trained observers writing a responsible account of a
scene that had just happened before their eyes, more than a majority saw a
scene that had not taken place. What then did they see? One would suppose
it was easier to tell what had occurred, than to invent something which had
not occurred. They saw their stereotype of such a brawl. All of them had in
the course of their lives acquired a series of images of brawls, and these
images flickered before their eyes. In one man these images displaced less
than 20% of the actual scene, in thirteen men more than half. In thirty-four
out of the forty observers the stereotypes preempted at least one-tenth of the
scene.
A distinguished art critic has said44 that "what with the almost
numberless shapes assumed by an object. … What with our insensitiveness
and inattention, things scarcely would have for us features and outlines so
determined and clear that we could recall them at will, but for the
stereotyped shapes art has lent them." The truth is even broader than that,
for the stereotyped shapes lent to the world come not merely from art, in the
sense of painting and sculpture and literature, but from our moral codes and
our social philosophies and our political agitations as well. Substitute in the
following passage of Mr. Berenson's the words 'politics,' 'business,' and
'society,' for the word 'art' and the sentences will be no less true: "… unless
years devoted to the study of all schools of art have taught us also to see
with our own eyes, we soon fall into the habit of moulding whatever we
look at into the forms borrowed from the one art with which we are
acquainted. There is our standard of artistic reality. Let anyone give us
shapes and colors which we cannot instantly match in our paltry stock of
hackneyed forms and tints, and we shake our heads at his failure to
reproduce things as we know they certainly are, or we accuse him of
insincerity."
Mr. Berenson speaks of our displeasure when a painter "does not
visualize objects exactly as we do," and of the difficulty of appreciating the
art of the Middle Ages because since then "our manner of visualizing forms
has changed in a thousand ways."45 He goes on to show how in regard to
the human figure we have been taught to see what we do see. "Created by
Donatello and Masaccio, and sanctioned by the Humanists, the new canon
of the human figure, the new cast of features … presented to the ruling
classes of that time the type of human being most likely to win the day in
the combat of human forces… Who had the power to break through this
new standard of vision and, out of the chaos of things, to select shapes more
definitely expressive of reality than those fixed by men of genius? No one
had such power. People had perforce to see things in that way and in no
other, and to see only the shapes depicted, to love only the ideals
presented…."46

If we cannot fully understand the acts of other people, until we know what
they think they know, then in order to do justice we have to appraise not
only the information which has been at their disposal, but the minds through
which they have filtered it. For the accepted types, the current patterns, the
standard versions, intercept information on its way to consciousness.
Americanization, for example, is superficially at least the substitution of
American for European stereotypes. Thus the peasant who might see his
landlord as if he were the lord of the manor, his employer as he saw the
local magnate, is taught by Americanization to see the landlord and
employer according to American standards. This constitutes a change of
mind, which is, in effect, when the inoculation succeeds, a change of vision.
His eye sees differently. One kindly gentlewoman has confessed that the
stereotypes are of such overweening importance, that when hers are not
indulged, she at least is unable to accept the brotherhood of man and the
fatherhood of God: "we are strangely affected by the clothes we wear.
Garments create a mental and social atmosphere. What can be hoped for the
Americanism of a man who insists on employing a London tailor? One's
very food affects his Americanism. What kind of American consciousness
can grow in the atmosphere of sauerkraut and Limburger cheese? Or what
can you expect of the Americanism of the man whose breath always reeks
of garlic?"47
This lady might well have been the patron of a pageant which a friend
of mine once attended. It was called the Melting Pot, and it was given on
the Fourth of July in an automobile town where many foreign-born workers
are employed. In the center of the baseball park at second base stood a huge
wooden and canvas pot. There were flights of steps up to the rim on two
sides. After the audience had settled itself, and the band had played, a
procession came through an opening at one side of the field. It was made up
of men of all the foreign nationalities employed in the factories. They wore
their native costumes, they were singing their national songs; they danced
their folk dances, and carried the banners of all Europe. The master of
ceremonies was the principal of the grade school dressed as Uncle Sam. He
led them to the pot. He directed them up the steps to the rim, and inside. He
called them out again on the other side. They came, dressed in derby hats,
coats, pants, vest, stiff collar and polka-dot tie, undoubtedly, said my friend,
each with an Eversharp pencil in his pocket, and all singing the Star-
Spangled Banner.
To the promoters of this pageant, and probably to most of the actors, it
seemed as if they had managed to express the most intimate difficulty to
friendly association between the older peoples of America and the newer.
The contradiction of their stereotypes interfered with the full recognition of
their common humanity. The people who change their names know this.
They mean to change themselves, and the attitude of strangers toward them.
There is, of course, some connection between the scene outside and the
mind through which we watch it, just as there are some long-haired men
and short-haired women in radical gatherings. But to the hurried observer a
slight connection is enough. If there are two bobbed heads and four beards
in the audience, it will be a bobbed and bearded audience to the reporter
who knows beforehand that such gatherings are composed of people with
these tastes in the management of their hair. There is a connection between
our vision and the facts, but it is often a strange connection. A man has
rarely looked at a landscape, let us say, except to examine its possibilities
for division into building lots, but he has seen a number of landscapes
hanging in the parlor. And from them he has learned to think of a landscape
as a rosy sunset, or as a country road with a church steeple and a silver
moon. One day he goes to the country, and for hours he does not see a
single landscape. Then the sun goes down looking rosy. At once he
recognizes a landscape and exclaims that it is beautiful. But two days later,
when he tries to recall what he saw, the odds are that he will remember
chiefly some landscape in a parlor.
Unless he has been drunk or dreaming or insane he did see a sunset, but
he saw in it, and above all remembers from it, more of what the oil painting
taught him to observe, than what an impressionist painter, for example, or a
cultivated Japanese would have seen and taken away with him. And the
Japanese and the painter in turn will have seen and remembered more of the
form they had learned, unless they happen to be the very rare people who
find fresh sight for mankind. In untrained observation we pick recognizable
signs out of the environment. The signs stand for ideas, and these ideas we
fill out with our stock of images. We do not so much see this man and that
sunset; rather we notice that the thing is man or sunset, and then see chiefly
what our mind is already full of on those subjects.

There is economy in this. For the attempt to see all things freshly and in
detail, rather than as types and generalities, is exhausting, and among busy
affairs practically out of the question. In a circle of friends, and in relation
to close associates or competitors, there is no shortcut through, and no
substitute for, an individualized understanding. Those whom we love and
admire most are the men and women whose consciousness is peopled
thickly with persons rather than with types, who know us rather than the
classification into which we might fit. For even without phrasing it to
ourselves, we feel intuitively that all classification is in relation to some
purpose not necessarily our own; that between two human beings no
association has final dignity in which each does not take the other as an end
in himself. There is a taint on any contact between two people which does
not affirm as an axiom the personal inviolability of both.
But modern life is hurried and multifarious, above all physical distance
separates men who are often in vital contact with each other, such as
employer and employee, official and voter. There is neither time nor
opportunity for intimate acquaintance. Instead we notice a trait which marks
a well known type, and fill in the rest of the picture by means of the
stereotypes we carry about in our heads. He is an agitator. That much we
notice, or are told. Well, an agitator is this sort of person, and so he is this
sort of person. He is an intellectual. He is a plutocrat. He is a foreigner. He
is a "South European." He is from Back Bay. He is a Harvard Man. How
different from the statement: he is a Yale Man. He is a regular fellow. He is
a West Pointer. He is an old army sergeant. He is a Greenwich Villager:
what don't we know about him then, and about her? He is an international
banker. He is from Main Street.
The subtlest and most pervasive of all influences ere those which create
and maintain the repertory of stereotypes. We are told about the world
before we see it. We imagine most things before we experience them. And
those preconceptions, unless education has made us acutely aware, govern
deeply the whole process of perception. They mark out certain objects as
familiar or strange, emphasizing the difference, so that the slightly familiar
is seen as very familiar, and the somewhat strange as sharply alien. They are
aroused by small signs, which may vary from a true index to a vague
analogy. Aroused, they flood fresh vision with older images, and project
into the world what has been resurrected in memory. Were there no practical
uniformities in the environment, there would be no economy and only error
in the human habit of accepting foresight for sight. But there are
uniformities sufficiently accurate, and the need of economizing attention is
so inevitable, that the abandonment of all stereotypes for a wholly innocent
approach to experience would impoverish human life.
What matters is the character of the stereotypes, and the gullibility with
which we employ them. And these in the end depend upon those inclusive
patterns which constitute our philosophy of life. If in that philosophy we
assume that the world is codified according to a code which we possess, we
are likely to make our reports of what is going on describe a world run by
our code. But if our philosophy tells us that each man is only a small part of
the world, that his intelligence catches at best only phases and aspects in a
coarse net of ideas, then, when we use our stereotypes, we tend to know that
they are only stereotypes, to hold them lightly, to modify them gladly. We
tend, also, to realize more and more clearly when our ideas started, where
they started, how they came to us, why we accepted them. All useful history
is antiseptic in this fashion. It enables us to know what fairy tale, what
school book, what tradition, what novel, play, picture, phrase, planted one
preconception in this mind, another in that mind.

Those who wish to censor art do not at least underestimate this influence.
They generally misunderstand it, and almost always they are absurdly bent
on preventing other people from discovering anything not sanctioned by
them. But at any rate, like Plato in his argument about the poets, they feel
vaguely that the types acquired through fiction tend to be imposed on
reality. Thus there can be little doubt that the moving picture is steadily
building up imagery which is then evoked by the words people read in their
newspapers. In the whole experience of the race there has been no aid to
visualization comparable to the cinema. If a Florentine wished to visualize
the saints, he could go to the frescoes in his church, where he might see a
vision of saints standardized for his time by Giotto. If an Athenian wished
to visualize the gods he went to the temples. But the number of objects
which were pictured was not great. And in the East, where the spirit of the
second commandment was widely accepted, the portraiture of concrete
things was even more meager, and for that reason perhaps the faculty of
practical decision was by so much reduced. In the western world, however,
during the last few centuries there has been an enormous increase in the
volume and scope of secular description, the word picture, the narrative, the
illustrated narrative, and finally the moving picture and, perhaps, the talking
picture.
Photographs have the kind of authority over imagination to-day, which
the printed word had yesterday, and the spoken word before that. They seem
utterly real. They come, we imagine, directly to us without human
meddling, and they are the most effortless food for the mind conceivable.
Any description in words, or even any inert picture, requires an effort of
memory before a picture exists in the mind. But on the screen the whole
process of observing, describing, reporting, and then imagining, has been
accomplished for you. Without more trouble than is needed to stay awake
the result which your imagination is always aiming at is reeled off on the
screen. The shadowy idea becomes vivid; your hazy notion, let us say, of
the Ku Klux Klan, thanks to Mr. Griffiths, takes vivid shape when you see
the Birth of a Nation. Historically it may be the wrong shape, morally it
may be a pernicious shape, but it is a shape, and I doubt whether anyone
who has seen the film and does not know more about the Ku Klux Klan
than Mr. Griffiths, will ever hear the name again without seeing those white
horsemen.

And so when we speak of the mind of a group of people, of the French
mind, the militarist mind, the bolshevik mind, we are liable to serious
confusion unless we agree to separate the instinctive equipment from the
stereotypes, the patterns, and the formulae which play so decisive a part in
building up the mental world to which the native character is adapted and
responds. Failure to make this distinction accounts for oceans of loose talk
about collective minds, national souls, and race psychology. To be sure a
stereotype may be so consistently and authoritatively transmitted in each
generation from parent to child that it seems almost like a biological fact. In
some respects, we may indeed have become, as Mr. Wallas says,48
biologically parasitic upon our social heritage. But certainly there is not the
least scientific evidence which would enable anyone to argue that men are
born with the political habits of the country in which they are born. In so far
as political habits are alike in a nation, the first places to look for an
explanation are the nursery, the school, the church, not in that limbo
inhabited by Group Minds and National Souls. Until you have thoroughly
failed to see tradition being handed on from parents, teachers, priests, and
uncles, it is a solecism of the worst order to ascribe political differences to
the germ plasm.
It is possible to generalize tentatively and with a decent humility about
comparative differences within the same category of education and
experience. Yet even this is a tricky enterprise. For almost no two
experiences are exactly alike, not even of two children in the same
household. The older son never does have the experience of being the
younger. And therefore, until we are able to discount the difference in
nurture, we must withhold judgment about differences of nature. As well
judge the productivity of two soils by comparing their yield before you
know which is in Labrador and which in Iowa, whether they have been
cultivated and enriched, exhausted, or allowed to run wild.
39. E. g. cf. Edmond Locard, L'Enquête Criminelle et les Méthodes Scientifiques. A great deal of
interesting material has been gathered in late years on the credibility of the witness, which
shows, as an able reviewer of Dr. Locard's book says in The Times (London) Literary
Supplement (August 18, 1921), that credibility varies as to classes of witnesses and classes of
events, and also as to type of perception. Thus, perceptions of touch, odor, and taste have low
evidential value. Our hearing is defective and arbitrary when it judges the source and direction
of sound, and in listening to the talk of other people "words which are not heard will be supplied
by the witness in all good faith. He will have a theory of the purport of the conversation, and
will arrange the sounds he heard to fit it." Even visual perceptions are liable to great error, as in
identification, recognition, judgment of distance, estimates of numbers, for example, the size of
a crowd. In the untrained observer, the sense of time is highly variable. All these original
weaknesses are complicated by tricks of memory, and the incessant creative quality of the
imagination. Cf. also Sherrington, The Integrative Action of the Nervous System, pp. 318-327.
The late Professor Hugo Münsterberg wrote a popular book on this subject called On the
Witness Stand.
40. Wm. James, Principles of Psychology, Vol. I, p. 488.
41. John Dewey, How We Think, pg 121.
42. op. cit., p. 133.
43. A. von
Gennep, La formation des légendes, pp. 158-159. Cited F. van
Langenhove, The Growth of a Legend, pp. 120-122.
44. Bernard Berenson, The Central Italian Painters of the Renaissance, pp. 60, et seq.
45. Cf. also his comment on Dante's Visual Images, and his Early Illustrators in The Study and
Criticism of Italian Art (First Series), p. 13. "We cannot help dressing Virgil as a Roman, and
giving him a 'classical profile' and 'statuesque carriage,' but Dante's visual image of Virgil was
probably no less mediaeval, no more based on a critical reconstruction of antiquity, than his
entire conception of the Roman poet. Fourteenth Century illustrators make Virgil look like a
mediaeval scholar, dressed in cap and gown, and there is no reason why Dante's visual image of
him should have been other than this."
46. The Central Italian Painters, pp. 66-67.
47. Cited by Mr. Edward Hale Bierstadt, New Republic, June 1 1921 p. 21.
48. Graham Wallas, Our Social Heritage, p. 17.
Chapter VII.
Stereotypes as Defense
Table of Contents

There is another reason, besides economy of effort, why we so often hold to
our stereotypes when we might pursue a more disinterested vision. The
systems of stereotypes may be the core of our personal tradition, the
defenses of our position in society.
They are an ordered, more or less consistent picture of the world, to
which our habits, our tastes, our capacities, our comforts and our hopes
have adjusted themselves. They may not be a complete picture of the world,
but they are a picture of a possible world to which we are adapted. In that
world people and things have their well-known places, and do certain
expected things. We feel at home there. We fit in. We are members. We
know the way around. There we find the charm of the familiar, the normal,
the dependable; its grooves and shapes are where we are accustomed to find
them. And though we have abandoned much that might have tempted us
before we creased ourselves into that mould, once we are firmly in, it fits as
snugly as an old shoe.
No wonder, then, that any disturbance of the stereotypes seems like an
attack upon the foundations of the universe. It is an attack upon the
foundations of our universe, and, where big things are at stake, we do not
readily admit that there is any distinction between our universe and the
universe. A world which turns out to be one in which those we honor are
unworthy, and those we despise are noble, is nerve-racking. There is
anarchy if our order of precedence is not the only possible one. For if the
meek should indeed inherit the earth, if the first should be last, if those who
are without sin alone may cast a stone, if to Caesar you render only the
things that are Caesar's, then the foundations of self-respect would be
shaken for those who have arranged their lives as if these maxims were not
true. A pattern of stereotypes is not neutral. It is not merely a way of
substituting order for the great blooming, buzzing confusion of reality. It is
not merely a short cut. It is all these things and something more. It is the
guarantee of our self-respect; it is the projection upon the world of our own
sense of our own value, our own position and our own rights. The
stereotypes are, therefore, highly charged with the feelings that are attached
to them. They are the fortress of our tradition, and behind its defenses we
can continue to feel ourselves safe in the position we occupy.

When, for example, in the fourth century B. C., Aristotle wrote his defense
of slavery in the face of increasing skepticism,49 the Athenian slaves were
in great part indistinguishable from free citizens Mr. Zimmern quotes an
amusing passage from the Old Oligarch explaining the good treatment of
the slaves. "Suppose it were legal for a slave to be beaten by a citizen, it
would frequently happen that an Athenian might be mistaken for a slave or
an alien and receive a beating;—since the Athenian people is not better
clothed than the slave or alien, nor in personal appearance is there any
superiority." This absence of distinction would naturally tend to dissolve the
institution. If free men and slaves looked alike, what basis was there for
treating them so differently? It was this confusion which Aristotle set
himself to clear away in the first book of his Politics. With unerring instinct
he understood that to justify slavery he must teach the Greeks a way of
seeing their slaves that comported with the continuance of slavery.
So, said Aristotle, there are beings who are slaves by nature.50 "He then
is by nature formed a slave, who is fitted to become the chattel of another
person, and on that account is so." All this really says is that whoever
happens to be a slave is by nature intended to be one. Logically the
statement is worthless, but in fact it is not a proposition at all, and logic has
nothing to do with it. It is a stereotype, or rather it is part of a stereotype.
The rest follows almost immediately. After asserting that slaves perceive
reason, but are not endowed with the use of it, Aristotle insists that "it is the
intention of nature to make the bodies of slaves and free men different from
each other, that the one should be robust for their necessary purposes, but
the other erect; useless indeed for such servile labours, but fit for civil
life… It is clear then that some men are free by nature, and others are
slaves. …"
If we ask ourselves what is the matter with Aristotle's argument, we find
that he has begun by erecting a great barrier between himself and the facts.
When he had said that those who are slaves are by nature intended to be
slaves, he at one stroke excluded the fatal question whether those particular
men who happened to be slaves were the particular men intended by nature
to be slaves. For that question would have tainted each case of slavery with
doubt. And since the fact of being a slave was not evidence that a man was
destined to be one, no certain test would have remained. Aristotle, therefore,
excluded entirely that destructive doubt. Those who are slaves are intended
to be slaves. Each slave holder was to look upon his chattels as natural
slaves. When his eye had been trained to see them that way, he was to note
as confirmation of their servile character the fact that they performed servile
work, that they were competent to do servile work, and that they had the
muscles to do servile work.
This is the perfect stereotype. Its hallmark is that it precedes the use of
reason; is a form of perception, imposes a certain character on the data of
our senses before the data reach the intelligence. The stereotype is like the
lavender window-panes on Beacon Street, like the door-keeper at a costume
ball who judges whether the guest has an appropriate masquerade. There is
nothing so obdurate to education or to criticism as the stereotype. It stamps
itself upon the evidence in the very act of securing the evidence. That is
why the accounts of returning travellers are often an interesting tale of what
the traveller carried abroad with him on his trip. If he carried chiefly his
appetite, a zeal for tiled bathrooms, a conviction that the Pullman car is the
acme of human comfort, and a belief that it is proper to tip waiters, taxicab
drivers, and barbers, but under no circumstances station agents and ushers,
then his Odyssey will be replete with good meals and bad meals, bathing
adventures, compartment-train escapades, and voracious demands for
money. Or if he is a more serious soul he may while on tour have found
himself at celebrated spots. Having touched base, and cast one furtive
glance at the monument, he buried his head in Baedeker, read every word
through, and moved on to the next celebrated spot; and thus returned with a
compact and orderly impression of Europe, rated one star, or two.
In some measure, stimuli from the outside, especially when they are
printed or spoken words, evoke some part of a system of stereotypes, so that
the actual sensation and the preconception occupy consciousness at the
same time. The two are blended, much as if we looked at red through blue
glasses and saw green. If what we are looking at corresponds successfully
with what we anticipated, the stereotype is reinforced for the future, as it is
in a man who knows in advance that the Japanese are cunning and has the
bad luck to run across two dishonest Japanese.
If the experience contradicts the stereotype, one of two things happens.
If the man is no longer plastic, or if some powerful interest makes it highly
inconvenient to rearrange his stereotypes, he pooh- poohs the contradiction
as an exception that proves the rule, discredits the witness, finds a flaw
somewhere, and manages to forget it. But if he is still curious and open-
minded, the novelty is taken into the picture, and allowed to modify it.
Sometimes, if the incident is striking enough, and if he has felt a general
discomfort with his established scheme, he may be shaken to such an extent
as to distrust all accepted ways of looking at life, and to expect that
normally a thing will not be what it is generally supposed to be. In the
extreme case, especially if he is literary, he may develop a passion for
inverting the moral canon by making Judas, Benedict Arnold, or Caesar
Borgia the hero of his tale.

The role played by the stereotype can be seen in the German tales about
Belgian snipers. Those tales curiously enough were first refuted by an
organization of German Catholic priests known as Pax.51 The existence of
atrocity stories is itself not remarkable, nor that the German people gladly
believed them. But it is remarkable that a great conservative body of
patriotic Germans should have set out as early as August 16, 1914, to
contradict a collection of slanders on the enemy, even though such slanders
were of the utmost value in soothing the troubled conscience of their fellow
countrymen. Why should the Jesuit order in particular have set out to
destroy a fiction so important to the fighting morale of Germany?
I quote from M. van Langenhove's account:
"Hardly had the German armies entered Belgium when strange rumors
began to circulate. They spread from place to place, they were
reproduced by the press, and they soon permeated the whole of
Germany. It was said that the Belgian people, instigated by the clergy,
had intervened perfidiously in the hostilities; had attacked by surprise
isolated detachments; had indicated to the enemy the positions
occupied by the troops; that old men, and even children, had been
guilty of horrible atrocities upon wounded and defenseless German
soldiers, tearing out their eyes and cutting off fingers, nose or ears; that
the priests from their pulpits had exhorted the people to commit these
crimes, promising them as a reward the kingdom of heaven, and had
even taken the lead in this barbarity.
"Public credulity accepted these stories. The highest powers in the
state welcomed them without hesitation and endorsed them with their
authority…
"In this way public opinion in Germany was disturbed and a lively
indignation manifested itself, directed especially against the priests
who were held responsible for the barbarities attributed to the
Belgians… By a natural diversion the anger to which they were a prey
was directed by the Germans against the Catholic clergy generally.
Protestants allowed the old religious hatred to be relighted in their
minds and delivered themselves to attacks against Catholics. A new
Kulturkampf was let loose.
"The Catholics did not delay in taking action against this hostile
attitude." (Italics mine)52
There may have been some sniping. It would be extraordinary if every
angry Belgian had rushed to the library, opened a manual of international
law, and had informed himself whether he had a right to take potshot at the
infernal nuisance tramping through his streets. It would be no less
extraordinary if an army that had never been under fire, did not regard
every bullet that came its way as unauthorized, because it was inconvenient,
and indeed as somehow a violation of the rules of the Kriegspiel, which
then constituted its only experience of war. One can imagine the more
sensitive bent on convincing themselves that the people to whom they were
doing such terrible things must be terrible people. And so the legend may
have been spun until it reached the censors and propagandists, who,
whether they believed it or not, saw its value, and let it loose on the German
civilians. They too were not altogether sorry to find that the people they
were outraging were sub-human. And, above all, since the legend came
from their heroes, they were not only entitled to believe it, they were
unpatriotic if they did not.
But where so much is left to the imagination because the scene of action
is lost in the fog of war, there is no check and no control. The legend of the
ferocious Belgian priests soon tapped an old hatred. For in the minds of
most patriotic protestant Germans, especially of the upper classes, the
picture of Bismarck's victories included a long quarrel with the Roman
Catholics. By a process of association, Belgian priests became priests, and
hatred of Belgians a vent for all their hatreds. These German protestants did
what some Americans did when under the stress of war they created a
compound object of hatred out of the enemy abroad and all their opponents
at home. Against this synthetic enemy, the Hun in Germany and the Hun
within the Gate, they launched all the animosity that was in them.
The Catholic resistance to the atrocity tales was, of course, defensive. It
was aimed at those particular fictions which aroused animosity against all
Catholics, rather than against Belgian Catholics alone. The Informations
Pax, says M. van Langenhove, had only an ecclesiastical bearing and
"confined their attention almost exclusively to the reprehensible acts
attributed to the priests." And yet one cannot help wondering a little about
what was set in motion in the minds of German Catholics by this revelation
of what Bismarck's empire meant in relation to them; and also whether
there was any obscure connection between that knowledge and the fact that
the prominent German politician who was willing in the armistice to sign
the death warrant of the empire was Erzberger,53 the leader of the Catholic
Centre Party.
49. Zimmern: Greek Commonwealth. See his footnote, p. 383.
50. Politics, Bk. 1, Ch. 5.
51. Fernand van Langenhove, The Growth of a Legend. The author is a Belgian sociologist.
52. Op. cit., pp. 5-7
53. Since this was written, Erzberger has been assassinated.
Chapter VIII.
Blind Spots and Their Value
Table of Contents

I have been speaking of stereotypes rather than ideals, because the word
ideal is usually reserved for what we consider the good, the true and the
beautiful. Thus it carries the hint that here is something to be copied or
attained. But our repertory of fixed impressions is wider than that. It
contains ideal swindlers, ideal Tammany politicians, ideal jingoes, ideal
agitators, ideal enemies. Our stereotyped world is not necessarily the world
we should like it to be. It is simply the kind of world we expect it to be. If
events correspond there is a sense of familiarity, and we feel that we are
moving with the movement of events. Our slave must be a slave by nature,
if we are Athenians who wish to have no qualms. If we have told our
friends that we do eighteen holes of golf in 95, we tell them after doing the
course in 110, that we are not ourselves to-day. That is to say, we are not
acquainted with the duffer who foozled fifteen strokes.
Most of us would deal with affairs through a rather haphazard and
shifting assortment of stereotypes, if a comparatively few men in each
generation were not constantly engaged in arranging, standardizing, and
improving them into logical systems, known as the Laws of Political
Economy, the Principles of Politics, and the like. Generally when we write
about culture, tradition, and the group mind, we are thinking of these
systems perfected by men of genius. Now there is no disputing the necessity
of constant study and criticism of these idealized versions, but the historian
of people, the politician, and the publicity man cannot stop there. For what
operates in history is not the systematic idea as a genius formulated it, but
shifting imitations, replicas, counterfeits, analogies, and distortions in
individual minds.
Thus Marxism is not necessarily what Karl Marx wrote in Das Kapital,
but whatever it is that all the warring sects believe, who claim to be the
faithful. From the gospels you cannot deduce the history of Christianity, nor
from the Constitution the political history of America. It is Das Kapital as
conceived, the gospels as preached and the preachment as understood, the
Constitution as interpreted and administered, to which you have to go. For
while there is a reciprocating influence between the standard version and
the current versions, it is these current versions as distributed among men
which affect their behavior.54
"The theory of Relativity," says a critic whose eyelids, like the Lady
Lisa's, are a little weary, "promises to develop into a principle as adequate
to universal application as was the theory of Evolution. This latter theory,
from being a technical biological hypothesis, became an inspiring guide to
workers in practically every branch of knowledge: manners and customs,
morals, religions, philosophies, arts, steam engines, electric tramways—
everything had 'evolved.' 'Evolution' became a very general term; it also
became imprecise until, in many cases, the original, definite meaning of the
word was lost, and the theory it had been evoked to describe was
misunderstood. We are hardy enough to prophesy a similar career and fate
for the theory of Relativity. The technical physical theory, at present
imperfectly understood, will become still more vague and dim. History
repeats itself, and Relativity, like Evolution, after receiving a number of
intelligible but somewhat inaccurate popular expositions in its scientific
aspect, will be launched on a world-conquering career. We suggest that, by
that time, it will probably be called Relativismus. Many of these larger
applications will doubtless be justified; some will be absurd and a
considerable number will, we imagine, reduce to truisms. And the physical
theory, the mere seed of this mighty growth, will become once more the
purely technical concern of scientific men."55
But for such a world-conquering career an idea must correspond,
however imprecisely, to something. Professor Bury shows for how long a
time the idea of progress remained a speculative toy. "It is not easy," he
writes,56 "for a new idea of the speculative order to penetrate and inform
the general consciousness of a community until it has assumed some
external and concrete embodiment, or is recommended by some striking
material evidence. In the case of Progress both these conditions were
fulfilled (in England) in the period 1820-1850." The most striking evidence
was furnished by the mechanical revolution. "Men who were born at the
beginning of the century had seen, before they had passed the age of thirty,
the rapid development of steam navigation, the illumination of towns and
houses by gas, the opening of the first railway." In the consciousness of the
average householder miracles like these formed the pattern of his belief in
the perfectibility of the human race.
Tennyson, who was in philosophical matters a fairly normal person, tells
us that when he went by the first train from Liverpool to Manchester (1830)
he thought that the wheels ran in grooves. Then he wrote this line:
"Let the great world spin forever down the ringing grooves
of change."57
And so a notion more or less applicable to a journey between Liverpool
and Manchester was generalized into a pattern of the universe "for ever."
This pattern, taken up by others, reinforced by dazzling inventions, imposed
an optimistic turn upon the theory of evolution. That theory, of course, is, as
Professor Bury says, neutral between pessimism and optimism. But it
promised continual change, and the changes visible in the world marked
such extraordinary conquests of nature, that the popular mind made a blend
of the two. Evolution first in Darwin himself, and then more elaborately in
Herbert Spencer, was a "progress towards perfection."

The stereotype represented by such words as "progress" and "perfection"
was composed fundamentally of mechanical inventions. And mechanical it
has remained, on the whole, to this day. In America more than anywhere
else, the spectacle of mechanical progress has made so deep an impression,
that it has suffused the whole moral code. An American will endure almost
any insult except the charge that he is not progressive. Be he of long native
ancestry, or a recent immigrant, the aspect that has always struck his eye is
the immense physical growth of American civilization. That constitutes a
fundamental stereotype through which he views the world: the country
village will become the great metropolis, the modest building a skyscraper,
what is small shall be big; what is slow shall be fast; what is poor shall be
rich; what is few shall be many; whatever is shall be more so.
Not every American, of course, sees the world this way. Henry Adams
didn't, and William Allen White doesn't. But those men do, who in the
magazines devoted to the religion of success appear as Makers of America.
They mean just about that when they preach evolution, progress, prosperity,
being constructive, the American way of doing things. It is easy to laugh,
but, in fact, they are using a very great pattern of human endeavor. For one
thing it adopts an impersonal criterion; for another it adopts an earthly
criterion; for a third it is habituating men to think quantitatively. To be sure
the ideal confuses excellence with size, happiness with speed, and human
nature with contraption. Yet the same motives are at work which have ever
actuated any moral code, or ever will. The desire for the biggest, the fastest,
the highest, or if you are a maker of wristwatches or microscopes the
smallest; the love in short of the superlative and the "peerless," is in essence
and possibility a noble passion.
Certainly the American version of progress has fitted an extraordinary
range of facts in the economic situation and in human nature. It turned an
unusual amount of pugnacity, acquisitiveness, and lust of power into
productive work. Nor has it, until more recently perhaps, seriously
frustrated the active nature of the active members of the community. They
have made a civilization which provides them who made it with what they
feel to be ample satisfaction in work, mating and play, and the rush of their
victory over mountains, wildernesses, distance, and human competition has
even done duty for that part of religious feeling which is a sense of
communion with the purpose of the universe. The pattern has been a
success so nearly perfect in the sequence of ideals, practice, and results, that
any challenge to it is called un-American.
And yet, this pattern is a very partial and inadequate way of
representing the world. The habit of thinking about progress as
"development" has meant that many aspects of the environment were
simply neglected. With the stereotype of "progress" before their eyes,
Americans have in the mass seen little that did not accord with that
progress. They saw the expansion of cities, but not the accretion of slums;
they cheered the census statistics, but refused to consider overcrowding;
they pointed with pride to their growth, but would not see the drift from the
land, or the unassimilated immigration. They expanded industry furiously at
reckless cost to their natural resources; they built up gigantic corporations
without arranging for industrial relations. They grew to be one of the most
powerful nations on earth without preparing their institutions or their minds
for the ending of their isolation. They stumbled into the World War morally
and physically unready, and they stumbled out again, much disillusioned,
but hardly more experienced.
In the World War the good and the evil influence of the American
stereotype was plainly visible. The idea that the war could be won by
recruiting unlimited armies, raising unlimited credits, building an unlimited
number of ships, producing unlimited munitions, and concentrating without
limit on these alone, fitted the traditional stereotype, and resulted in
something like a physical miracle.58 But among those most affected by the
stereotype, there was no place for the consideration of what the fruits of
victory were, or how they were to be attained. Therefore, aims were
ignored, or regarded as automatic, and victory was conceived, because the
stereotype demanded it, as nothing but an annihilating victory in the field.
In peace time you did not ask what the fastest motor car was for, and in war
you did not ask what the completest victory was for. Yet in Paris the pattern
did not fit the facts. In peace you can go on endlessly supplanting small
things with big ones, and big ones with bigger ones; in war when you have
won absolute victory, you cannot go on to a more absolute victory. You
have to do something on an entirely different pattern. And if you lack such a
pattern, the end of the war is to you what it was to so many good people, an
anticlimax in a dreary and savorless world.
This marks the point where the stereotype and the facts, that cannot be
ignored, definitely part company. There is always such a point, because our
images of how things behave are simpler and more fixed than the ebb and
flow of affairs. There comes a time, therefore, when the blind spots come
from the edge of vision into the center. Then unless there are critics who
have the courage to sound an alarm, and leaders capable of understanding
the change, and a people tolerant by habit, the stereotype, instead of
economizing effort, and focussing energy as it did in 1917 and 1918, may
frustrate effort and waste men's energy by blinding them, as it did for those
people who cried for a Carthaginian peace in 1919 and deplored the Treaty
of Versailles in 1921.

Uncritically held, the stereotype not only censors out much that needs to be
taken into account, but when the day of reckoning comes, and the
stereotype is shattered, likely as not that which it did wisely take into
account is ship-wrecked with it. That is the punishment assessed by Mr.
Bernard Shaw against Free Trade, Free Contract, Free Competition, Natural
Liberty, Laissez-faire, and Darwinism. A hundred years ago, when he would
surely have been one of the tartest advocates of these doctrines, he would
not have seen them as he sees them to-day, in the Infidel Half Century,59 to
be excuses for "'doing the other fellow down' with impunity, all interference
by a guiding government, all organization except police organization to
protect legalized fraud against fisticuffs, all attempt to introduce human
purpose and design and forethought into the industrial welter being
'contrary to the laws of political economy'" He would have seen, then, as
one of the pioneers of the march to the plains of heaven60 that, of the kind
of human purpose and design and forethought to be found in a government
like that of Queen Victoria's uncles, the less the better. He would have seen,
not the strong doing the weak down, but the foolish doing the strong down.
He would have seen purposes, designs and forethoughts at work,
obstructing invention, obstructing enterprise, obstructing what he would
infallibly have recognized as the next move of Creative Evolution.
Even now Mr. Shaw is none too eager for the guidance of any guiding
government he knows, but in theory he has turned a full loop against
laissez-faire. Most advanced thinking before the war had made the same
turn against the established notion that if you unloosed everything, wisdom
would bubble up, and establish harmony. Since the war, with its definite
demonstration of guiding governments, assisted by censors, propagandists,
and spies, Roebuck Ramsden and Natural Liberty have been readmitted to
the company of serious thinkers.
One thing is common to these cycles. There is in each set of stereotypes
a point where effort ceases and things happen of their own accord, as you
would like them to. The progressive stereotype, powerful to incite work,
almost completely obliterates the attempt to decide what work and why that
work. Laissez-faire, a blessed release from stupid officialdom, assumes that
men will move by spontaneous combustion towards a pre-established
harmony. Collectivism, an antidote to ruthless selfishness, seems, in the
Marxian mind, to suppose an economic determinism towards efficiency and
wisdom on the part of socialist officials. Strong government, imperialism at
home and abroad, at its best deeply conscious of the price of disorder, relies
at last on the notion that all that matters to the governed will be known by
the governors. In each theory there is a spot of blind automatism.
That spot covers up some fact, which if it were taken into account,
would check the vital movement that the stereotype provokes. If the
progressive had to ask himself, like the Chinaman in the joke, what he
wanted to do with the time he saved by breaking the record, if the advocate
of laissez-faire had to contemplate not only free and exuberant energies of
men, but what some people call their human nature, if the collectivist let the
center of his attention be occupied with the problem of how he is to secure
his officials, if the imperialist dared to doubt his own inspiration, you would
find more Hamlet and less Henry the Fifth. For these blind spots keep away
distracting images, which with their attendant emotions, might cause
hesitation and infirmity of purpose. Consequently the stereotype not only
saves time in a busy life and is a defense of our position in society, but
tends to preserve us from all the bewildering effect of trying to see the
world steadily and see it whole.
54. But unfortunately it is ever so much harder to know this actual culture than it is to summarize
and to comment upon the works of genius. The actual culture exists in people far too busy to
indulge in the strange trade of formulating their beliefs. They record them only incidentally, and
the student rarely knows how typical are his data. Perhaps the best he can do is to follow Lord
Bryce's suggestion [Modern Democracies, Vol. i, p. 156] that he move freely "among all sorts
and conditions of men," to seek out the unbiassed persons in every neighborhood who have skill
in sizing up. "There is a flair which long practise and 'sympathetic touch' bestow. The trained
observer learns how to profit by small indications, as an old seaman discerns, sooner than the
landsman, the signs of coming storm." There is, in short, a vast amount of guess work involved,
and it is no wonder that scholars, who enjoy precision, so often confine their attentions to the
neater formulations of other scholars.
55. The Times (London), Literary Supplement, June 2, 1921, p. 352. Professor Einstein said when he
was in America in 1921 that people tended to overestimate the influence of his theory, and to
under-estimate its certainty.
56. J. B. Bury, The Idea of Progress, p. 324.
57. 2 Tennyson, Memoir by his Son, Vol. I, p. 195. Cited by Bury, op. cit., p. 326.
58. I have in mind the transportation and supply of two million troops overseas. Prof. Wesley
Mitchell points out that the total production of goods after our entrance into the war did not
greatly increase in volume over that of the year 1916; but that production for war purposes did
increase.
59. Back to Methuselah. Preface.
60. The Quintessence of Ibsenism
Chapter IX.
Codes and Their Enemies
Table of Contents

Anyone who has stood at the end of a railroad platform waiting for a friend,
will recall what queer people he mistook for him. The shape of a hat, a
slightly characteristic gait, evoked the vivid picture in his mind's eye. In
sleep a tinkle may sound like the pealing of a great bell; the distant stroke of
a hammer like a thunderclap. For our constellations of imagery will vibrate
to a stimulus that is perhaps but vaguely similar to some aspect of them.
They may, in hallucination, flood the whole consciousness. They may enter
very little into perception, though I am inclined to think that such an
experience is extremely rare and highly sophisticated, as when we gaze
blankly at a familiar word or object, and it gradually ceases to be familiar.
Certainly for the most part, the way we see things is a combination of what
is there and of what we expected to find. The heavens are not the same to an
astronomer as to a pair of lovers; a page of Kant will start a different train
of thought in a Kantian and in a radical empiricist; the Tahitian belle is a
better looking person to her Tahitian suitor than to the readers of the
National Geographic Magazine.
Expertness in any subject is, in fact, a multiplication of the number of
aspects we are prepared to discover, plus the habit of discounting our
expectations. Where to the ignoramus all things look alike, and life is just
one thing after another, to the specialist things are highly individual. For a
chauffeur, an epicure, a connoisseur, a member of the President's cabinet, or
a professor's wife, there are evident distinctions and qualities, not at all
evident to the casual person who discusses automobiles, wines, old masters,
Republicans, and college faculties.
But in our public opinions few can be expert, while life is, as Mr.
Bernard Shaw has made plain, so short. Those who are expert are so on
only a few topics. Even among the expert soldiers, as we learned during the
war, expert cavalrymen were not necessarily brilliant with trench-warfare
and tanks. Indeed, sometimes a little expertness on a small topic may
simply exaggerate our normal human habit of trying to squeeze into our
stereotypes all that can be squeezed, and of casting into outer darkness that
which does not fit.
Whatever we recognize as familiar we tend, if we are not very careful,
to visualize with the aid of images already in our mind. Thus in the
American view of Progress and Success there is a definite picture of human
nature and of society. It is the kind of human nature and the kind of society
which logically produce the kind of progress that is regarded as ideal. And
then, when we seek to describe or explain actually successful men, and
events that have really happened, we read back into them the qualities that
are presupposed in the stereotypes.
These qualities were standardized rather innocently by the older
economists. They set out to describe the social system under which they
lived, and found it too complicated for words. So they constructed what
they sincerely hoped was a simplified diagram, not so different in principle
and in veracity from the parallelogram with legs and head in a child's
drawing of a complicated cow. The scheme consisted of a capitalist who
had diligently saved capital from his labor, an entrepreneur who conceived
a socially useful demand and organized a factory, a collection of workmen
who freely contracted, take it or leave it, for their labor, a landlord, and a
group of consumers who bought in the cheapest market those goods which
by the ready use of the pleasure-pain calculus they knew would give them
the most pleasure. The model worked. The kind of people, which the model
assumed, living in the sort of world the model assumed, invariably
coöperated harmoniously in the books where the model was described.
With modification and embroidery, this pure fiction, used by economists
to simplify their thinking, was retailed and popularized until for large
sections of the population it prevailed as the economic mythology of the
day. It supplied a standard version of capitalist, promoter, worker and
consumer in a society that was naturally more bent on achieving success
than on explaining it. The buildings which rose, and the bank accounts
which accumulated, were evidence that the stereotype of how the thing had
been done was accurate. And those who benefited most by success came to
believe they were the kind of men they were supposed to be. No wonder
that the candid friends of successful men, when they read the official
biography and the obituary, have to restrain themselves from asking
whether this is indeed their friend.

To the vanquished and the victims, the official portraiture was, of course,
unrecognizable. For while those who exemplified progress did not often
pause to inquire whether they had arrived according to the route laid down
by the economists, or by some other just as creditable, the unsuccessful
people did inquire. "No one," says William James,61 "sees further into a
generalization than his own knowledge of detail extends." The captains of
industry saw in the great trusts monuments of (their) success; their defeated
competitors saw the monuments of (their) failure. So the captains
expounded the economies and virtues of big business, asked to be let alone,
said they were the agents of prosperity, and the developers of trade. The
vanquished insisted upon the wastes and brutalities of the trusts, and called
loudly upon the Department of Justice to free business from conspiracies. In
the same situation one side saw progress, economy, and a splendid
development; the other, reaction, extravagance, and a restraint of trade.
Volumes of statistics, anecdotes about the real truth and the inside truth, the
deeper and the larger truth, were published to prove both sides of the
argument.
For when a system of stereotypes is well fixed, our attention is called to
those facts which support it, and diverted from those which contradict. So
perhaps it is because they are attuned to find it, that kindly people discover
so much reason for kindness, malicious people so much malice. We speak
quite accurately of seeing through rose-colored spectacles, or with a
jaundiced eye. If, as Philip Littell once wrote of a distinguished professor,
we see life as through a class darkly, our stereotypes of what the best people
and the lower classes are like will not be contaminated by understanding.
What is alien will be rejected, what is different will fall upon unseeing eyes.
We do not see what our eyes are not accustomed to take into account.
Sometimes consciously, more often without knowing it, we are impressed
by those facts which fit our philosophy.

This philosophy is a more or less organized series of images for describing
the unseen world. But not only for describing it. For judging it as well. And,
therefore, the stereotypes are loaded with preference, suffused with
affection or dislike, attached to fears, lusts, strong wishes, pride, hope.
Whatever invokes the stereotype is judged with the appropriate sentiment.
Except where we deliberately keep prejudice in suspense, we do not study a
man and judge him to be bad. We see a bad man. We see a dewy morn, a
blushing maiden, a sainted priest, a humorless Englishman, a dangerous
Red, a carefree bohemian, a lazy Hindu, a wily Oriental, a dreaming Slav, a
volatile Irishman, a greedy Jew, a 100% American. In the workaday world
that is often the real judgment, long in advance of the evidence, and it
contains within itself the conclusion which the evidence is pretty certain to
confirm. Neither justice, nor mercy, nor truth, enter into such a judgment,
for the judgment has preceded the evidence. Yet a people without
prejudices, a people with altogether neutral vision, is so unthinkable in any
civilization of which it is useful to think, that no scheme of education could
be based upon that ideal. Prejudice can be detected, discounted, and refined,
but so long as finite men must compress into a short schooling preparation
for dealing with a vast civilization, they must carry pictures of it around
with them, and have prejudices. The quality of their thinking and doing will
depend on whether those prejudices are friendly, friendly to other people, to
other ideas, whether they evoke love of what is felt to be positively good,
rather than hatred of what is not contained in their version of the good.
Morality, good taste and good form first standardize and then emphasize
certain of these underlying prejudices. As we adjust ourselves to our code,
we adjust the facts we see to that code. Rationally, the facts are neutral to all
our views of right and wrong. Actually, our canons determine greatly what
we shall perceive and how.
For a moral code is a scheme of conduct applied to a number of typical
instances. To behave as the code directs is to serve whatever purpose the
code pursues. It may be God's will, or the king's, individual salvation in a
good, solid, three dimensional paradise, success on earth, or the service of
mankind. In any event the makers of the code fix upon certain typical
situations, and then by some form of reasoning or intuition, deduce the kind
of behavior which would produce the aim they acknowledge. The rules
apply where they apply.
But in daily living how does a man know whether his predicament is the
one the law-giver had in mind? He is told not to kill. But if his children are
attacked, may he kill to stop a killing? The Ten Commandments are silent
on the point. Therefore, around every code there is a cloud of interpreters
who deduce more specific cases. Suppose, then, that the doctors of the law
decide that he may kill in self-defense. For the next man the doubt is almost
as great; how does he know that he is defining self-defense correctly, or that
he has not misjudged the facts, imagined the attack, and is really the
aggressor? Perhaps he has provoked the attack. But what is a provocation?
Exactly these confusions infected the minds of most Germans in August,
1914.
Far more serious in the modern world than any difference of moral code
is the difference in the assumptions about facts to which the code is applied.
Religious, moral and political formulae are nothing like so far apart as the
facts assumed by their votaries. Useful discussion, then, instead of
comparing ideals, reexamines the visions of the facts. Thus the rule that you
should do unto others as you would have them do unto you rests on the
belief that human nature is uniform. Mr. Bernard Shaw's statement that you
should not do unto others what you would have them do unto you, because
their tastes may be different, rests on the belief that human nature is not
uniform. The maxim that competition is the life of trade consists of a whole
tome of assumptions about economic motives, industrial relations, and the
working of a particular commercial system. The claim that America will
never have a merchant marine, unless it is privately owned and managed,
assumes a certain proved connection between a certain kind of profit-
making and incentive. The justification by the bolshevik propagandist of the
dictatorship, espionage, and the terror, because "every state is an apparatus
of violence"62 is an historical judgment, the truth of which is by no means
self-evident to a non-communist.
At the core of every moral code there is a picture of human nature, a
map of the universe, and a version of history. To human nature (of the sort
conceived), in a universe (of the kind imagined), after a history (so
understood), the rules of the code apply. So far as the facts of personality, of
the environment and of memory are different, by so far the rules of the code
are difficult to apply with success. Now every moral code has to conceive
human psychology, the material world, and tradition some way or other. But
in the codes that are under the influence of science, the conception is known
to be an hypothesis, whereas in the codes that come unexamined from the
past or bubble up from the caverns of the mind, the conception is not taken
as an hypothesis demanding proof or contradiction, but as a fiction accepted
without question. In the one case, man is humble about his beliefs, because
he knows they are tentative and incomplete; in the other he is dogmatic,
because his belief is a completed myth. The moralist who submits to the
scientific discipline knows that though he does not know everything, he is
in the way of knowing something; the dogmatist, using a myth, believes
himself to share part of the insight of omniscience, though he lacks the
criteria by which to tell truth from error. For the distinguishing mark of a
myth is that truth and error, fact and fable, report and fantasy, are all on the
same plane of credibility.
The myth is, then, not necessarily false. It might happen to be wholly
true. It may happen to be partly true. If it has affected human conduct a long
time, it is almost certain to contain much that is profoundly and importantly
true. What a myth never contains is the critical power to separate its truths
from its errors. For that power comes only by realizing that no human
opinion, whatever its supposed origin, is too exalted for the test of evidence,
that every opinion is only somebody's opinion. And if you ask why the test
of evidence is preferable to any other, there is no answer unless you are
willing to use the test in order to test it.

The statement is, I think, susceptible of overwhelming proof, that moral
codes assume a particular view of the facts. Under the term moral codes I
include all kinds: personal, family, economic, professional, legal, patriotic,
international. At the center of each there is a pattern of stereotypes about
psychology, sociology, and history. The same view of human nature,
institutions or tradition rarely persists through all our codes. Compare, for
example, the economic and the patriotic codes. There is a war supposed to
affect all alike. Two men are partners in business. One enlists, the other
takes a war contract. The soldier sacrifices everything, perhaps even his life.
He is paid a dollar a day, and no one says, no one believes, that you could
make a better soldier out of him by any form of economic incentive. That
motive disappears out of his human nature. The contractor sacrifices very
little, is paid a handsome profit over costs, and few say or believe that he
would produce the munitions if there were no economic incentive. That
may be unfair to him. The point is that the accepted patriotic code assumes
one kind of human nature, the commercial code another. And the codes are
probably founded on true expectations to this extent, that when a man
adopts a certain code he tends to exhibit the kind of human nature which the
code demands.
That is one reason why it is so dangerous to generalize about human
nature. A loving father can be a sour boss, an earnest municipal reformer,
and a rapacious jingo abroad. His family life, his business career, his
politics, and his foreign policy rest on totally different versions of what
others are like and of how he should act. These versions differ by codes in
the same person, the codes differ somewhat among persons in the same
social set, differ widely as between social sets, and between two nations, or
two colors, may differ to the point where there is no common assumption
whatever. That is why people professing the same stock of religious beliefs
can go to war. The element of their belief which determines conduct is that
view of the facts which they assume.
That is where codes enter so subtly and so pervasively into the making
of public opinion. The orthodox theory holds that a public opinion
constitutes a moral judgment on a group of facts. The theory I am
suggesting is that, in the present state of education, a public opinion is
primarily a moralized and codified version of the facts. I am arguing that
the pattern of stereotypes at the center of our codes largely determines what
group of facts we shall see, and in what light we shall see them. That is
why, with the best will in the world, the news policy of a journal tends to
support its editorial policy; why a capitalist sees one set of facts, and certain
aspects of human nature, literally sees them; his socialist opponent another
set and other aspects, and why each regards the other as unreasonable or
perverse, when the real difference between them is a difference of
perception. That difference is imposed by the difference between the
capitalist and socialist pattern of stereotypes. "There are no classes in
America," writes an American editor. "The history of all hitherto existing
society is the history of class struggles," says the Communist Manifesto. If
you have the editor's pattern in your mind, you will see vividly the facts that
confirm it, vaguely and ineffectively those that contradict. If you have the
communist pattern, you will not only look for different things, but you will
see with a totally different emphasis what you and the editor happen to see
in common.

And since my moral system rests on my accepted version of the facts, he
who denies either my moral judgments or my version of the facts, is to me
perverse, alien, dangerous. How shall I account for him? The opponent has
always to be explained, and the last explanation that we ever look for is that
he sees a different set of facts. Such an explanation we avoid, because it
saps the very foundation of our own assurance that we have seen life
steadily and seen it whole. It is only when we are in the habit of recognizing
our opinions as a partial experience seen through our stereotypes that we
become truly tolerant of an opponent. Without that habit, we believe in the
absolutism of our own vision, and consequently in the treacherous character
of all opposition. For while men are willing to admit that there are two sides
to a "question," they do not believe that there are two sides to what they
regard as a "fact." And they never do believe it until after long critical
education, they are fully conscious of how second-hand and subjective is
their apprehension of their social data.
So where two factions see vividly each its own aspect, and contrive
their own explanations of what they see, it is almost impossible for them to
credit each other with honesty. If the pattern fits their experience at a crucial
point, they no longer look upon it as an interpretation. They look upon it as
"reality." It may not resemble the reality, except that it culminates in a
conclusion which fits a real experience. I may represent my trip from New
York to Boston by a straight line on a map, just as a man may regard his
triumph as the end of a straight and narrow path. The road by which I
actually went to Boston may have involved many detours, much turning
and twisting, just as his road may have involved much besides pure
enterprise, labor and thrift. But provided I reach Boston and he succeeds,
the airline and the straight path will serve as ready made charts. Only when
somebody tries to follow them, and does not arrive, do we have to answer
objections. If we insist on our charts, and he insists on rejecting them, we
soon tend to regard him as a dangerous fool, and he to regard us as liars and
hypocrites. Thus we gradually paint portraits of each other. For the
opponent presents himself as the man who says, evil be thou my good. He
is an annoyance who does not fit into the scheme of things. Nevertheless he
interferes. And since that scheme is based in our minds on incontrovertible
fact fortified by irresistible logic, some place has to be found for him in the
scheme. Rarely in politics or industrial disputes is a place made for him by
the simple admission that he has looked upon the same reality and seen
another aspect of it. That would shake the whole scheme.
Thus to the Italians in Paris Fiume was Italian It was not merely a city
that it would be desirable to include within the Italian kingdom. It was
Italian. They fixed their whole mind upon the Italian majority within the
legal boundaries of the city itself. The American delegates, having seen
more Italians in New York than there are in Fiume, without regarding New
York as Italian, fixed their eyes on Fiume as a central European port of
entry. They saw vividly the Jugoslavs in the suburbs and the non-Italian
hinterland. Some of the Italians in Paris were therefore in need of a
convincing explanation of the American perversity. They found it in a
rumor which started, no one knows where, that an influential American
diplomat was in the snares of a Jugoslav mistress. She had been seen…. He
had been seen…. At Versailles just off the boulevard. … The villa with the
large trees.
This is a rather common way of explaining away opposition. In their
more libelous form such charges rarely reach the printed page, and a
Roosevelt may have to wait years, or a Harding months, before he can force
an issue, and end a whispering campaign that has reached into every circle
of talk. Public men have to endure a fearful amount of poisonous clubroom,
dinner table, boudoir slander, repeated, elaborated, chuckled over, and
regarded as delicious. While this sort of thing is, I believe, less prevalent in
America than in Europe, yet rare is the American official about whom
somebody is not repeating a scandal.
Out of the opposition we make villains and conspiracies. If prices go up
unmercifully the profiteers have conspired; if the newspapers misrepresent
the news, there is a capitalist plot; if the rich are too rich, they have been
stealing; if a closely fought election is lost, the electorate was corrupted; if a
statesman does something of which you disapprove, he has been bought or
influenced by some discreditable person. If workingmen are restless, they
are the victims of agitators; if they are restless over wide areas, there is a
conspiracy on foot. If you do not produce enough aeroplanes, it is the work
of spies; if there is trouble in Ireland, it is German or Bolshevik "gold." And
if you go stark, staring mad looking for plots, you see all strikes, the Plumb
plan, Irish rebellion, Mohammedan unrest, the restoration of King
Constantine, the League of Nations, Mexican disorder, the movement to
reduce armaments, Sunday movies, short skirts, evasion of the liquor laws,
Negro self-assertion, as sub-plots under some grandiose plot engineered
either by Moscow, Rome, the Free Masons, the Japanese, or the Elders of
Zion.
61. The Letters of William James, Vol. I, p.65
62. See Two Years of Conflict on the Internal Front, published by the Russian Socialist Federated
Soviet Republic, Moscow, 1920. Translated by Malcolm W. Davis for the New York Evening
Post, January 15, 1921.
Chapter X.
The Detection of Stereotypes
Table of Contents

Skilled diplomatists, compelled to talk out loud to the warring peoples,
learned how to use a large repertory of stereotypes. They were dealing with
a precarious alliance of powers, each of which was maintaining its war
unity only by the most careful leadership. The ordinary soldier and his wife,
heroic and selfless beyond anything in the chronicles of courage, were still
not heroic enough to face death gladly for all the ideas which were said by
the foreign offices of foreign powers to be essential to the future of
civilization. There were ports, and mines, rocky mountain passes, and
villages that few soldiers would willingly have crossed No Man's Land to
obtain for their allies.
Now it happened in one nation that the war party which was in control
of the foreign office, the high command, and most of the press, had claims
on the territory of several of its neighbors. These claims were called the
Greater Ruritania by the cultivated classes who regarded Kipling,
Treitschke, and Maurice Barres as one hundred percent Ruritanian. But the
grandiose idea aroused no enthusiasm abroad. So holding this finest flower
of the Ruritanian genius, as their poet laureate said, to their hearts,
Ruritania's statesmen went forth to divide and conquer. They divided the
claim into sectors. For each piece they invoked that stereotype which some
one or more of their allies found it difficult to resist, because that ally had
claims for which it hoped to find approval by the use of this same
stereotype.
The first sector happened to be a mountainous region inhabited by alien
peasants. Ruritania demanded it to complete her natural geographical
frontier. If you fixed your attention long enough on the ineffable value of
what is natural, those alien peasants just dissolved into fog, and only the
slope of the mountains was visible. The next sector was inhabited by
Ruritanians, and on the principle that no people ought to live under alien
rule, they were re-annexed. Then came a city of considerable commercial
importance, not inhabited by Ruritanians. But until the Eighteenth Century
it had been part of Ruritania, and on the principle of Historic Right it was
annexed. Farther on there was a splendid mineral deposit owned by aliens
and worked by aliens. On the principle of reparation for damage it was
annexed. Beyond this there was a territory inhabited 97% by aliens,
constituting the natural geographical frontier of another nation, never
historically a part of Ruritania. But one of the provinces which had been
federated into Ruritania had formerly traded in those markets, and the upper
class culture was Ruritanian. On the principle of cultural superiority and the
necessity of defending civilization, the lands were claimed. Finally, there
was a port wholly disconnected from Ruritania geographically, ethnically,
economically, historically, traditionally. It was demanded on the ground that
it was needed for national defense.
In the treaties that concluded the Great War you can multiply examples
of this kind. Now I do not wish to imply that I think it was possible to
resettle Europe consistently on any one of these principles. I am certain that
it was not. The very use of these principles, so pretentious and so absolute,
meant that the spirit of accommodation did not prevail and that, therefore,
the substance of peace was not there. For the moment you start to discuss
factories, mines, mountains, or even political authority, as perfect examples
of some eternal principle or other, you are not arguing, you are fighting.
That eternal principle censors out all the objections, isolates the issue from
its background and its context, and sets going in you some strong emotion,
appropriate enough to the principle, highly inappropriate to the docks,
warehouses, and real estate. And having started in that mood you cannot
stop. A real danger exists. To meet it you have to invoke more absolute
principles in order to defend what is open to attack. Then you have to
defend the defenses, erect buffers, and buffers for the buffers, until the
whole affair is so scrambled that it seems less dangerous to fight than to
keep on talking.
There are certain clues which often help in detecting the false
absolutism of a stereotype. In the case of the Ruritanian propaganda the
principles blanketed each other so rapidly that one could readily see how
the argument had been constructed. The series of contradictions showed
that for each sector that stereotype was employed which would obliterate all
the facts that interfered with the claim. Contradiction of this sort is often a
good clue.

Inability to take account of space is another. In the spring of 1918, for
example, large numbers of people, appalled by the withdrawal of Russia,
demanded the "reestablishment of an Eastern Front." The war, as they had
conceived it, was on two fronts, and when one of them disappeared there
was an instant demand that it be recreated. The unemployed Japanese army
was to man the front, substituting for the Russian. But there was one
insuperable obstacle. Between Vladivostok and the eastern battleline there
were five thousand miles of country, spanned by one broken down railway.
Yet those five thousand miles would not stay in the minds of the
enthusiasts. So overwhelming was their conviction that an eastern front was
needed, and so great their confidence in the valor of the Japanese army, that,
mentally, they had projected that army from Vladivostok to Poland on a
magic carpet. In vain our military authorities argued that to land troops on
the rim of Siberia had as little to do with reaching the Germans, as climbing
from the cellar to the roof of the Woolworth building had to do with
reaching the moon.
The stereotype in this instance was the war on two fronts. Ever since
men had begun to imagine the Great War they had conceived Germany held
between France and Russia. One generation of strategists, and perhaps two,
had lived with that visual image as the starting point of all their
calculations. For nearly four years every battle-map they saw had deepened
the impression that this was the war. When affairs took a new turn, it was
not easy to see them as they were then. They were seen through the
stereotype, and facts which conflicted with it, such as the distance from
Japan to Poland, were incapable of coming vividly into consciousness.
It is interesting to note that the American authorities dealt with the new
facts more realistically than the French. In part, this was because (previous
to 1914) they had no preconception of a war upon the continent; in part
because the Americans, engrossed in the mobilization of their forces, had a
vision of the western front which was itself a stereotype that excluded from
their consciousness any very vivid sense of the other theatres of war. In the
spring of 1918 this American view could not compete with the traditional
French view, because while the Americans believed enormously in their
own powers, the French at that time (before Cantigny and the Second
Marne) had the gravest doubts. The American confidence suffused the
American stereotype, gave it that power to possess consciousness, that
liveliness and sensible pungency, that stimulating effect upon the will, that
emotional interest as an object of desire, that congruity with the activity in
hand, which James notes as characteristic of what we regard as "real."63
The French in despair remained fixed on their accepted image. And when
facts, gross geographical facts, would not fit with the preconception, they
were either censored out of mind, or the facts were themselves stretched out
of shape. Thus the difficulty of the Japanese reaching the Germans five
thousand miles away was, in measure, overcome by bringing the Germans
more than half way to meet them. Between March and June 1918, there was
supposed to be a German army operating in Eastern Siberia. This phantom
army consisted of some German prisoners actually seen, more German
prisoners thought about, and chiefly of the delusion that those five thousand
intervening miles did not really exist.64

A true conception of space is not a simple matter. If I draw a straight line on
a map between Bombay and Hong Kong and measure the distance, I have
learned nothing whatever about the distance I should have to cover on a
voyage. And even if I measure the actual distance that I must traverse, I still
know very little until I know what ships are in the service, when they run,
how fast they go, whether I can secure accommodation and afford to pay for
it. In practical life space is a matter of available transportation, not of
geometrical planes, as the old railroad magnate knew when he threatened to
make grass grow in the streets of a city that had offended him. If I am
motoring and ask how far it is to my destination, I curse as an unmitigated
booby the man who tells me it is three miles, and does not mention a six
mile detour. It does me no good to be told that it is three miles if you walk. I
might as well be told it is one mile as the crow flies. I do not fly like a crow,
and I am not walking either. I must know that it is nine miles for a motor
car, and also, if that is the case, that six of them are ruts and puddles. I call
the pedestrian a nuisance who tells me it is three miles and think evil of the
aviator who told me it was one mile. Both of them are talking about the
space they have to cover, not the space I must cover.
In the drawing of boundary lines absurd complications have arisen
through failure to conceive the practical geography of a region. Under some
general formula like self-determination statesmen have at various times
drawn lines on maps, which, when surveyed on the spot, ran through the
middle of a factory, down the center of a village street, diagonally across
the nave of a church, or between the kitchen and bedroom of a peasant's
cottage. There have been frontiers in a grazing country which separated
pasture from water, pasture from market, and in an industrial country,
railheads from railroad. On the colored ethnic map the line was ethnically
just, that is to say, just in the world of that ethnic map.

But time, no less than space, fares badly. A common example is that of the
man who tries by making an elaborate will to control his money long after
his death. "It had been the purpose of the first William James," writes his
great-grandson Henry James,65 "to provide that his children (several of
whom were under age when he died) should qualify themselves by industry
and experience to enjoy the large patrimony which he expected to bequeath
to them, and with that in view he left a will which was a voluminous
compound of restraints and instructions. He showed thereby how great were
both his confidence in his own judgment and his solicitude for the moral
welfare of his descendants." The courts upset the will. For the law in its
objection to perpetuities recognizes that there are distinct limits to the
usefulness of allowing anyone to impose his moral stencil upon an
unknown future. But the desire to impose it is a very human trait, so human
that the law permits it to operate for a limited time after death.
The amending clause of any constitution is a good index of the
confidence the authors entertained about the reach of their opinions in the
succeeding generations. There are, I believe, American state constitutions
which are almost incapable of amendment. The men who made them could
have had but little sense of the flux of time: to them the Here and Now was
so brilliantly certain, the Hereafter so vague or so terrifying, that they had
the courage to say how life should run after they were gone. And then
because constitutions are difficult to amend, zealous people with a taste for
mortmain have loved to write on this imperishable brass all kinds of rules
and restrictions that, given any decent humility about the future, ought to be
no more permanent than an ordinary statute.
A presumption about time enters widely into our opinions. To one
person an institution which has existed for the whole of his conscious life is
part of the permanent furniture of the universe: to another it is ephemeral.
Geological time is very different from biological time. Social time is most
complex. The statesman has to decide whether to calculate for the
emergency or for the long run. Some decisions have to be made on the basis
of what will happen in the next two hours; others on what will happen in a
week, a month, a season, a decade, when the children have grown up, or
their children's children. An important part of wisdom is the ability to
distinguish the time-conception that properly belongs to the thing in hand.
The person who uses the wrong time-conception ranges from the dreamer
who ignores the present to the philistine who can see nothing else. A true
scale of values has a very acute sense of relative time.
Distant time, past and future, has somehow to be conceived. But as
James says, "of the longer duration we have no direct 'realizing' sense."66
The longest duration which we immediately feel is what is called the
"specious present." It endures, according to Titchener, for about six
seconds.67 "All impressions within this period of time are present to us at
once. This makes it possible for us to perceive changes and events as well
as stationary objects. The perceptual present is supplemented by the
ideational present. Through the combination of perceptions with memory
images, entire days, months, and even years of the past are brought together
into the present."
In this ideational present, vividness, as James said, is proportionate to
the number of discriminations we perceive within it. Thus a vacation in
which we were bored with nothing to do passes slowly while we are in it,
but seems very short in memory. Great activity kills time rapidly, but in
memory its duration is long. On the relation between the amount we
discriminate and our time perspective James has an interesting passage:68
"We have every reason to think that creatures may possibly
differ enormously in the amounts of duration which they
intuitively feel, and in the fineness of the events that may fill
it. Von Baer has indulged in some interesting computations
of the effect of such differences in changing the aspect of
Nature. Suppose we were able, within the length of a second,
to note 10,000 events distinctly, instead of barely 10 as
now;69 if our life were then destined to hold the same
number of impressions, it might be 1000 times as short. We
should live less than a month, and personally know nothing
of the change of seasons. If born in winter, we should
believe in summer as we now believe in the heats of the
carboniferous era. The motions of organic beings would be
so slow to our senses as to be inferred, not seen. The sun
would stand still in the sky, the moon be almost free from
change, and so on. But now reverse the hypothesis and
suppose a being to get only one 1000th part of the sensations
we get in a given time, and consequently to live 1000 times
as long. Winters and summers will be to him like quarters of
an hour. Mushrooms and the swifter growing plants will
shoot into being so rapidly as to appear instantaneous
creations; annual shrubs will rise and fall from the earth like
restless boiling water springs; the motions of animals will be
as invisible as are to us the movements of bullets and
cannon-balls; the sun will scour through the sky like a
meteor, leaving a fiery trail behind him, etc."

In his Outline of History Mr. Wells has made a gallant effort to visualize
"the true proportions of historical to geological time"70 On a scale which
represents the time from Columbus to ourselves by three inches of space,
the reader would have to walk 55 feet to see the date of the painters of the
Altamara caves, 550 feet to see the earlier Neanderthalers, a mile or so to
the last of the dinosaurs. More or less precise chronology does not begin
until after 1000 B.C., and at that time "Sargon I of the Akkadian-Sumerian
Empire was a remote memory,… more remote than is Constantine the Great
from the world of the present day…. Hammurabi had been dead a thousand
years… Stonehedge in England was already a thousand years old."
Mr. Wells was writing with a purpose. "In the brief period of ten
thousand years these units (into which men have combined) have grown
from the small family tribe of the early neolithic culture to the vast united
realms—vast yet still too small and partial—of the present time." Mr. Wells
hoped by changing the time perspective on our present problems to change
the moral perspective. Yet the astronomical measure of time, the geological,
the biological, any telescopic measure which minimizes the present is not
"more true" than a microscopic. Mr. Simeon Strunsky is right when he
insists that "if Mr. Wells is thinking of his subtitle, The Probable Future of
Mankind, he is entitled to ask for any number of centuries to work out his
solution. If he is thinking of the salvaging of this western civilization,
reeling under the effects of the Great War, he must think in decades and
scores of years."71 It all depends upon the practical purpose for which you
adopt the measure. There are situations when the time perspective needs to
be lengthened, and others when it needs to be shortened.
The man who says that it does not matter if 15,000,000 Chinese die of
famine, because in two generations the birthrate will make up the loss, has
used a time perspective to excuse his inertia. A person who pauperizes a
healthy young man because he is sentimentally overimpressed with an
immediate difficulty has lost sight of the duration of the beggar's life. The
people who for the sake of an immediate peace are willing to buy off an
aggressive empire by indulging its appetite have allowed a specious present
to interfere with the peace of their children. The people who will not be
patient with a troublesome neighbor, who want to bring everything to a
"showdown" are no less the victims of a specious present.

Into almost every social problem the proper calculation of time enters.
Suppose, for example, it is a question of timber. Some trees grow faster
than others. Then a sound forest policy is one in which the amount of each
species and of each age cut in each season is made good by replanting. In so
far as that calculation is correct the truest economy has been reached. To cut
less is waste, and to cut more is exploitation. But there may come an
emergency, say the need for aeroplane spruce in a war, when the year's
allowance must be exceeded. An alert government will recognize that and
regard the restoration of the balance as a charge upon the future.
Coal involves a different theory of time, because coal, unlike a tree, is
produced on the scale of geological time. The supply is limited. Therefore a
correct social policy involves intricate computation of the available reserves
of the world, the indicated possibilities, the present rate of use, the present
economy of use, and the alternative fuels. But when that computation has
been reached it must finally be squared with an ideal standard involving
time. Suppose, for example, that engineers conclude that the present fuels
are being exhausted at a certain rate; that barring new discoveries industry
will have to enter a phase of contraction at some definite time in the future.
We have then to determine how much thrift and self-denial we will use,
after all feasible economies have been exercised, in order not to rob
posterity. But what shall we consider posterity? Our grandchildren? Our
great grandchildren? Perhaps we shall decide to calculate on a hundred
years, believing that to be ample time for the discovery of alternative fuels
if the necessity is made clear at once. The figures are, of course,
hypothetical. But in calculating that way we shall be employing what
reason we have. We shall be giving social time its place in public opinion.
Let us now imagine a somewhat different case: a contract between a city
and a trolley-car company. The company says that it will not invest its
capital unless it is granted a monopoly of the main highway for ninety-nine
years. In the minds of the men who make that demand ninety-nine years is
so long as to mean "forever." But suppose there is reason to think that
surface cars, run from a central power plant on tracks, are going out of
fashion in twenty years. Then it is a most unwise contract to make, for you
are virtually condemning a future generation to inferior transportation. In
making such a contract the city officials lack a realizing sense of ninety-
nine years. Far better to give the company a subsidy now in order to attract
capital than to stimulate investment by indulging a fallacious sense of
eternity. No city official and no company official has a sense of real time
when he talks about ninety-nine years.
Popular history is a happy hunting ground of time confusions. To the
average Englishman, for example, the behavior of Cromwell, the corruption
of the Act of Union, the Famine of 1847 are wrongs suffered by people long
dead and done by actors long dead with whom no living person, Irish or
English, has any real connection. But in the mind of a patriotic Irishman
these same events are almost contemporary. His memory is like one of
those historical paintings, where Virgil and Dante sit side by side
conversing. These perspectives and foreshortenings are a great barrier
between peoples. It is ever so difficult for a person of one tradition to
remember what is contemporary in the tradition of another.
Almost nothing that goes by the name of Historic Rights or Historic
Wrongs can be called a truly objective view of the past. Take, for example,
the Franco-German debate about Alsace-Lorraine. It all depends on the
original date you select. If you start with the Rauraci and Sequani, the lands
are historically part of Ancient Gaul. If you prefer Henry I, they are
historically a German territory; if you take 1273 they belong to the House
of Austria; if you take 1648 and the Peace of Westphalia, most of them are
French; if you take Louis XIV and the year 1688 they are almost all French.
If you are using the argument from history you are fairly certain to select
those dates in the past which support your view of what should be done
now.
Arguments about "races" and nationalities often betray the same
arbitrary view of time. During the war, under the influence of powerful
feeling, the difference between "Teutons" on the one hand, and "Anglo-
Saxons" and French on the other, was popularly believed to be an eternal
difference. They had always been opposing races. Yet a generation ago,
historians, like Freeman, were emphasizing the common Teutonic origin of
the West European peoples, and ethnologists would certainly insist that the
Germans, English, and the greater part of the French are branches of what
was once a common stock. The general rule is: if you like a people to-day
you come down the branches to the trunk; if you dislike them you insist that
the separate branches are separate trunks. In one case you fix your attention
on the period before they were distinguishable; in the other on the period
after which they became distinct. And the view which fits the mood is taken
as the "truth."
An amiable variation is the family tree. Usually one couple are
appointed the original ancestors, if possible, a couple associated with an
honorific event like the Norman Conquest. That couple have no ancestors.
They are not descendants. Yet they were the descendants of ancestors, and
the expression that So-and-So was the founder of his house means not that
he is the Adam of his family, but that he is the particular ancestor from
whom it is desirable to start, or perhaps the earliest ancestor of which there
is a record. But genealogical tables exhibit a deeper prejudice. Unless the
female line happens to be especially remarkable descent is traced down
through the males. The tree is male. At various moments females accrue to
it as itinerant bees light upon an ancient apple tree.

But the future is the most illusive time of all. Our temptation here is to jump
over necessary steps in the sequence; and as we are governed by hope or
doubt, to exaggerate or to minimize the time required to complete various
parts of a process. The discussion of the role to be exercised by wage-
earners in the management of industry is riddled with this difficulty. For
management is a word that covers many functions.72 Some of these require
no training; some require a little training; others can be learned only in a
lifetime. And the truly discriminating program of industrial democratization
would be one based on the proper time sequence, so that the assumption of
responsibility would run parallel to a complementary program of industrial
training. The proposal for a sudden dictatorship of the proletariat is an
attempt to do away with the intervening time of preparation; the resistance
to all sharing of responsibility an attempt to deny the alteration of human
capacity in the course of time. Primitive notions of democracy, such as
rotation in office, and contempt for the expert, are really nothing but the old
myth that the Goddess of Wisdom sprang mature and fully armed from the
brow of Jove. They assume that what it takes years to learn need not be
learned at all.
Whenever the phrase "backward people" is used as the basis of a policy,
the conception of time is a decisive element. The Covenant of the League of
Nations says,73 for example, that "the character of the mandate must differ
according to the stage of the development of the people," as well as on
other grounds. Certain communities, it asserts, "have reached a stage of
development" where their independence can be provisionally recognized,
subject to advice and assistance "until such time as they are able to stand
alone." The way in which the mandatories and the mandated conceive that
time will influence deeply their relations. Thus in the case of Cuba the
judgment of the American government virtually coincided with that of the
Cuban patriots, and though there has been trouble, there is no finer page in
the history of how strong powers have dealt with the weak. Oftener in that
history the estimates have not coincided. Where the imperial people,
whatever its public expressions, has been deeply convinced that the
backwardness of the backward was so hopeless as not to be worth
remedying, or so profitable that it was not desirable to remedy it, the tie has
festered and poisoned the peace of the world. There have been a few cases,
very few, where backwardness has meant to the ruling power the need for a
program of forwardness, a program with definite standards and definite
estimates of time. Far more frequently, so frequently in fact as to seem the
rule, backwardness has been conceived as an intrinsic and eternal mark of
inferiority. And then every attempt to be less backward has been frowned
upon as the sedition, which, under these conditions, it undoubtedly is. In
our own race wars we can see some of the results of the failure to realize
that time would gradually obliterate the slave morality of the Negro, and
that social adjustment based on this morality would begin to break down.
It is hard not to picture the future as if it obeyed our present purposes, to
annihilate whatever delays our desire, or immortalize whatever stands
between us and our fears.

In putting together our public opinions, not only do we have to picture more
space than we can see with our eyes, and more time than we can feel, but
we have to describe and judge more people, more actions, more things than
we can ever count, or vividly imagine. We have to summarize and
generalize. We have to pick out samples, and treat them as typical.
To pick fairly a good sample of a large class is not easy. The problem
belongs to the science of statistics, and it is a most difficult affair for
anyone whose mathematics is primitive, and mine remain azoic in spite of
the half dozen manuals which I once devoutly imagined that I understood.
All they have done for me is to make me a little more conscious of how
hard it is to classify and to sample, how readily we spread a little butter
over the whole universe.
Some time ago a group of social workers in Sheffield, England, started
out to substitute an accurate picture of the mental equipment of the workers
of that city for the impressionistic one they had.74 They wished to say, with
some decent grounds for saying it, how the workers of Sheffield were
equipped. They found, as we all find the moment we refuse to let our first
notion prevail, that they were beset with complications. Of the test they
employed nothing need be said here except that it was a large questionnaire.
For the sake of the illustration, assume that the questions were a fair test of
mental equipment for English city life. Theoretically, then, those questions
should have been put to every member of the working class. But it is not so
easy to know who are the working class. However, assume again that the
census knows how to classify them. Then there were roughly 104,000 men
and 107,000 women who ought to have been questioned. They possessed
the answers which would justify or refute the casual phrase about the
"ignorant workers" or the "intelligent workers." But nobody could think of
questioning the whole two hundred thousand.
So the social workers consulted an eminent statistician, Professor
Bowley. He advised them that not less than 408 men and 408 women would
prove to be a fair sample. According to mathematical calculation this
number would not show a greater deviation from the average than 1 in 22.75
They had, therefore, to question at least 816 people before they could
pretend to talk about the average workingman. But which 816 people
should they approach? "We might have gathered particulars concerning
workers to whom one or another of us had a pre-inquiry access; we might
have worked through philanthropic gentlemen and ladies who were in
contact with certain sections of workers at a club, a mission, an infirmary, a
place of worship, a settlement. But such a method of selection would
produce entirely worthless results. The workers thus selected would not be
in any sense representative of what is popularly called 'the average run of
workers;' they would represent nothing but the little coteries to which they
belonged.
"The right way of securing 'victims,' to which at immense cost of time
and labour we rigidly adhered, is to get hold of your workers by some
'neutral' or 'accidental' or 'random' method of approach." This they did. And
after all these precautions they came to no more definite conclusion than
that on their classification and according to their questionnaire, among
200,000 Sheffield workers "about one quarter" were "well equipped,"
"approaching three-quarters" were "inadequately equipped" and that "about
one-fifteenth" were "mal-equipped."
Compare this conscientious and almost pedantic method of arriving at
an opinion, with our usual judgments about masses of people, about the
volatile Irish, and the logical French, and the disciplined Germans, and the
ignorant Slavs, and the honest Chinese, and the untrustworthy Japanese, and
so on and so on. All these are generalizations drawn from samples, but the
samples are selected by a method that statistically is wholly unsound. Thus
the employer will judge labor by the most troublesome employee or the
most docile that he knows, and many a radical group has imagined that it
was a fair sample of the working class. How many women's views on the
"servant question" are little more than the reflection of their own treatment
of their servants? The tendency of the casual mind is to pick out or stumble
upon a sample which supports or defies its prejudices, and then to make it
the representative of a whole class.
A great deal of confusion arises when people decline to classify
themselves as we have classified them. Prophecy would be so much easier
if only they would stay where we put them. But, as a matter of fact, a phrase
like the working class will cover only some of the truth for a part of the
time. When you take all the people, below a certain level of income, and
call them the working class, you cannot help assuming that the people so
classified will behave in accordance with your stereotype. Just who those
people are you are not quite certain. Factory hands and mine workers fit in
more or less, but farm hands, small farmers, peddlers, little shop keepers,
clerks, servants, soldiers, policemen, firemen slip out of the net. The
tendency, when you are appealing to the "working class," is to fix your
attention on two or three million more or less confirmed trade unionists, and
treat them as Labor; the other seventeen or eighteen million, who might
qualify statistically, are tacitly endowed with the point of view ascribed to
the organized nucleus. How very misleading it was to impute to the British
working class in 1918-1921 the point of view expressed in the resolutions
of the Trades Union Congress or in the pamphlets written by intellectuals.
The stereotype of Labor as Emancipator selects the evidence which
supports itself and rejects the other. And so parallel with the real
movements of working men there exists a fiction of the Labor Movement,
in which an idealized mass moves towards an ideal goal. The fiction deals
with the future. In the future possibilities are almost indistinguishable from
probabilities and probabilities from certainties. If the future is long enough,
the human will might turn what is just conceivable into what is very likely,
and what is likely into what is sure to happen. James called this the faith
ladder, and said that "it is a slope of goodwill on which in the larger
questions of life men habitually live."76
"1. There is nothing absurd in a certain view of the world being true,
nothing contradictory;
2. It might have been true under certain conditions;
3. It may be true even now;
4. It is fit to be true;
5. It ought to be true;
6. It must be true;
7. It shall be true, at any rate true for me."
And, as he added in another place,77 "your acting thus may in certain
special cases be a means of making it securely true in the end." Yet no one
would have insisted more than he, that, so far as we know how, we must
avoid substituting the goal for the starting point, must avoid reading back
into the present what courage, effort and skill might create in the future. Yet
this truism is inordinately difficult to live by, because every one of us is so
little trained in the selection of our samples.
If we believe that a certain thing ought to be true, we can almost always
find either an instance where it is true, or someone who believes it ought to
be true. It is ever so hard when a concrete fact illustrates a hope to weigh
that fact properly. When the first six people we meet agree with us, it is not
easy to remember that they may all have read the same newspaper at
breakfast. And yet we cannot send out a questionnaire to 816 random
samples every time we wish to estimate a probability. In dealing with any
large mass of facts, the presumption is against our having picked true
samples, if we are acting on a casual impression.

And when we try to go one step further in order to seek the causes and
effects of unseen and complicated affairs, haphazard opinion is very tricky.
There are few big issues in public life where cause and effect are obvious at
once. They are not obvious to scholars who have devoted years, let us say,
to studying business cycles, or price and wage movements, or the migration
and the assimilation of peoples, or the diplomatic purposes of foreign
powers. Yet somehow we are all supposed to have opinions on these
matters, and it is not surprising that the commonest form of reasoning is the
intuitive, post hoc ergo propter hoc.
The more untrained a mind, the more readily it works out a theory that
two things which catch its attention at the same time are causally connected.
We have already dwelt at some length on the way things reach our attention.
We have seen that our access to information is obstructed and uncertain,
and that our apprehension is deeply controlled by our stereotypes; that the
evidence available to our reason is subject to illusions of defense, prestige,
morality, space, time, and sampling. We must note now that with this initial
taint, public opinions are still further beset, because in a series of events
seen mostly through stereotypes, we readily accept sequence or parallelism
as equivalent to cause and effect.
This is most likely to happen when two ideas that come together arouse
the same feeling. If they come together they are likely to arouse the same
feeling; and even when they do not arrive together a powerful feeling
attached to one is likely to suck out of all the corners of memory any idea
that feels about the same. Thus everything painful tends to collect into one
system of cause and effect, and likewise everything pleasant.
"IId IIm (1675) This day I hear that G[od] has shot an arrow into the
midst of this Town. The small pox is in an ordinary ye sign of the Swan, the
ordinary Keepers name is Windsor. His daughter is sick of the disease. It is
observable that this disease begins at an alehouse, to testify God's
displeasure agt the sin of drunkenness & yt of multiplying alehouses!"78
Thus Increase Mather, and thus in the year 1919 a distinguished
Professor of Celestial Mechanics discussing the Einstein theory:
"It may well be that…. Bolshevist uprisings are in reality the
visible objects of some underlying, deep, mental disturbance,
world-wide in character…. This same spirit of unrest has
invaded science."79
In hating one thing violently, we readily associate with it as cause or
effect most of the other things we hate or fear violently. They may have no
more connection than smallpox and alehouses, or Relativity and
Bolshevism, but they are bound together in the same emotion. In a
superstitious mind, like that of the Professor of Celestial Mechanics,
emotion is a stream of molten lava which catches and imbeds whatever it
touches. When you excavate in it you find, as in a buried city, all sorts of
objects ludicrously entangled in each other. Anything can be related to
anything else, provided it feels like it. Nor has a mind in such a state any
way of knowing how preposterous it is. Ancient fears, reinforced by more
recent fears, coagulate into a snarl of fears where anything that is dreaded is
the cause of anything else that is dreaded.

Generally it all culminates in the fabrication of a system of all evil, and of
another which is the system of all good. Then our love of the absolute
shows itself. For we do not like qualifying adverbs.80 They clutter up
sentences, and interfere with irresistible feeling. We prefer most to more,
least to less, we dislike the words rather, perhaps, if, or, but, toward, not
quite, almost, temporarily, partly. Yet nearly every opinion about public
affairs needs to be deflated by some word of this sort. But in our free
moments everything tends to behave absolutely,—one hundred percent,
everywhere, forever.
It is not enough to say that our side is more right than the enemy's, that
our victory will help democracy more than his. One must insist that our
victory will end war forever, and make the world safe for democracy. And
when the war is over, though we have thwarted a greater evil than those
which still afflict us, the relativity of the result fades out, the absoluteness
of the present evil overcomes our spirit, and we feel that we are helpless
because we have not been irresistible. Between omnipotence and impotence
the pendulum swings.
Real space, real time, real numbers, real connections, real weights are
lost. The perspective and the background and the dimensions of action are
clipped and frozen in the stereotype.
63. Principles of Psychology, Vol. II, p. 300.
64. See in this connection Mr. Charles Grasty's interview with Marshal Foch, New York Times,
February 26, 1918. "Germany is walking through Russia. America and Japan, who are in a
position to do so, should go to meet her in Siberia." See also the resolution by Senator King of
Utah, June 10, 1918, and Mr. Taft's statement in the New York Times, June 11, 1918, and the
appeal to America on May 5, 1918, by Mr. A. J. Sack, Director of the Russian Information
Bureau: "If Germany were in the Allied place… she would have 3,000,000 fighting on the East
front within a year."
65. The Letters of William James, Vol. I, p. 6.
66. Principles of Psychology, Vol. I, p. 638.
67. Cited by Warren, Human Psychology, p. 255.
68. Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 639.
69. In the moving picture this effect is admirably produced by the ultra-rapid camera.
70. 1 Vol. II, p. 605. See also James Harvey Robinson, The New History, p. 239.
71. In a review of The Salvaging of Civilization, The Literary Review of the N. Y. Evening Post, June
18, 1921, p. 5.
72. Cf. Carter L. Goodrich, The Frontier of Control.
73. Article XIX.
74. The Equipment of the Worker.
75. Op. cit., p. 65.
76. William James, Some Problems of Philosophy, p. 224.
77. A Pluralistic Universe, p. 329.
78. The Heart of the Puritan, p. 177, edited by Elizabeth Deering Hanscom.
79. Cited in The New Republic, Dec. 24, 1919, p. 120.
80. Cf. Freud's discussion of absolutism in dreams, Interpretation of Dreams, Chapter VI, especially
pp. 288, et seq.
Part IV.
Interests
Table of Contents
Chapter XI.
The Enlisting of Interest
Table of Contents

But the human mind is not a film which registers once and for all each
impression that comes through its shutters and lenses. The human mind is
endlessly and persistently creative. The pictures fade or combine, are
sharpened here, condensed there, as we make them more completely our
own. They do not lie inert upon the surface of the mind, but are reworked
by the poetic faculty into a personal expression of ourselves. We distribute
the emphasis and participate in the action.
In order to do this we tend to personalize quantities, and to dramatize
relations. As some sort of allegory, except in acutely sophisticated minds,
the affairs of the world are represented. Social Movements, Economic
Forces, National Interests, Public Opinion are treated as persons, or persons
like the Pope, the President, Lenin, Morgan or the King become ideas and
institutions. The deepest of all the stereotypes is the human stereotype
which imputes human nature to inanimate or collective things.
The bewildering variety of our impressions, even after they have been
censored in all kinds of ways, tends to force us to adopt the greater
economy of the allegory. So great is the multitude of things that we cannot
keep them vividly in mind. Usually, then, we name them, and let the name
stand for the whole impression. But a name is porous. Old meanings slip
out and new ones slip in, and the attempt to retain the full meaning of the
name is almost as fatiguing as trying to recall the original impressions. Yet
names are a poor currency for thought. They are too empty, too abstract, too
inhuman. And so we begin to see the name through some personal
stereotype, to read into it, finally to see in it the incarnation of some human
quality.
Yet human qualities are themselves vague and fluctuating. They are best
remembered by a physical sign. And therefore, the human qualities we tend
to ascribe to the names of our impressions, themselves tend to be visualized
in physical metaphors. The people of England, the history of England,
condense into England, and England becomes John Bull, who is jovial and
fat, not too clever, but well able to take care of himself. The migration of a
people may appear to some as the meandering of a river, and to others like a
devastating flood. The courage people display may be objectified as a rock;
their purpose as a road, their doubts as forks of the road, their difficulties as
ruts and rocks, their progress as a fertile valley. If they mobilize their dread-
naughts they unsheath a sword. If their army surrenders they are thrown to
earth. If they are oppressed they are on the rack or under the harrow.
When public affairs are popularized in speeches, headlines, plays,
moving pictures, cartoons, novels, statues or paintings, their transformation
into a human interest requires first abstraction from the original, and then
animation of what has been abstracted. We cannot be much interested in, or
much moved by, the things we do not see. Of public affairs each of us sees
very little, and therefore, they remain dull and unappetizing, until
somebody, with the makings of an artist, has translated them into a moving
picture. Thus the abstraction, imposed upon our knowledge of reality by all
the limitations of our access and of our prejudices, is compensated. Not
being omnipresent and omniscient we cannot see much of what we have to
think and talk about. Being flesh and blood we will not feed on words and
names and gray theory. Being artists of a sort we paint pictures, stage
dramas and draw cartoons out of the abstractions.
Or, if possible, we find gifted men who can visualize for us. For people
are not all endowed to the same degree with the pictorial faculty. Yet one
may, I imagine, assert with Bergson that the practical intelligence is most
closely adapted to spatial qualities.81 A "clear" thinker is almost always a
good visualizer. But for that same reason, because he is "cinematographic,"
he is often by that much external and insensitive. For the people who have
intuition, which is probably another name for musical or muscular
perception, often appreciate the quality of an event and the inwardness of an
act far better than the visualizer. They have more understanding when the
crucial element is a desire that is never crudely overt, and appears on the
surface only in a veiled gesture, or in a rhythm of speech. Visualization may
catch the stimulus and the result. But the intermediate and internal is often
as badly caricatured by a visualizer, as is the intention of the composer by
an enormous soprano in the sweet maiden's part.
Nevertheless, though they have often a peculiar justice, intuitions
remain highly private and largely incommunicable. But social intercourse
depends on communication, and while a person can often steer his own life
with the utmost grace by virtue of his intuitions, he usually has great
difficulty in making them real to others. When he talks about them they
sound like a sheaf of mist. For while intuition does give a fairer perception
of human feeling, the reason with its spatial and tactile prejudice can do
little with that perception. Therefore, where action depends on whether a
number of people are of one mind, it is probably true that in the first
instance no idea is lucid for practical decision until it has visual or tactile
value. But it is also true, that no visual idea is significant to us until it has
enveloped some stress of our own personality. Until it releases or resists,
depresses or enhances, some craving of our own, it remains one of the
objects which do not matter.

Pictures have always been the surest way of conveying an idea, and next in
order, words that call up pictures in memory. But the idea conveyed is not
fully our own until we have identified ourselves with some aspect of the
picture. The identification, or what Vernon Lee has called empathy,82 may
be almost infinitely subtle and symbolic. The mimicry may be performed
without our being aware of it, and sometimes in a way that would horrify
those sections of our personality which support our self-respect. In
sophisticated people the participation may not be in the fate of the hero, but
in the fate of the whole idea to which both hero and villain are essential.
But these are refinements.
In popular representation the handles for identification are almost
always marked. You know who the hero is at once. And no work promises
to be easily popular where the marking is not definite and the choice clear.83
But that is not enough. The audience must have something to do, and the
contemplation of the true, the good and the beautiful is not something to do.
In order not to sit inertly in the presence of the picture, and this applies as
much to newspaper stories as to fiction and the cinema, the audience must
be exercised by the image. Now there are two forms of exercise which far
transcend all others, both as to ease with which they are aroused, and
eagerness with which stimuli for them are sought. They are sexual passion
and fighting, and the two have so many associations with each other, blend
into each other so intimately, that a fight about sex outranks every other
theme in the breadth of its appeal. There is none so engrossing or so
careless of all distinctions of culture and frontiers.
The sexual motif figures hardly at all in American political imagery.
Except in certain minor ecstasies of war, in an occasional scandal, or in
phases of the racial conflict with Negroes or Asiatics, to speak of it at all
would seem far-fetched. Only in moving pictures, novels, and some
magazine fiction are industrial relations, business competition, politics, and
diplomacy tangled up with the girl and the other woman. But the fighting
motif appears at every turn. Politics is interesting when there is a fight, or as
we say, an issue. And in order to make politics popular, issues have to be
found, even when in truth and justice, there are none,—none, in the sense
that the differences of judgment, or principle, or fact, do not call for the
enlistment of pugnacity.84
But where pugnacity is not enlisted, those of us who are not directly
involved find it hard to keep up our interest. For those who are involved the
absorption may be real enough to hold them even when no issue is
involved. They may be exercised by sheer joy in activity, or by subtle
rivalry or invention. But for those to whom the whole problem is external
and distant, these other faculties do not easily come into play. In order that
the faint image of the affair shall mean something to them, they must be
allowed to exercise the love of struggle, suspense, and victory.
Miss Patterson85 insists that "suspense… constitutes the difference
between the masterpieces in the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the
pictures at the Rivoli or the Rialto Theatres." Had she made it clear that the
masterpieces lack either an easy mode of identification or a theme popular
for this generation, she would be wholly right in saying that this "explains
why the people straggle into the Metropolitan by twos and threes and
struggle into the Rialto and Rivoli by hundreds. The twos and threes look at
a picture in the Art Museum for less than ten minutes—unless they chance
to be art students, critics, or connoisseurs. The hundreds in the Rivoli or the
Rialto look at the picture for more than an hour. As far as beauty is
concerned there can be no comparison of the merits of the two pictures. Yet
the motion picture draws more people and holds them at attention longer
than do the masterpieces, not through any intrinsic merit of its own, but
because it depicts unfolding events, the outcome of which the audience is
breathlessly waiting. It possesses the element of struggle, which never fails
to arouse suspense."
In order then that the distant situation shall not be a gray flicker on the
edge of attention, it should be capable of translation into pictures in which
the opportunity for identification is recognizable. Unless that happens it will
interest only a few for a little while. It will belong to the sights seen but not
felt, to the sensations that beat on our sense organs, and are not
acknowledged. We have to take sides. We have to be able to take sides. In
the recesses of our being we must step out of the audience on to the stage,
and wrestle as the hero for the victory of good over evil. We must breathe
into the allegory the breath of our life.

And so, in spite of the critics, a verdict is rendered in the old controversy
about realism and romanticism. Our popular taste is to have the drama
originate in a setting realistic enough to make identification plausible and to
have it terminate in a setting romantic enough to be desirable, but not so
romantic as to be inconceivable. In between the beginning and the end the
canons are liberal, but the true beginning and the happy ending are
landmarks. The moving picture audience rejects fantasy logically
developed, because in pure fantasy there is no familiar foothold in the age
of machines. It rejects realism relentlessly pursued because it does not
enjoy defeat in a struggle that has become its own.
What will be accepted as true, as realistic, as good, as evil, as desirable,
is not eternally fixed. These are fixed by stereotypes, acquired from earlier
experiences and carried over into judgment of later ones. And, therefore, if
the financial investment in each film and in popular magazines were not so
exorbitant as to require instant and widespread popularity, men of spirit and
imagination would be able to use the screen and the periodical, as one
might dream of their being used, to enlarge and to refine, to verify and
criticize the repertory of images with which our imaginations work. But,
given the present costs, the men who make moving pictures, like the church
and the court painters of other ages, must adhere to the stereotypes that they
find, or pay the price of frustrating expectation. The stereotypes can be
altered, but not in time to guarantee success when the film is released six
months from now.
The men who do alter the stereotypes, the pioneering artists and critics,
are naturally depressed and angered at managers and editors who protect
their investments. They are risking everything, then why not the others?
That is not quite fair, for in their righteous fury they have forgotten their
own rewards, which are beyond any that their employers can hope to feel.
They could not, and would not if they could, change places. And they have
forgotten another thing in the unceasing war with Philistia. They have
forgotten that they are measuring their own success by standards that artists
and wise men of the past would never have dreamed of invoking. They are
asking for circulations and audiences that were never considered by any
artist until the last few generations. And when they do not get them, they
are disappointed.
Those who catch on, like Sinclair Lewis in "Main Street," are men who
have succeeded in projecting definitely what great numbers of other people
were obscurely trying to say inside their heads. "You have said it for me."
They establish a new form which is then endlessly copied until it, too,
becomes a stereotype of perception. The next pioneer finds it difficult to
make the public see Main Street any other way. And he, like the forerunners
of Sinclair Lewis, has a quarrel with the public.
This quarrel is due not only to the conflict of stereotypes, but to the
pioneering artist's reverence for his material. Whatever the plane he
chooses, on that plane he remains. If he is dealing with the inwardness of an
event he follows it to its conclusion regardless of the pain it causes. He will
not tag his fantasy to help anyone, or cry peace where there is no peace.
There is his America. But big audiences have no stomach for such severity.
They are more interested in themselves than in anything else in the world.
The selves in which they are interested are the selves that have been
revealed by schools and by tradition. They insist that a work of art shall be a
vehicle with a step where they can climb aboard, and that they shall ride,
not according to the contours of the country, but to a land where for an hour
there are no clocks to punch and no dishes to wash. To satisfy these
demands there exists an intermediate class of artists who are able and
willing to confuse the planes, to piece together a realistic-romantic
compound out of the inventions of greater men, and, as Miss Patterson
advises, give "what real life so rarely does-the triumphant resolution of a set
of difficulties; the anguish of virtue and the triumph of sin… changed to the
glorifications of virtue and the eternal punishment of its enemy."86

The ideologies of politics obey these rules. The foothold of realism is
always there. The picture of some real evil, such as the German threat or
class conflict, is recognizable in the argument. There is a description of
some aspect of the world which is convincing because it agrees with
familiar ideas. But as the ideology deals with an unseen future, as well as
with a tangible present, it soon crosses imperceptibly the frontier of
verification. In describing the present you are more or less tied down to
common experience. In describing what nobody has experienced you are
bound to let go. You stand at Armageddon, more or less, but you battle for
the Lord, perhaps…. A true beginning, true according to the standards
prevailing, and a happy ending. Every Marxist is hard as nails about the
brutalities of the present, and mostly sunshine about the day after the
dictatorship. So were the war propagandists: there was not a bestial quality
in human nature they did not find everywhere east of the Rhine, or west of
it if they were Germans. The bestiality was there all right. But after the
victory, eternal peace. Plenty of this is quite cynically deliberate. For the
skilful propagandist knows that while you must start with a plausible
analysis, you must not keep on analyzing, because the tedium of real
political accomplishment will soon destroy interest. So the propagandist
exhausts the interest in reality by a tolerably plausible beginning, and then
stokes up energy for a long voyage by brandishing a passport to heaven.
The formula works when the public fiction enmeshes itself with a
private urgency. But once enmeshed, in the heat of battle, the original self
and the original stereotype which effected the junction may be wholly lost
to sight.
81. Creative Evolution, Chs. III, IV.
82. Beauty and Ugliness.
83. A fact which bears heavily on the character of news. Cf. Part VII.
84. Cf. Frances Taylor Patterson, Cinema Craftsmanship, pp. 31-32. "III. If the plot lacks suspense:
1. Add an antagonist, 2. Add an obstacle, 3. Add a problem, 4. Emphasize one of the questions
in the minds of the spectator.,.."
85. Op. cit., pp. 6-7.
86. Op. cit., p. 46. "The hero and heroine must in general possess youth, beauty, goodness, exalted
self-sacrifice, and unalterable constancy."
Chapter XII.
Self-Interest Reconsidered
Table of Contents

Therefore, the identical story is not the same story to all who hear it. Each
will enter it at a slightly different point, since no two experiences are
exactly alike; he will reenact it in his own way, and transfuse it with his
own feelings. Sometimes an artist of compelling skill will force us to enter
into lives altogether unlike our own, lives that seem at first glance dull,
repulsive, or eccentric. But that is rare. In almost every story that catches
our attention we become a character and act out the role with a pantomime
of our own. The pantomime may be subtle or gross, may be sympathetic to
the story, or only crudely analogous; but it will consist of those feelings
which are aroused by our conception of the role. And so, the original theme
as it circulates, is stressed, twisted, and embroidered by all the minds
through which it goes. It is as if a play of Shakespeare's were rewritten each
time it is performed with all the changes of emphasis and meaning that the
actors and audience inspired.
Something very like that seems to have happened to the stories in the
sagas before they were definitively written down. In our time the printed
record, such as it is, checks the exuberance of each individual's fancy. But
against rumor there is little or no checks and the original story, true or
invented, grows wings and horns, hoofs and beaks, as the artist in each
gossip works upon it. The first narrator's account does not keep its shape
and proportions. It is edited and revised by all who played with it as they
heard it, used it for day dreams, and passed it on.87
Consequently the more mixed the audience, the greater will be the
variation in the response. For as the audience grows larger, the number of
common words diminishes. Thus the common factors in the story become
more abstract. This story, lacking precise character of its own, is heard by
people of highly varied character. They give it their own character.

The character they give it varies not only with sex and age, race and
religion and social position, but within these cruder classifications,
according to the inherited and acquired constitution of the individual, his
faculties, his career, the progress of his career, an emphasized aspect of his
career, his moods and tenses, or his place on the board in any of the games
of life that he is playing. What reaches him of public affairs, a few lines of
print, some photographs, anecdotes, and some casual experience of his own,
he conceives through his set patterns and recreates with his own emotions.
He does not take his personal problems as partial samples of the greater
environment. He takes his stories of the greater environment as a mimic
enlargement of his private life.
But not necessarily of that private life as he would describe it to
himself. For in his private life the choices are narrow, and much of himself
is squeezed down and out of sight where it cannot directly govern his
outward behavior. And thus, beside the more average people who project
the happiness of their own lives into a general good will, or their
unhappiness into suspicion and hate, there are the outwardly happy people
who are brutal everywhere but in their own circle, as well as the people
who, the more they detest their families, their friends, their jobs, the more
they overflow with love for mankind.
As you descend from generalities to detail, it becomes more apparent
that the character in which men deal with their affairs is not fixed. Possibly
their different selves have a common stem and common qualities, but the
branches and the twigs have many forms. Nobody confronts every situation
with the same character. His character varies in some degree through the
sheer influence of time and accumulating memory, since he is not an
automaton. His character varies, not only in time, but according to
circumstance. The legend of the solitary Englishman in the South Seas, who
invariably shaves and puts on a black tie for dinner, bears witness to his
own intuitive and civilized fear of losing the character which he has
acquired. So do diaries, and albums, and souvenirs, old letters, and old
clothes, and the love of unchanging routine testify to our sense of how hard
it is to step twice in the Heraclitan river.
There is no one self always at work. And therefore it is of great
importance in the formation of any public opinion, what self is engaged.
The Japanese ask the right to settle in California. Clearly it makes a whole
lot of difference whether you conceive the demand as a desire to grow fruit
or to marry the white man's daughter. If two nations are disputing a piece of
territory, it matters greatly whether the people regard the negotiations as a
real estate deal, an attempt to humiliate them, or, in the excited and
provocative language which usually enclouds these arguments, as a rape.
For the self which takes charge of the instincts when we are thinking about
lemons or distant acres is very different from the self which appears when
we are thinking even potentially as the outraged head of a family. In one
case the private feeling which enters into the opinion is tepid, in the other,
red hot. And so while it is so true as to be mere tautology that "self-interest"
determines opinion, the statement is not illuminating, until we know which
self out of many selects and directs the interest so conceived.
Religious teaching and popular wisdom have always distinguished
several personalities in each human being. They have been called the
Higher and Lower, the Spiritual and the Material, the Divine and the
Carnal; and although we may not wholly accept this classification, we
cannot fail to observe that distinctions exist. Instead of two antithetic selves,
a modern man would probably note a good many not so sharply separated.
He would say that the distinction drawn by theologians was arbitrary and
external, because many different selves were grouped together as higher
provided they fitted into the theologian's categories, but he would recognize
nevertheless that here was an authentic clue to the variety of human nature.
We have learned to note many selves, and to be a little less ready to
issue judgment upon them. We understand that we see the same body, but
often a different man, depending on whether he is dealing with a social
equal, a social inferior, or a social superior; on whether he is making love to
a woman he is eligible to marry, or to one whom he is not; on whether he is
courting a woman, or whether he considers himself her proprietor; on
whether he is dealing with his children, his partners, his most trusted
subordinates, the boss who can make him or break him; on whether he is
struggling for the necessities of life, or successful; on whether he is dealing
with a friendly alien, or a despised one; on whether he is in great danger, or
in perfect security; on whether he is alone in Paris or among his family in
Peoria.
People differ widely, of course, in the consistency of their characters, so
widely that they may cover the whole gamut of differences between a split
soul like Dr. Jekyll's and an utterly singleminded Brand, Parsifal, or Don
Quixote. If the selves are too unrelated, we distrust the man; if they are too
inflexibly on one track we find him arid, stubborn, or eccentric. In the
repertory of characters, meager for the isolated and the self-sufficient,
highly varied for the adaptable, there is a whole range of selves, from that
one at the top which we should wish God to see, to those at the bottom that
we ourselves do not dare to see. There may be octaves for the family,—
father, Jehovah, tyrant,—husband, proprietor, male,—lover, lecher,—for the
occupation,—employer, master, exploiter,—competitor, intriguer, enemy,—
subordinate, courtier, snob. Some never come out into public view. Others
are called out only by exceptional circumstances. But the characters take
their form from a man's conception of the situation in which he finds
himself. If the environment to which he is sensitive happens to be the smart
set, he will imitate the character he conceives to be appropriate. That
character will tend to act as modulator of his bearing, his speech, his choice
of subjects, his preferences. Much of the comedy of life lies here, in the
way people imagine their characters for situations that are strange to them:
the professor among promoters, the deacon at a poker game, the cockney in
the country, the paste diamond among real diamonds.

Into the making of a man's characters there enters a variety of influences not
easily separated.88 The analysis in its fundamentals is perhaps still as
doubtful as it was in the fifth century B. C. when Hippocrates formulated
the doctrine of the humors, distinguished the sanguine, the melancholic, the
choleric, and the phlegmatic dispositions, and ascribed them to the blood,
the black bile, the yellow bile, and the phlegm. The latest theories, such as
one finds them in Cannon,89 Adler,90 Kempf,91 appear to follow much the
same scent, from the outward behavior and the inner consciousness to the
physiology of the body. But in spite of an immensely improved technique,
no one would be likely to claim that there are settled conclusions which
enable us to set apart nature from nurture, and abstract the native character
from the acquired. It is only in what Joseph Jastrow has called the slums of
psychology that the explanation of character is regarded as a fixed system
to be applied by phrenologists, palmists, fortune-tellers, mind-readers, and a
few political professors. There you will still find it asserted that "the
Chinese are fond of colors, and have their eyebrows much vaulted" while
"the heads of the Calmucks are depressed from above, but very large
laterally, about the organ which gives the inclination to acquire; and this
nation's propensity to steal, etc., is admitted."92
The modern psychologists are disposed to regard the outward behavior
of an adult as an equation between a number of variables, such as the
resistance of the environment, repressed cravings of several maturities, and
the manifest personality.93 They permit us to suppose, though I have not
seen the notion formulated, that the repression or control of cravings is
fixed not in relation to the whole person all the time, but more or less in
respect to his various selves. There are things he will not do as a patriot that
he will do when he is not thinking of himself as a patriot. No doubt there
are impulses, more or less incipient in childhood, that are never exercised
again in the whole of a man's life, except as they enter obscurely and
indirectly into combination with other impulses. But even that is not certain,
since repression is not irretrievable. For just as psychoanalysis can bring to
the surface a buried impulse, so can social situations.94 It is only when our
surroundings remain normal and placid, when what is expected of us by
those we meet is consistent, that we live without knowledge of many of our
dispositions. When the unexpected occurs, we learn much about ourselves
that we did not know.
The selves, which we construct with the help of all who influence us,
prescribe which impulses, how emphasized, how directed, are appropriate
to certain typical situations for which we have learned prepared attitudes.
For a recognizable type of experience, there is a character which controls
the outward manifestations of our whole being. Murderous hate is, for
example, controlled in civil life. Though you choke with rage, you must not
display it as a parent, child, employer, politician. You would not wish to
display a personality that exudes murderous hate. You frown upon it, and
the people around you also frown. But if a war breaks out, the chances are
that everybody you admire will begin to feel the justification of killing and
hating. At first the vent for these feelings is very narrow. The selves which
come to the front are those which are attuned to a real love of country, the
kind of feeling that you find in Rupert Brooke, and in Sir Edward Grey's
speech on August 3,1914, and in President Wilson's address to Congress on
April 2, 1917. The reality of war is still abhorred, and what war actually
means is learned but gradually. For previous wars are only transfigured
memories. In that honeymoon phase, the realists of war rightly insist that
the nation is not yet awake, and reassure each other by saying: "Wait for the
casualty lists." Gradually the impulse to kill becomes the main business,
and all those characters which might modify it, disintegrate. The impulse
becomes central, is sanctified, and gradually turns unmanageable. It seeks a
vent not alone on the idea of the enemy, which is all the enemy most people
actually see during the war, but upon all the persons and objects and ideas
that have always been hateful. Hatred of the enemy is legitimate. These
other hatreds have themselves legitimized by the crudest analogy, and by
what, once having cooled off, we recognize as the most far-fetched analogy.
It takes a long time to subdue so powerful an impulse once it goes loose.
And therefore, when the war is over in fact, it takes time and struggle to
regain self-control, and to deal with the problems of peace in civilian
character.
Modern war, as Mr. Herbert Croly has said, is inherent in the political
structure of modern society, but outlawed by its ideals. For the civilian
population there exists no ideal code of conduct in war, such as the soldier
still possesses and chivalry once prescribed. The civilians are without
standards, except those that the best of them manage to improvise. The only
standards they possess make war an accursed thing. Yet though the war may
be a necessary one, no moral training has prepared them for it. Only their
higher selves have a code and patterns, and when they have to act in what
the higher regards as a lower character profound disturbance results.
The preparation of characters for all the situations in which men may
find themselves is one function of a moral education. Clearly then, it
depends for its success upon the sincerity and knowledge with which the
environment has been explored. For in a world falsely conceived, our own
characters are falsely conceived, and we misbehave. So the moralist must
choose: either he must offer a pattern of conduct for every phase of life,
however distasteful some of its phases may be, or he must guarantee that
his pupils will never be confronted by the situations he disapproves. Either
he must abolish war, or teach people how to wage it with the greatest
psychic economy; either he must abolish the economic life of man and feed
him with stardust and dew, or he must investigate all the perplexities of
economic life and offer patterns of conduct which are applicable in a world
where no man is self-supporting. But that is just what the prevailing moral
culture so generally refuses to do. In its best aspects it is diffident at the
awful complication of the modern world. In its worst, it is just cowardly.
Now whether the moralists study economics and politics and psychology, or
whether the social scientists educate the moralists is no great matter. Each
generation will go unprepared into the modern world, unless it has been
taught to conceive the kind of personality it will have to be among the
issues it will most likely meet.

Most of this the naive view of self-interest leaves out of account. It forgets
that self and interest are both conceived somehow, and that for the most part
they are conventionally conceived. The ordinary doctrine of self-interest
usually omits altogether the cognitive function. So insistent is it on the fact
that human beings finally refer all things to themselves, that it does not stop
to notice that men's ideas of all things and of themselves are not instinctive.
They are acquired.
Thus it may be true enough, as James Madison wrote in the tenth paper
of the Federalist, that "a landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a
mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser interests, grow up
of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into different classes,
actuated by different sentiments and views." But if you examine the context
of Madison's paper, you discover something which I think throws light upon
that view of instinctive fatalism, called sometimes the economic
interpretation of history. Madison was arguing for the federal constitution,
and "among the numerous advantages of the union" he set forth "its
tendency to break and control the violence of faction." Faction was what
worried Madison. And the causes of faction he traced to "the nature of
man," where latent dispositions are "brought into different degrees of
activity, according to the different circumstances of civil society. A zeal for
different opinions concerning religion, concerning government and many
other points, as well of speculation as of practice; an attachment to different
leaders ambitiously contending for preeminence and power, or to persons of
other descriptions whose fortunes have been interesting to the human
passions, have, in turn, divided mankind into parties, inflamed them with
mutual animosity, and rendered them much more disposed to vex and
oppress each other, than to coöperate for their common good. So strong is
this propensity of mankind to fall into mutual animosities, that where no
substantial occasion presents itself, the most frivolous and fanciful
distinctions have been sufficient to kindle their unfriendly passions and
excite their most violent conflicts. But the most common and durable source
of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property."
Madison's theory, therefore, is that the propensity to faction may be
kindled by religious or political opinions, by leaders, but most commonly
by the distribution of property. Yet note that Madison claims only that men
are divided by their relation to property. He does not say that their property
and their opinions are cause and effect, but that differences of property are
the causes of differences of opinion. The pivotal word in Madison's
argument is "different." From the existence of differing economic situations
you can tentatively infer a probable difference of opinions, but you cannot
infer what those opinions will necessarily be.
This reservation cuts radically into the claims of the theory as that
theory is usually held. That the reservation is necessary, the enormous
contradiction between dogma and practice among orthodox socialists bears
witness. They argue that the next stage in social evolution is the inevitable
result of the present stage. But in order to produce that inevitable next stage
they organize and agitate to produce "class consciousness." Why, one asks,
does not the economic situation produce consciousness of class in
everybody? It just doesn't, that is all. And therefore the proud claim will not
stand that the socialist philosophy rests on prophetic insight into destiny. It
rests on an hypothesis about human nature.95
The socialist practice is based on a belief that if men are economically
situated in different ways, they can then be induced to hold certain views.
Undoubtedly they often come to believe, or can be induced to believe
different things, as they are, for example, landlords or tenants, employees or
employers, skilled or unskilled laborers, wageworkers or salaried men,
buyers or sellers, farmers or middle-men, exporters or importers, creditors
or debtors. Differences of income make a profound difference in contact
and opportunity. Men who work at machines will tend, as Mr. Thorstein
Veblen has so brilliantly demonstrated,96 to interpret experience differently
from handicraftsmen or traders. If this were all that the materialistic
conception of politics asserted, the theory would be an immensely valuable
hypothesis that every interpreter of opinion would have to use. But he
would often have to abandon the theory, and he would always have to be on
guard. For in trying to explain a certain public opinion, it is rarely obvious
which of a man's many social relations is effecting a particular opinion.
Does Smith's opinion arise from his problems as a landlord, an importer, an
owner of railway shares, or an employer? Does Jones's opinion, Jones being
a weaver in a textile mill, come from the attitude of his boss, the
competition of new immigrants, his wife's grocery bills, or the ever present
contract with the firm which is selling him a Ford car and a house and lot
on the instalment plan? Without special inquiry you cannot tell. The
economic determinist cannot tell.
A man's various economic contacts limit or enlarge the range of his
opinions. But which of the contacts, in what guise, on what theory, the
materialistic conception of politics cannot predict. It can predict, with a
high degree of probability, that if a man owns a factory, his ownership will
figure in those opinions which seem to have some bearing on that factory.
But how the function of being an owner will figure, no economic
determinist as such, can tell you. There is no fixed set of opinions on any
question that go with being the owner of a factory, no views on labor, on
property, on management, let alone views on less immediate matters. The
determinist can predict that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred the owner
will resist attempts to deprive him of ownership, or that he will favor
legislation which he thinks will increase his profits. But since there is no
magic in ownership which enables a business man to know what laws will
make him prosper, there is no chain of cause and effect described in
economic materialism which enables anyone to prophesy whether the
owner will take a long view or a short one, a competitive or a cooperative.
Did the theory have the validity which is so often claimed for it, it
would enable us to prophesy. We could analyze the economic interests of a
people, and deduce what the people was bound to do. Marx tried that, and
after a good guess about the trusts, went wholly wrong. The first socialist
experiment came, not as he predicted, out of the culmination of capitalist
development in the West, but out of the collapse of a pre-capitalist system
in the East. Why did he go wrong? Why did his greatest disciple, Lenin, go
wrong? Because the Marxians thought that men's economic position would
irresistibly produce a clear conception of their economic interests. They
thought they themselves possessed that clear conception, and that what they
knew the rest of mankind would learn. The event has shown, not only that a
clear conception of interest does not arise automatically in everyone, but
that it did not arise even in Marx and Lenin themselves. After all that Marx
and Lenin have written, the social behavior of mankind is still obscure. It
ought not to be, if economic position alone determined public opinion.
Position ought, if their theory were correct, not only to divide mankind into
classes, but to supply each class with a view of its interest and a coherent
policy for obtaining it. Yet nothing is more certain than that all classes of
men are in constant perplexity as to what their interests are.97
This dissolves the impact of economic determinism. For if our
economic interests are made up of our variable concepts of those interests,
then as the master key to social processes the theory fails. That theory
assumes that men are capable of adopting only one version of their interest,
and that having adopted it, they move fatally to realize it. It assumes the
existence of a specific class interest. That assumption is false. A class
interest can be conceived largely or narrowly, selfishly or unselfishly, in the
light of no facts, some facts, many facts, truth and error. And so collapses
the Marxian remedy for class conflicts. That remedy assumes that if all
property could be held in common, class differences would disappear. The
assumption is false. Property might well be held in common, and yet not be
conceived as a whole. The moment any group of people failed to see
communism in a communist manner, they would divide into classes on the
basis of what they saw.
In respect to the existing social order Marxian socialism emphasizes
property conflict as the maker of opinion, in respect to the loosely defined
working class it ignores property conflict as the basis of agitation, in respect
to the future it imagines a society without property conflict, and, therefore,
without conflict of opinion. Now in the existing social order there may be
more instances where one man must lose if another is to gain, than there
would be under socialism, but for every case where one must lose for
another to gain, there are endless cases where men simply imagine the
conflict because they are uneducated. And under socialism, though you
removed every instance of absolute conflict, the partial access of each man
to the whole range of facts would nevertheless create conflict. A socialist
state will not be able to dispense with education, morality, or liberal
science, though on strict materialistic grounds the communal ownership of
properties ought to make them superfluous. The communists in Russia
would not propagate their faith with such unflagging zeal if economic
determinism were alone determining the opinion of the Russian people.

The socialist theory of human nature is, like the hedonistic calculus, an
example of false determinism. Both assume that the unlearned dispositions
fatally but intelligently produce a certain type of behavior. The socialist
believes that the dispositions pursue the economic interest of a class; the
hedonist believes that they pursue pleasure and avoid pain. Both theories
rest on a naive view of instinct, a view, defined by James,98 though
radically qualified by him, as "the faculty of acting in such a way as to
produce certain ends, without foresight of the ends and without previous
education in the performance."
It is doubtful whether instinctive action of this sort figures at all in the
social life of mankind. For as James pointed out:99 "every instinctive act in
an animal with memory must cease to be 'blind' after being once repeated."
Whatever the equipment at birth, the innate dispositions are from earliest
infancy immersed in experience which determines what shall excite them as
stimulus. "They become capable," as Mr. McDougall says,100 "of being
initiated, not only by the perception of objects of the kind which directly
excite the innate disposition, the natural or native excitants of the instinct,
but also by ideas of such objects, and by perceptions and by ideas of objects
of other kinds."101
It is only the "central part of the disposition"102 says Mr. McDougall
further, "that retains its specific character and remains common to all
individuals and all situations in which the instinct is excited." The cognitive
processes, and the actual bodily movements by which the instinct achieves
its end may be indefinitely complicated. In other words, man has an instinct
of fear, but what he will fear and how he will try to escape, is determined
not from birth, but by experience.
If it were not for this variability, it would be difficult to conceive the
inordinate variety of human nature. But when you consider that all the
important tendencies of the creature, his appetites, his loves, his hates, his
curiosity, his sexual cravings, his fears, and pugnacity, are freely attachable
to all sorts of objects as stimulus, and to all kinds of objects as gratification,
the complexity of human nature is not so inconceivable. And when you
think that each new generation is the casual victim of the way a previous
generation was conditioned, as well as the inheritor of the environment that
resulted, the possible combinations and permutations are enormous.
There is no prima facie case then for supposing that because persons
crave some particular thing, or behave in some particular way, human
nature is fatally constituted to crave that and act thus. The craving and the
action are both learned, and in another generation might be learned
differently. Analytic psychology and social history unite in supporting this
conclusion. Psychology indicates how essentially casual is the nexus
between the particular stimulus and the particular response. Anthropology
in the widest sense reinforces the view by demonstrating that the things
which have excited men's passions, and the means which they have used to
realize them, differ endlessly from age to age and from place to place.
Men pursue their interest. But how they shall pursue it is not fatally
determined, and, therefore, within whatever limits of time this planet will
continue to support human life, man can set no term upon the creative
energies of men. He can issue no doom of automatism. He can say, if he
must, that for his life there will be no changes which he can recognize as
good. But in saying that he will be confining his life to what he can see with
his eye, rejecting what he might see with his mind; he will be taking as the
measure of good a measure which is only the one he happens to possess. He
can find no ground for abandoning his highest hopes and relaxing his
conscious effort unless he chooses to regard the unknown as the
unknowable, unless he elects to believe that what no one knows no one will
know, and that what someone has not yet learned no one will ever be able to
teach.
87. For an interesting example, see the case described by C. J. Jung, Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse,
1911, Vol. I, p. 81. Translated by Constance Long, in Analytical Psychology, Ch. IV.
88. For an interesting sketch of the more noteworthy early attempts to explain character, see the
chapter called "The Antecedents of the Study of Character and Temperament," in Joseph
Jastrow's The Psychology of Conviction.
89. Bodily Changes in Pleasure, Pain and Anger.
90. The Neurotic Constitution.
91. The Autonomic Functions and the Personality; Psychopathology. Cf. also Louis Berman: The
Glands Regulating Personality.
92. Jastrow, op. cit., p. 156.
93. Formulated by Kempf, Psychopathology, p. 74, as follows:
Manifest wishes } over } Later Repressed Wishes } Over } opposed by the resistance
of the Adolescent Repressed Wishes } environment=Behavior Over } Preadolescent
Repressed Wishes }
94. Cf. the very interesting book of Everett Dean Martin, The Behavior of Crowds.
Also Hobbes, Leviathan, Part II, Ch. 25. "For the passions of men, which asunder are
moderate, as the heat of one brand, in an assembly are like many brands, that inflame one
another, especially when they blow one another with orations…."
LeBon, The Crowd, elaborates this observation of Hobbes's.
95. Cf. Thorstein Veblen, "The Socialist Economics of Karl Marx and His Followers," in The Place
of Science in Modern Civilization, esp. pp. 413-418.
96. The Theory of Business Enterprise.
97. As a matter of fact, when it came to the test, Lenin completely abandoned the materialistic
interpretation of politics. Had he held sincerely to the Marxian formula when he seized power in
1917, he would have said to himself: according to the teachings of Marx, socialism will develop
out of a mature capitalism… here am I, in control of a nation that is only entering upon a
capitalist development… it is true that I am a socialist, but I am a scientific socialist… it follows
that for the present all idea of a socialist republic is out of the question… we must advance
capitalism in order that the evolution which Marx predicted may take place. But Lenin did
nothing of the sort. Instead of waiting for evolution to evolve, he tried by will, force, and
education, to defy the historical process which his philosophy assumed.
Since this was written Lenin has abandoned communism on the ground that Russia does not
possess the necessary basis in a mature capitalism. He now says that Russia must create
capitalism, which will create a proletariat, which will some day create communism. This is at
least consistent with Marxist dogma. But it shows how little determinism there is in the opinions
of a determinist.
98. Principles of Psychology, Vol. II, p. 383.
99. Op. cit., Vol. II, p. 390.
100. Introduction to Social Psychology, Fourth Edition, pp. 31-32.
101. "Most definitions of instincts and instinctive actions take account only of their conative
aspects… and it is a common mistake to ignore the cognitive and affective aspects of the
instinctive mental process." Footnote op. cit., p. 29.
102. p. 34.
Part V.
The Making of a Common Will
Table of Contents
Chapter XIII.
The Transfer of Interest
Table of Contents

This goes to show that there are many variables in each man's impressions
of the invisible world. The points of contact vary, the stereotyped
expectations vary, the interest enlisted varies most subtly of all. The living
impressions of a large number of people are to an immeasurable degree
personal in each of them, and unmanageably complex in the mass. How,
then, is any practical relationship established between what is in people's
heads and what is out there beyond their ken in the environment? How in
the language of democratic theory, do great numbers of people feeling each
so privately about so abstract a picture, develop any common will? How
does a simple and constant idea emerge from this complex of variables?
How are those things known as the Will of the People, or the National
Purpose, or Public Opinion crystallized out of such fleeting and casual
imagery?
That there is a real difficulty here was shown by an angry tilt in the
spring of 1921 between the American Ambassador to England and a very
large number of other Americans. Mr. Harvey, speaking at a British dinner
table, had assured the world without the least sign of hesitancy what were
the motives of Americans in 1917.103 As he described them, they were not
the motives which President Wilson had insisted upon when he enunciated
the American mind. Now, of course, neither Mr. Harvey nor Mr. Wilson,
nor the critics and friends of either, nor any one else, can know
quantitatively and qualitatively what went on in thirty or forty million adult
minds. But what everybody knows is that a war was fought and won by a
multitude of efforts, stimulated, no one knows in what proportion, by the
motives of Wilson and the motives of Harvey and all kinds of hybrids of the
two. People enlisted and fought, worked, paid taxes, sacrificed to a common
end, and yet no one can begin to say exactly what moved each person to do
each thing that he did. It is no use, then, Mr. Harvey telling a soldier who
thought this was a war to end war that the soldier did not think any such
thing. The soldier who thought that thought that. And Mr. Harvey, who
thought something else, thought something else.
In the same speech Mr. Harvey formulated with equal clarity what the
voters of 1920 had in their minds. That is a rash thing to do, and, if you
simply assume that all who voted your ticket voted as you did, then it is a
disingenuous thing to do. The count shows that sixteen millions voted
Republican, and nine millions Democratic. They voted, says Mr. Harvey,
for and against the League of Nations, and in support of this claim, he can
point to Mr. Wilson's request for a referendum, and to the undeniable fact
that the Democratic party and Mr. Cox insisted that the League was the
issue. But then, saying that the League was the issue did not make the
League the issue, and by counting the votes on election day you do not
know the real division of opinion about the League. There were, for
example, nine million Democrats. Are you entitled to believe that all of
them are staunch supporters of the League? Certainly you are not. For your
knowledge of American politics tells you that many of the millions voted,
as they always do, to maintain the existing social system in the South, and
that whatever their views on the League, they did not vote to express their
views. Those who wanted the League were no doubt pleased that the
Democratic party wanted it too. Those who disliked the League may have
held their noses as they voted. But both groups of Southerners voted the
same ticket.
Were the Republicans more unanimous? Anybody can pick Republican
voters enough out of his circle of friends to cover the whole gamut of
opinion from the irreconcilability of Senators Johnson and Knox to the
advocacy of Secretary Hoover and Chief Justice Taft. No one can say
definitely how many people felt in any particular way about the League, nor
how many people let their feelings on that subject determine their vote.
When there are only two ways of expressing a hundred varieties of feeling,
there is no certain way of knowing what the decisive combination was.
Senator Borah found in the Republican ticket a reason for voting
Republican, but so did President Lowell. The Republican majority was
composed of men and women who thought a Republican victory would kill
the League, plus those who thought it the most practical way to secure the
League, plus those who thought it the surest way offered to obtain an
amended League. All these voters were inextricably entangled with their
own desire, or the desire of other voters to improve business, or put labor in
its place, or to punish the Democrats for going to war, or to punish them for
not having gone sooner, or to get rid of Mr. Burleson, or to improve the
price of wheat, or to lower taxes, or to stop Mr. Daniels from outbuilding
the world, or to help Mr. Harding do the same thing.
And yet a sort of decision emerged; Mr. Harding moved into the White
House. For the least common denominator of all the votes was that the
Democrats should go and the Republicans come in. That was the only factor
remaining after all the contradictions had cancelled each other out. But that
factor was enough to alter policy for four years. The precise reasons why
change was desired on that November day in 1920 are not recorded, not
even in the memories of the individual voters. The reasons are not fixed.
They grow and change and melt into other reasons, so that the public
opinions Mr. Harding has to deal with are not the opinions that elected him.
That there is no inevitable connection between an assortment of opinions
and a particular line of action everyone saw in 1916. Elected apparently on
the cry that he kept us out of war, Mr. Wilson within five months led the
country into war.
The working of the popular will, therefore, has always called for
explanation. Those who have been most impressed by its erratic working
have found a prophet in M. LeBon, and have welcomed generalizations
about what Sir Robert Peel called "that great compound of folly, weakness,
prejudice, wrong feeling, right feeling, obstinacy and newspaper paragraphs
which is called public opinion." Others have concluded that since out of
drift and incoherence, settled aims do appear, there must be a mysterious
contrivance at work somewhere over and above the inhabitants of a nation.
They invoke a collective soul, a national mind, a spirit of the age which
imposes order upon random opinion. An oversoul seems to be needed, for
the emotions and ideas in the members of a group do not disclose anything
so simple and so crystalline as the formula which those same individuals
will accept as a true statement of their Public Opinion.

But the facts can, I think, be explained more convincingly without the help
of the oversoul in any of its disguises. After all, the art of inducing all sorts
of people who think differently to vote alike is practiced in every political
campaign. In 1916, for example, the Republican candidate had to produce
Republican votes out of many different kinds of Republicans. Let us look at
Mr. Hughes' first speech after accepting the nomination.104 The context is
still clear enough in our minds to obviate much explanation; yet the issues
are no longer contentious. The candidate was a man of unusually plain
speech, who had been out of politics for several years and was not
personally committed on the issues of the recent past. He had, moreover,
none of that wizardry which popular leaders like Roosevelt, Wilson, or
Lloyd George possess, none of that histrionic gift by which such men
impersonate the feelings of their followers. From that aspect of politics he
was by temperament and by training remote. But yet he knew by calculation
what the politician's technic is. He was one of those people who know just
how to do a thing, but who can not quite do it themselves. They are often
better teachers than the virtuoso to whom the art is so much second nature
that he himself does not know how he does it. The statement that those who
can, do; those who cannot, teach, is not nearly so much of a reflection on
the teacher as it sounds.
Mr. Hughes knew the occasion was momentous, and he had prepared
his manuscript carefully. In a box sat Theodore Roosevelt just back from
Missouri. All over the house sat the veterans of Armageddon in various
stages of doubt and dismay. On the platform and in the other boxes the ex-
whited sepulchres and ex-second-story men of 1912 were to be seen,
obviously in the best of health and in a melting mood. Out beyond the hall
there were powerful pro-Germans and powerful pro-Allies; a war party in
the East and in the big cities; a peace party in the middle and far West.
There was strong feeling about Mexico. Mr. Hughes had to form a majority
against the Democrats out of people divided into all sorts of combinations
on Taft vs. Roosevelt, pro-Germans vs. pro-Allies, war vs. neutrality,
Mexican intervention vs. non-intervention.
About the morality or the wisdom of the affair we are, of course, not
concerned here. Our only interest is in the method by which a leader of
heterogeneous opinion goes about the business of securing a homogeneous
vote.
"This representative gathering is a happy augury. It means
the strength of reunion. It means that the party of Lincoln is
restored…."
The italicized words are binders: Lincoln in such a speech has of course,
no relation to Abraham Lincoln. It is merely a stereotype by which the piety
which surrounds that name can be transferred to the Republican candidate
who now stands in his shoes. Lincoln reminds the Republicans, Bull Moose
and Old Guard, that before the schism they had a common history. About
the schism no one can afford to speak. But it is there, as yet unhealed.
The speaker must heal it. Now the schism of 1912 had arisen over
domestic questions; the reunion of 1916 was, as Mr. Roosevelt had
declared, to be based on a common indignation against Mr. Wilson's
conduct of international affairs. But international affairs were also a
dangerous source of conflict. It was necessary to find an opening subject
which would not only ignore 1912 but would avoid also the explosive
conflicts of 1916. The speaker skilfully selected the spoils system in
diplomatic appointments. "Deserving Democrats" was a discrediting phrase,
and Mr. Hughes at once evokes it. The record being indefensible, there is no
hesitation in the vigor of the attack. Logically it was an ideal introduction to
a common mood.
Mr. Hughes then turns to Mexico, beginning with an historical review.
He had to consider the general sentiment that affairs were going badly in
Mexico; also, a no less general sentiment that war should be avoided; and
two powerful currents of opinion, one of which said President Wilson was
right in not recognizing Huerta, the other which preferred Huerta to
Carranza, and intervention to both. Huerta was the first sore spot in the
record…
"He was certainly in fact the head of the Government in Mexico."
But the moralists who regarded Huerta as a drunken murderer had to be
placated.
"Whether or not he should be recognized was a question to be
determined in the exercise of a sound discretion, but according to correct
principles."
So instead of saying that Huerta should have been recognized, the
candidate says that correct principles ought to be applied. Everybody
believes in correct principles, and everybody, of course, believes he
possesses them. To blur the issue still further President Wilson's policy is
described as "intervention." It was that in law, perhaps, but not in the sense
then currently meant by the word. By stretching the word to cover what Mr.
Wilson had done, as well as what the real interventionists wanted, the issue
between the two factions was to be repressed.
Having got by the two explosive points "Huerta" and "intervention" by
letting the words mean all things to all men, the speech passes for a while to
safer ground. The candidate tells the story of Tampico, Vera Cruz, Villa,
Santa Ysabel, Columbus and Carrizal. Mr. Hughes is specific, either
because the facts as known from the newspapers are irritating, or because
the true explanation is, as for example in regard to Tampico, too
complicated. No contrary passions could be aroused by such a record. But
at the end the candidate had to take a position. His audience expected it.
The indictment was Mr. Roosevelt's. Would Mr. Hughes adopt his remedy,
intervention?
"The nation has no policy of aggression toward Mexico. We have no
desire for any part of her territory. We wish her to have peace, stability and
prosperity. We should be ready to aid her in binding up her wounds, in
relieving her from starvation and distress, in giving her in every practicable
way the benefits of our disinterested friendship. The conduct of this
administration has created difficulties which we shall have to surmount….
We shall have to adopt a new policy, a policy of firmness and consistency
through which alone we can promote an enduring friendship."
The theme friendship is for the non-interventionists, the theme "new
policy" and "firmness" is for the interventionists. On the non-contentious
record, the detail is overwhelming; on the issue everything is cloudy.
Concerning the European war Mr. Hughes employed an ingenious
formula:
"I stand for the unflinching maintenance of all American
rights on land and sea."
In order to understand the force of that statement at the time it was
spoken, we must remember how each faction during the period of neutrality
believed that the nations it opposed in Europe were alone violating
American rights. Mr. Hughes seemed to say to the pro-Allies: I would have
coerced Germany. But the pro-Germans had been insisting that British sea
power was violating most of our rights. The formula covers two
diametrically opposed purposes by the symbolic phrase "American rights."
But there was the Lusitania. Like the 1912 schism, it was an invincible
obstacle to harmony.
"… I am confident that there would have been no destruction
of American lives by the sinking of the Lusitania."
Thus, what cannot be compromised must be obliterated, when there is a
question on which we cannot all hope to get together, let us pretend that it
does not exist. About the future of American relations with Europe Mr.
Hughes was silent. Nothing he could say would possibly please the two
irreconcilable factions for whose support he was bidding.
It is hardly necessary to say that Mr. Hughes did not invent this technic
and did not employ it with the utmost success. But he illustrated how a
public opinion constituted out of divergent opinions is clouded; how its
meaning approaches the neutral tint formed out of the blending of many
colors. Where superficial harmony is the aim and conflict the fact,
obscurantism in a public appeal is the usual result. Almost always
vagueness at a crucial point in public debate is a symptom of cross-
purposes.

But how is it that a vague idea so often has the power to unite deeply felt
opinions? These opinions, we recall, however deeply they may be felt, are
not in continual and pungent contact with the facts they profess to treat. On
the unseen environment, Mexico, the European war, our grip is slight
though our feeling may be intense. The original pictures and words which
aroused it have not anything like the force of the feeling itself. The account
of what has happened out of sight and hearing in a place where we have
never been, has not and never can have, except briefly as in a dream or
fantasy, all the dimensions of reality. But it can arouse all, and sometimes
even more emotion than the reality. For the trigger can be pulled by more
than one stimulus.
The stimulus which originally pulled the trigger may have been a series
of pictures in the mind aroused by printed or spoken words. These pictures
fade and are hard to keep steady; their contours and their pulse fluctuate.
Gradually the process sets in of knowing what you feel without being
entirely certain why you feel it. The fading pictures are displaced by other
pictures, and then by names or symbols. But the emotion goes on, capable
now of being aroused by the substituted images and names. Even in severe
thinking these substitutions take place, for if a man is trying to compare two
complicated situations, he soon finds exhausting the attempt to hold both
fully in mind in all their detail. He employs a shorthand of names and signs
and samples. He has to do this if he is to advance at all, because he cannot
carry the whole baggage in every phrase through every step he takes. But if
he forgets that he has substituted and simplified, he soon lapses into
verbalism, and begins to talk about names regardless of objects. And then
he has no way of knowing when the name divorced from its first thing is
carrying on a misalliance with some other thing. It is more difficult still to
guard against changelings in casual politics.
For by what is known to psychologists as conditioned response, an
emotion is not attached merely to one idea. There are no end of things
which can arouse the emotion, and no end of things which can satisfy it.
This is particularly true where the stimulus is only dimly and indirectly
perceived, and where the objective is likewise indirect. For you can
associate an emotion, say fear, first with something immediately dangerous,
then with the idea of that thing, then with something similar to that idea,
and so on and on. The whole structure of human culture is in one respect an
elaboration of the stimuli and responses of which the original emotional
capacities remain a fairly fixed center. No doubt the quality of emotion has
changed in the course of history, but with nothing like the speed, or
elaboration, that has characterized the conditioning of it.
People differ widely in their susceptibility to ideas. There are some in
whom the idea of a starving child in Russia is practically as vivid as a
starving child within sight. There are others who are almost incapable of
being excited by a distant idea. There are many gradations between. And
there are people who are insensitive to facts, and aroused only by ideas. But
though the emotion is aroused by the idea, we are unable to satisfy the
emotion by acting ourselves upon the scene itself. The idea of the starving
Russian child evokes a desire to feed the child. But the person so aroused
cannot feed it. He can only give money to an impersonal organization, or to
a personification which he calls Mr. Hoover. His money does not reach that
child. It goes to a general pool from which a mass of children are fed. And
so just as the idea is second hand, so are the effects of the action second
hand. The cognition is indirect, the conation is indirect, only the effect is
immediate. Of the three parts of the process, the stimulus comes from
somewhere out of sight, the response reaches somewhere out of sight, only
the emotion exists entirely within the person. Of the child's hunger he has
only an idea, of the child's relief he has only an idea, but of his own desire
to help he has a real experience. It is the central fact of the business, the
emotion within himself, which is first hand.
Within limits that vary, the emotion is transferable both as regards
stimulus and response. Therefore, if among a number of people, possessing
various tendencies to respond, you can find a stimulus which will arouse the
same emotion in many of them, you can substitute it for the original stimuli.
If, for example, one man dislikes the League, another hates Mr. Wilson, and
a third fears labor, you may be able to unite them if you can find some
symbol which is the antithesis of what they all hate. Suppose that symbol is
Americanism. The first man may read it as meaning the preservation of
American isolation, or as he may call it, independence; the second as the
rejection of a politician who clashes with his idea of what an American
president should be, the third as a call to resist revolution. The symbol in
itself signifies literally no one thing in particular, but it can be associated
with almost anything. And because of that it can become the common bond
of common feelings, even though those feelings were originally attached to
disparate ideas.
When political parties or newspapers declare for Americanism,
Progressivism, Law and Order, Justice, Humanity, they hope to amalgamate
the emotion of conflicting factions which would surely divide, if, instead of
these symbols, they were invited to discuss a specific program. For when a
coalition around the symbol has been effected, feeling flows toward
conformity under the symbol rather than toward critical scrutiny of the
measures. It is, I think, convenient and technically correct to call multiple
phrases like these symbolic. They do not stand for specific ideas, but for a
sort of truce or junction between ideas. They are like a strategic railroad
center where many roads converge regardless of their ultimate origin or
their ultimate destination. But he who captures the symbols by which public
feeling is for the moment contained, controls by that much the approaches
of public policy. And as long as a particular symbol has the power of
coalition, ambitious factions will fight for possession. Think, for example,
of Lincoln's name or of Roosevelt's. A leader or an interest that can make
itself master of current symbols is master of the current situation. There are
limits, of course. Too violent abuse of the actualities which groups of
people think the symbol represents, or too great resistance in the name of
that symbol to new purposes, will, so to speak, burst the symbol. In this
manner, during the year 1917, the imposing symbol of Holy Russia and the
Little Father burst under the impact of suffering and defeat.

The tremendous consequences of Russia's collapse were felt on all the
fronts and among all the peoples. They led directly to a striking experiment
in the crystallization of a common opinion out of the varieties of opinion
churned up by the war. The Fourteen Points were addressed to all the
governments, allied, enemy, neutral, and to all the peoples. They were an
attempt to knit together the chief imponderables of a world war. Necessarily
this was a new departure, because this was the first great war in which all
the deciding elements of mankind could be brought to think about the same
ideas, or at least about the same names for ideas, simultaneously. Without
cable, radio, telegraph, and daily press, the experiment of the Fourteen
Points would have been impossible. It was an attempt to exploit the modern
machinery of communication to start the return to a "common
consciousness" throughout the world.
But first we must examine some of the circumstances as they presented
themselves at the end of 1917. For in the form which the document finally
assumed, all these considerations are somehow represented. During the
summer and autumn a series of events had occurred which profoundly
affected the temper of the people and the course of the war. In July the
Russians had made a last offensive, had been disastrously beaten, and the
process of demoralization which led to the Bolshevik revolution of
November had begun. Somewhat earlier the French had suffered a severe
and almost disastrous defeat in Champagne which produced mutinies in the
army and a defeatist agitation among the civilians. England was suffering
from the effects of the submarine raids, from the terrible losses of the
Flanders battles, and in November at Cambrai the British armies met a
reverse that appalled the troops at the front and the leaders at home.
Extreme war weariness pervaded the whole of western Europe.
In effect, the agony and disappointment had jarred loose men's
concentration on the accepted version of the war. Their interests were no
longer held by the ordinary official pronouncements, and their attention
began to wander, fixing now upon their own suffering, now upon their party
and class purposes, now upon general resentments against the governments.
That more or less perfect organization of perception by official propaganda,
of interest and attention by the stimuli of hope, fear, and hatred, which is
called morale, was by way of breaking down. The minds of men
everywhere began to search for new attachments that promised relief.
Suddenly they beheld a tremendous drama. On the Eastern front there
was a Christmas truce, an end of slaughter, an end of noise, a promise of
peace. At Brest-Litovsk the dream of all simple people had come to life: it
was possible to negotiate, there was some other way to end the ordeal than
by matching lives with the enemy. Timidly, but with rapt attention, people
began to turn to the East. Why not, they asked? What is it all for? Do the
politicians know what they are doing? Are we really fighting for what they
say? Is it possible, perhaps, to secure it without fighting? Under the ban of
the censorship, little of this was allowed to show itself in print, but, when
Lord Lansdowne spoke, there was a response from the heart. The earlier
symbols of the war had become hackneyed, and had lost their power to
unify. Beneath the surface a wide schism was opening up in each Allied
country.
Something similar was happening in Central Europe. There too the
original impulse of the war was weakened; the union sacrée was broken.
The vertical cleavages along the battle front were cut across by horizontal
divisions running in all kinds of unforeseeable ways. The moral crisis of the
war had arrived before the military decision was in sight. All this President
Wilson and his advisers realized. They had not, of course, a perfect
knowledge of the situation, but what I have sketched they knew.
They knew also that the Allied Governments were bound by a series of
engagements that in letter and in spirit ran counter to the popular
conception of what the war was about. The resolutions of the Paris
Economic Conference were, of course, public property, and the network of
secret treaties had been published by the Bolsheviks in November of
1917.105 Their terms were only vaguely known to the peoples, but it was
definitely believed that they did not comport with the idealistic slogan of
self-determination, no annexations and no indemnities. Popular questioning
took the form of asking how many thousand English lives Alsace-Lorraine
or Dalmatia were worth, how many French lives Poland or Mesopotamia
were worth. Nor was such questioning entirely unknown in America. The
whole Allied cause had been put on the defensive by the refusal to
participate at Brest-Litovsk.
Here was a highly sensitive state of mind which no competent leader
could fail to consider. The ideal response would have been joint action by
the Allies. That was found to be impossible when it was considered at the
Interallied Conference of October. But by December the pressure had
become so great that Mr. George and Mr. Wilson were moved
independently to make some response. The form selected by the President
was a statement of peace terms under fourteen heads. The numbering of
them was an artifice to secure precision, and to create at once the
impression that here was a business-like document. The idea of stating
"peace terms" instead of "war aims" arose from the necessity of establishing
a genuine alternative to the Brest-Litovsk negotiations. They were intended
to compete for attention by substituting for the spectacle of Russo-German
parleys the much grander spectacle of a public world-wide debate.
Having enlisted the interest of the world, it was necessary to hold that
interest unified and flexible for all the different possibilities which the
situation contained. The terms had to be such that the majority among the
Allies would regard them as worth while. They had to meet the national
aspirations of each people, and yet to limit those aspirations so that no one
nation would regard itself as a catspaw for another. The terms had to satisfy
official interests so as not to provoke official disunion, and yet they had to
meet popular conceptions so as to prevent the spread of demoralization.
They had, in short, to preserve and confirm Allied unity in case the war was
to go on.
But they had also to be the terms of a possible peace, so that in case the
German center and left were ripe for agitation, they would have a text with
which to smite the governing class. The terms had, therefore, to push the
Allied governors nearer to their people, drive the German governors away
from their people, and establish a line of common understanding between
the Allies, the non-official Germans, and the subject peoples of Austria-
Hungary. The Fourteen Points were a daring attempt to raise a standard to
which almost everyone might repair. If a sufficient number of the enemy
people were ready there would be peace; if not, then the Allies would be
better prepared to sustain the shock of war.
All these considerations entered into the making of the Fourteen Points.
No one man may have had them all in mind, but all the men concerned had
some of them in mind. Against this background let us examine certain
aspects of the document. The first five points and the fourteenth deal with
"open diplomacy," "freedom of the seas," "equal trade opportunities,"
"reduction of armaments," no imperialist annexation of colonies, and the
League of Nations. They might be described as a statement of the popular
generalizations in which everyone at that time professed to believe. But
number three is more specific. It was aimed consciously and directly at the
resolutions of the Paris Economic Conference, and was meant to relieve the
German people of their fear of suffocation.
Number six is the first point dealing with a particular nation. It was
intended as a reply to Russian suspicion of the Allies, and the eloquence of
its promises was attuned to the drama of Brest-Litovsk. Number seven deals
with Belgium, and is as unqualified in form and purpose as was the
conviction of practically the whole world, including very large sections of
Central Europe. Over number eight we must pause. It begins with an
absolute demand for evacuation and restoration of French territory, and then
passes on to the question of Alsace-Lorraine. The phrasing of this clause
most perfectly illustrates the character of a public statement which must
condense a vast complex of interests in a few words. "And the wrong done
to France by Prussia in 1871 in the matter of Alsace-Lorraine, which has
unsettled the peace of the world for nearly fifty years, should be righted.
…" Every word here was chosen with meticulous care. The wrong done
should be righted; why not say that Alsace-Lorraine should be restored? It
was not said, because it was not certain that all of the French at that time
would fight on indefinitely for reannexation if they were offered a
plebiscite; and because it was even less certain whether the English and
Italians would fight on. The formula had, therefore, to cover both
contingencies. The word "righted" guaranteed satisfaction to France, but did
not read as a commitment to simple annexation. But why speak of the
wrong done by Prussia in 1871? The word Prussia was, of course, intended
to remind the South Germans that Alsace-Lorraine belonged not to them but
to Prussia. Why speak of peace unsettled for "fifty years," and why the use
of "1871"? In the first place, what the French and the rest of the world
remembered was 1871. That was the nodal point of their grievance. But the
formulators of the Fourteen Points knew that French officialdom planned
for more than the Alsace-Lorraine of 1871. The secret memoranda that had
passed between the Czar's ministers and French officials in 1916 covered
the annexation of the Saar Valley and some sort of dismemberment of the
Rhineland. It was planned to include the Saar Valley under the term
"Alsace-Lorraine" because it had been part of Alsace-Lorraine in 1814,
though it had been detached in 1815, and was no part of the territory at the
close of the Franco-Prussian war. The official French formula for annexing
the Saar was to subsume it under "Alsace-Lorraine" meaning the Alsace-
Lorraine of 1814-1815. By insistence on "1871" the President was really
defining the ultimate boundary between Germany and France, was
adverting to the secret treaty, and was casting it aside.
Number nine, a little less subtly, does the same thing in respect to Italy.
"Clearly recognizable lines of nationality" are exactly what the lines of the
Treaty of London were not. Those lines were partly strategic, partly
economic, partly imperialistic, partly ethnic. The only part of them that
could possibly procure allied sympathy was that which would recover the
genuine Italia Irredenta. All the rest, as everyone who was informed knew,
merely delayed the impending Jugoslav revolt.

It would be a mistake to suppose that the apparently unanimous enthusiasm
which greeted the Fourteen Points represented agreement on a program.
Everyone seemed to find something that he liked and stressed this aspect
and that detail. But no one risked a discussion. The phrases, so pregnant
with the underlying conflicts of the civilized world, were accepted. They
stood for opposing ideas, but they evoked a common emotion. And to that
extent they played a part in rallying the western peoples for the desperate
ten months of war which they had still to endure.
As long as the Fourteen Points dealt with that hazy and happy future
when the agony was to be over, the real conflicts of interpretation were not
made manifest. They were plans for the settlement of a wholly invisible
environment, and because these plans inspired all groups each with its own
private hope, all hopes ran together as a public hope. For harmonization, as
we saw in Mr. Hughes's speech, is a hierarchy of symbols. As you ascend
the hierarchy in order to include more and more factions you may for a time
preserve the emotional connection though you lose the intellectual. But
even the emotion becomes thinner. As you go further away from
experience, you go higher into generalization or subtlety. As you go up in
the balloon you throw more and more concrete objects overboard, and when
you have reached the top with some phrase like the Rights of Humanity or
the World Made Safe for Democracy, you see far and wide, but you see
very little. Yet the people whose emotions are entrained do not remain
passive. As the public appeal becomes more and more all things to all men,
as the emotion is stirred while the meaning is dispersed, their very private
meanings are given a universal application. Whatever you want badly is the
Rights of Humanity. For the phrase, ever more vacant, capable of meaning
almost anything, soon comes to mean pretty nearly everything. Mr. Wilson's
phrases were understood in endlessly different ways in every corner of the
earth. No document negotiated and made of public record existed to correct
the confusion.106 And so, when the day of settlement came, everybody
expected everything. The European authors of the treaty had a large choice,
and they chose to realize those expectations which were held by those of
their countrymen who wielded the most power at home.
They came down the hierarchy from the Rights of Humanity to the
Rights of France, Britain and Italy. They did not abandon the use of
symbols. They abandoned only those which after the war had no permanent
roots in the imagination of their constituents. They preserved the unity of
France by the use of symbolism, but they would not risk anything for the
unity of Europe. The symbol France was deeply attached, the symbol
Europe had only a recent history. Nevertheless the distinction between an
omnibus like Europe and a symbol like France is not sharp. The history of
states and empires reveals times when the scope of the unifying idea
increases and also times when it shrinks. One cannot say that men have
moved consistently from smaller loyalties to larger ones, because the facts
will not bear out the claim. The Roman Empire and the Holy Roman
Empire bellied out further than those national unifications in the Nineteenth
Century from which believers in a World State argue by analogy.
Nevertheless, it is probably true that the real integration has increased
regardless of the temporary inflation and deflation of empires.

Such a real integration has undoubtedly occurred in American history. In
the decade before 1789 most men, it seems, felt that their state and their
community were real, but that the confederation of states was unreal. The
idea of their state, its flag, its most conspicuous leaders, or whatever it was
that represented Massachusetts, or Virginia, were genuine symbols. That is
to say, they were fed by actual experiences from childhood, occupation,
residence, and the like. The span of men's experience had rarely traversed
the imaginary boundaries of their states. The word Virginian was related to
pretty nearly everything that most Virginians had ever known or felt. It was
the most extensive political idea which had genuine contact with their
experience.
Their experience, not their needs. For their needs arose out of their real
environment, which in those days was at least as large as the thirteen
colonies. They needed a common defense. They needed a financial and
economic regime as extensive as the Confederation. But as long as the
pseudo-environment of the state encompassed them, the state symbols
exhausted their political interest. An interstate idea, like the Confederation,
represented a powerless abstraction. It was an omnibus, rather than a
symbol, and the harmony among divergent groups, which the omnibus
creates, is transient.
I have said that the idea of confederation was a powerless abstraction.
Yet the need of unity existed in the decade before the Constitution was
adopted. The need existed, in the sense that affairs were askew unless the
need of unity was taken into account. Gradually certain classes in each
colony began to break through the state experience. Their personal interests
led across the state lines to interstate experiences, and gradually there was
constructed in their minds a picture of the American environment which
was truly national in scope. For them the idea of federation became a true
symbol, and ceased to be an omnibus. The most imaginative of these men
was Alexander Hamilton. It happened that he had no primitive attachment
to any one state, for he was born in the West Indies, and had, from the very
beginning of his active life, been associated with the common interests of
all the states. Thus to most men of the time the question of whether the
capital should be in Virginia or in Philadelphia was of enormous
importance, because they were locally minded. To Hamilton this question
was of no emotional consequence; what he wanted was the assumption of
the state debts because they would further nationalize the proposed union.
So he gladly traded the site of the capitol for two necessary votes from men
who represented the Potomac district. To Hamilton the Union was a symbol
that represented all his interests and his whole experience; to White and Lee
from the Potomac, the symbol of their province was the highest political
entity they served, and they served it though they hated to pay the price.
They agreed, says Jefferson, to change their votes, "White with a revulsion
of stomach almost convulsive."107
In the crystallizing of a common will, there is always an Alexander
Hamilton at work.
103. New York Times, May 20, 1921.
104. Delivered at Carnegie Hall, New York City, July 31, 1916.
105. President Wilson stated at his conference with the Senators that he had never heard of these
treaties until he reached Paris. That statement is perplexing. The Fourteen Points, as the text
shows, could not have been formulated without a knowledge of the secret treaties. The
substance of those treaties was before the President when he and Colonel House prepared the
final published text of the Fourteen Points.
106. The American interpretation of the fourteen points was explained to the allied statesmen just
before the armistice.
107. Works, Vol. IX, p. 87. Cited by Beard, Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy, p. 172.
Chapter XIV.
Yes or No
Table of Contents

Symbols are often so useful and so mysteriously powerful that the word
itself exhales a magical glamor. In thinking about symbols it is tempting to
treat them as if they possessed independent energy. Yet no end of symbols
which once provoked ecstasy have quite ceased to affect anybody. The
museums and the books of folklore are full of dead emblems and
incantations, since there is no power in the symbol, except that which it
acquires by association in the human mind. The symbols that have lost their
power, and the symbols incessantly suggested which fail to take root,
remind us that if we were patient enough to study in detail the circulation of
a symbol, we should behold an entirely secular history.
In the Hughes campaign speech, in the Fourteen Points, in Hamilton's
project, symbols are employed. But they are employed by somebody at a
particular moment. The words themselves do not crystallize random feeling.
The words must be spoken by people who are strategically placed, and they
must be spoken at the opportune moment. Otherwise they are mere wind.
The symbols must be earmarked. For in themselves they mean nothing, and
the choice of possible symbols is always so great that we should, like the
donkey who stood equidistant between two bales of hay, perish from sheer
indecision among the symbols that compete for our attention.
Here, for example, are the reasons for their vote as stated by certain
private citizens to a newspaper just before the election of 1920.
For Harding:
"The patriotic men and women of to-day, who cast their
ballots for Harding and Coolidge will be held by posterity to
have signed our Second Declaration of Independence."
Mr. Wilmot—, inventor.
"He will see to it that the United States does not enter into
'entangling alliances,' Washington as a city will benefit by
changing the control of the government from the Democrats
to the Republicans."
Mr. Clarence—, salesman.
For Cox:
"The people of the United States realize that it is our duty
pledged on the fields of France, to join the League of
Nations. We must shoulder our share of the burden of
enforcing peace throughout the world."
Miss Marie—, stenographer.
"We should lose our own respect and the respect of other
nations were we to refuse to enter the League of Nations in
obtaining international peace."
Mr. Spencer—, statistician.
The two sets of phrases are equally noble, equally true, and almost
reversible. Would Clarence and Wilmot have admitted for an instant that
they intended to default in our duty pledged on the fields of France; or that
they did not desire international peace? Certainly not. Would Marie and
Spencer have admitted that they were in favor of entangling alliances or the
surrender of American independence? They would have argued with you
that the League was, as President Wilson called it, a disentangling alliance,
as well as a Declaration of Independence for all the world, plus a Monroe
Doctrine for the planet.

Since the offering of symbols is so generous, and the meaning that can be
imputed is so elastic, how does any particular symbol take root in any
particular person's mind? It is planted there by another human being whom
we recognize as authoritative. If it is planted deeply enough, it may be that
later we shall call the person authoritative who waves that symbol at us. But
in the first instance symbols are made congenial and important because they
are introduced to us by congenial and important people.
For we are not born out of an egg at the age of eighteen with a realistic
imagination; we are still, as Mr. Shaw recalls, in the era of Burge and
Lubin, where in infancy we are dependent upon older beings for our
contacts. And so we make our connections with the outer world through
certain beloved and authoritative persons. They are the first bridge to the
invisible world. And though we may gradually master for ourselves many
phases of that larger environment, there always remains a vaster one that is
unknown. To that we still relate ourselves through authorities. Where all the
facts are out of sight a true report and a plausible error read alike, sound
alike, feel alike.
Except on a few subjects where our own knowledge is great, we cannot
choose between true and false accounts. So we choose between trustworthy
and untrustworthy reporters.108
Theoretically we ought to choose the most expert on each subject. But
the choice of the expert, though a good deal easier than the choice of truth,
is still too difficult and often impracticable. The experts themselves are not
in the least certain who among them is the most expert. And at that, the
expert, even when we can identify him, is, likely as not, too busy to be
consulted, or impossible to get at. But there are people whom we can
identify easily enough because they are the people who are at the head of
affairs. Parents, teachers, and masterful friends are the first people of this
sort we encounter. Into the difficult question of why children trust one
parent rather than another, the history teacher rather than the Sunday school
teacher, we need not try to enter. Nor how trust gradually spreads through a
newspaper or an acquaintance who is interested in public affairs to public
personages. The literature of psychoanalysis is rich in suggestive
hypothesis.
At any rate we do find ourselves trusting certain people, who constitute
our means of junction with pretty nearly the whole realm of unknown
things. Strangely enough, this fact is sometimes regarded as inherently
undignified, as evidence of our sheep-like, ape-like nature. But complete
independence in the universe is simply unthinkable. If we could not take
practically everything for granted, we should spend our lives in utter
triviality. The nearest thing to a wholly independent adult is a hermit, and
the range of a hermit's action is very short. Acting entirely for himself, he
can act only within a tiny radius and for simple ends. If he has time to think
great thoughts we can be certain that he has accepted without question,
before he went in for being a hermit, a whole repertory of painfully
acquired information about how to keep warm and how to keep from being
hungry, and also about what the great questions are.
On all but a very few matters for short stretches in our lives, the utmost
independence that we can exercise is to multiply the authorities to whom
we give a friendly hearing. As congenital amateurs our quest for truth
consists in stirring up the experts, and forcing them to answer any heresy
that has the accent of conviction. In such a debate we can often judge who
has won the dialectical victory, but we are virtually defenseless against a
false premise that none of the debaters has challenged, or a neglected aspect
that none of them has brought into the argument. We shall see later how the
democratic theory proceeds on the opposite assumption and assumes for the
purposes of government an unlimited supply of self-sufficient individuals.
The people on whom we depend for contact with the outer world are
those who seem to be running it.109 They may be running only a very small
part of the world. The nurse feeds the child, bathes it, and puts it to bed.
That does not constitute the nurse an authority on physics, zoology, and the
Higher Criticism. Mr. Smith runs, or at least hires, the man who runs the
factory. That does not make him an authority on the Constitution of the
United States, nor on the effects \of the Fordney tariff. Mr. Smoot runs the
Republican party in the State of Utah. That in itself does not prove he is the
best man to consult about taxation. But the nurse may nevertheless
determine for a while what zoology the child shall learn, Mr. Smith will
have much to say on what the Constitution shall mean to his wife, his
secretary, and perhaps even to his parson, and who shall define the limits of
Senator Smoot's authority?
The priest, the lord of the manor, the captains and the kings, the party
leaders, the merchant, the boss, however these men are chosen, whether by
birth, inheritance, conquest or election, they and their organized following
administer human affairs. They are the officers, and although the same man
may be field marshal at home, second lieutenant at the office, and scrub
private in politics, although in many institutions the hierarchy of rank is
vague or concealed, yet in every institution that requires the cooperation of
many persons, some such hierarchy exists.110 In American politics we call it
a machine, or "the organization."

There are a number of important distinctions between the members of the
machine and the rank and file. The leaders, the steering committee and the
inner circle, are in direct contact with their environment. They may, to be
sure, have a very limited notion of what they ought to define as the
environment, but they are not dealing almost wholly with abstractions.
There are particular men they hope to see elected, particular balance sheets
they wish to see improved, concrete objectives that must be attained. I do
not mean that they escape the human propensity to stereotyped vision. Their
stereotypes often make them absurd routineers. But whatever their
limitations, the chiefs are in actual contact with some crucial part of that
larger environment. They decide. They give orders. They bargain. And
something definite, perhaps not at all what they imagined, actually happens.
Their subordinates are not tied to them by a common conviction. That is
to say the lesser members of a machine do not dispose their loyalty
according to independent judgment about the wisdom of the leaders. In the
hierarchy each is dependent upon a superior and is in turn superior to some
class of his dependents. What holds the machine together is a system of
privileges. These may vary according to the opportunities and the tastes of
those who seek them, from nepotism and patronage in all their aspects to
clannishness, hero-worship or a fixed idea. They vary from military rank in
armies, through land and services in a feudal system, to jobs and publicity
in a modern democracy. That is why you can breakup a particular machine
by abolishing its privileges. But the machine in every coherent group is, I
believe, certain to reappear. For privilege is entirely relative, and uniformity
is impossible. Imagine the most absolute communism of which your mind
is capable, where no one possessed any object that everyone else did not
possess, and still, if the communist group had to take any action whatever,
the mere pleasure of being the friend of the man who was going to make the
speech that secured the most votes, would, I am convinced, be enough to
crystallize an organization of insiders around him.
It is not necessary, then, to invent a collective intelligence in order to
explain why the judgments of a group are usually more coherent, and often
more true to form than the remarks of the man in the street. One mind, or a
few can pursue a train of thought, but a group trying to think in concert can
as a group do little more than assent or dissent. The members of a hierarchy
can have a corporate tradition. As apprentices they learn the trade from the
masters, who in turn learned it when they were apprentices, and in any
enduring society, the change of personnel within the governing hierarchies
is slow enough to permit the transmission of certain great stereotypes and
patterns of behavior. From father to son, from prelate to novice, from
veteran to cadet, certain ways of seeing and doing are taught. These ways
become familiar, and are recognized as such by the mass of outsiders.

Distance alone lends enchantment to the view that masses of human beings
ever coöperate in any complex affair without a central machine managed by
a very few people. "No one," says Bryce,111 "can have had some years'
experience of the conduct of affairs in a legislature or an administration
without observing how extremely small is the number of persons by whom
the world is governed." He is referring, of course, to affairs of state. To be
sure if you consider all the affairs of mankind the number of people who
govern is considerable, but if you take any particular institution, be it a
legislature, a party, a trade union, a nationalist movement, a factory, or a
club, the number of those who govern is a very small percentage of those
who are theoretically supposed to govern.
Landslides can turn one machine out and put another in; revolutions
sometimes abolish a particular machine altogether. The democratic
revolution set up two alternating machines, each of which in the course of a
few years reaps the advantage from the mistakes of the other. But nowhere
does the machine disappear. Nowhere is the idyllic theory of democracy
realized. Certainly not in trades unions, nor in socialist parties, nor in
communist governments. There is an inner circle, surrounded by concentric
circles which fade out gradually into the disinterested or uninterested rank
and file.
Democrats have never come to terms with this commonplace of group
life. They have invariably regarded it as perverse. For there are two visions
of democracy: one presupposes the self-sufficient individual; the other an
Oversoul regulating everything.
Of the two the Oversoul has some advantage because it does at least
recognize that the mass makes decisions that are not spontaneously born in
the breast of every member. But the Oversoul as presiding genius in
corporate behavior is a superfluous mystery if we fix our attention upon the
machine. The machine is a quite prosaic reality. It consists of human beings
who wear clothes and live in houses, who can be named and described.
They perform all the duties usually assigned to the Oversoul.

The reason for the machine is not the perversity of human nature. It is that
out of the private notions of any group no common idea emerges by itself.
For the number of ways is limited in which a multitude of people can act
directly upon a situation beyond their reach. Some of them can migrate, in
one form or another, they can strike or boycott, they can applaud or hiss.
They can by these means occasionally resist what they do not like, or
coerce those who obstruct what they desire. But by mass action nothing can
be constructed, devised, negotiated, or administered. A public as such,
without an organized hierarchy around which it can gather, may refuse to
buy if the prices are too high, or refuse to work if wages are too low. A trade
union can by mass action in a strike break an opposition so that the union
officials can negotiate an agreement. It may win, for example, the right to
joint control. But it cannot exercise the right except through an
organization. A nation can clamor for war, but when it goes to war it must
put itself under orders from a general staff.
The limit of direct action is for all practical purposes the power to say
Yes or No on an issue presented to the mass.112 For only in the very
simplest cases does an issue present itself in the same form spontaneously
and approximately at the same time to all the members of a public. There
are unorganized strikes and boycotts, not merely industrial ones, where the
grievance is so plain that virtually without leadership the same reaction
takes place in many people. But even in these rudimentary cases there are
persons who know what they want to do more quickly than the rest, and
who become impromptu ringleaders. Where they do not appear a crowd will
mill about aimlessly beset by all its private aims, or stand by fatalistically,
as did a crowd of fifty persons the other day, and watch a man commit
suicide.
For what we make out of most of the impressions that come to us from
the invisible world is a kind of pantomime played out in revery. The number
of times is small that we consciously decide anything about events beyond
our sight, and each man's opinion of what he could accomplish if he tried, is
slight. There is rarely a practical issue, and therefore no great habit of
decision. This would be more evident were it not that most information
when it reaches us carries with it an aura of suggestion as to how we ought
to feel about the news. That suggestion we need, and if we do not find it in
the news we turn to the editorials or to a trusted adviser. The revery, if we
feel ourselves implicated, is uncomfortable until we know where we stand,
that is, until the facts have been formulated so that we can feel Yes or No in
regard to them.
When a number of people all say Yes they may have all kinds of reasons
for saying it. They generally do. For the pictures in their minds are, as we
have already noted, varied in subtle and intimate ways. But this subtlety
remains within their minds; it becomes represented publicly by a number of
symbolic phrases which carry the individual emotion after evacuating most
of the intention. The hierarchy, or, if it is a contest, then the two hierarchies,
associate the symbols with a definite action, a vote of Yes or No, an attitude
pro or con. Then Smith who was against the League and Jones who was
against Article X, and Brown who was against Mr. Wilson and all his
works, each for his own reason, all in the name of more or less the same
symbolic phrase, register a vote against the Democrats by voting for the
Republicans. A common will has been expressed.
A concrete choice had to be presented, the choice had to be connected,
by the transfer of interest through the symbols, with individual opinion. The
professional politicians learned this long before the democratic
philosophers. And so they organized the caucus, the nominating convention,
and the steering committee, as the means of formulating a definite choice.
Everyone who wishes to accomplish anything that requires the cooperation
of a large number of people follows their example. Sometimes it is done
rather brutally as when the Peace Conference reduced itself to the Council
of Ten, and the Council of Ten to the Big Three or Four; and wrote a treaty
which the minor allies, their own constituents, and the enemy were
permitted to take or leave. More consultation than that is generally possible
and desirable. But the essential fact remains that a small number of heads
present a choice to a large group.

The abuses of the steering committee have led to various proposals such as
the initiative, referendum and direct primary. But these merely postponed or
obscured the need for a machine by complicating the elections, or as H. G.
Wells once said with scrupulous accuracy, the selections. For no amount of
balloting can obviate the need of creating an issue, be it a measure or a
candidate, on which the voters can say Yes, or No. There is, in fact, no such
thing as "direct legislation." For what happens where it is supposed to exist?
The citizen goes to the polls, receives a ballot on which a number of
measures are printed, almost always in abbreviated form, and, if he says
anything at all, he says Yes or No. The most brilliant amendment in the
world may occur to him. He votes Yes or No on that bill and no other. You
have to commit violence against the English language to call that
legislation. I do not argue, of course, that there are no benefits, whatever
you call the process. I think that for certain kinds of issues there are distinct
benefits. But the necessary simplicity of any mass decision is a very
important fact in view of the inevitable complexity of the world in which
those decisions operate. The most complicated form of voting that anyone
proposes is, I suppose, the preferential ballot. Among a number of
candidates presented the voter under that system, instead of saying yes to
one candidate and no to all the others, states the order of his choice. But
even here, immensely more flexible though it is, the action of the mass
depends upon the quality of the choices presented.113 And those choices are
presented by the energetic coteries who hustle about with petitions and
round up the delegates. The Many can elect after the Few have nominated.
108. See an interesting, rather quaint old book: George Cornewall Lewis, An Essay on the Influence
of Authority in Matters of Opinion.
109. Cf. Bryce, Modern Democracies Vol. II, pp. 544-545.
110. Cf. M. Ostrogorski, Democracy and the Organization of Political Parties, passim; R. Michels,
Political Parties, passim; and Bryce, Modern Democracies, particularly Chap. LXXV; also
Ross, Principles of Sociology, Chaps. XXII-XXIV.
111. Op. cit., Vol. II, p. 542.
112. Cf. James, Some Problems of Philosophy, p. 227. "But for most of our emergencies, fractional
solutions are impossible. Seldom can we act fractionally." Cf. Lowell, Public Opinion and
Popular Government, pp. 91, 92.
113. Cf. H. J. Laski, Foundations of Sovereignty, p. 224. "… proportional representation… by
leading, as it seems to lead, to the group system… may deprive the electors of their choice of
leaders." The group system undoubtedly tends, as Mr. Laski says, to make the selection of the
executive more indirect, but there is no doubt also that it tends to produce legislative assemblies
in which currents of opinion are more fully represented. Whether that is good or bad cannot be
determined a priori. But one can say that successful cooperation and responsibility in a more
accurately representative assembly require a higher organization of political intelligence and
political habit, than in a rigid two-party house. It is a more complex political form and may
therefore work less well.
Chapter XV.
Leaders and the Rank and File
Table of Contents

Because of their transcendent practical importance, no successful leader has
ever been too busy to cultivate the symbols which organize his following.
What privileges do within the hierarchy, symbols do for the rank and file.
They conserve unity. From the totem pole to the national flag, from the
wooden idol to God the Invisible King, from the magic word to some
diluted version of Adam Smith or Bentham, symbols have been cherished
by leaders, many of whom were themselves unbelievers, because they were
focal points where differences merged. The detached observer may scorn
the "star-spangled" ritual which hedges the symbol, perhaps as much as the
king who told himself that Paris was worth a few masses. But the leader
knows by experience that only when symbols have done their work is there
a handle he can use to move a crowd. In the symbol emotion is discharged
at a common target, and the idiosyncrasy of real ideas blotted out. No
wonder he hates what he calls destructive criticism, sometimes called by
free spirits the elimination of buncombe. "Above all things," says Bagehot,
"our royalty is to be reverenced, and if you begin to poke about it you
cannot reverence it."114 For poking about with clear definitions and candid
statements serves all high purposes known to man, except the easy
conservation of a common will. Poking about, as every responsible leader
suspects, tends to break the transference of emotion from the individual
mind to the institutional symbol. And the first result of that is, as he rightly
says, a chaos of individualism and warring sects. The disintegration of a
symbol, like Holy Russia, or the Iron Diaz, is always the beginning of a
long upheaval.
These great symbols possess by transference all the minute and detailed
loyalties of an ancient and stereotyped society. They evoke the feeling that
each individual has for the landscape, the furniture, the faces, the memories
that are his first, and in a static society, his only reality. That core of images
and devotions without which he is unthinkable to himself, is nationality.
The great symbols take up these devotions, and can arouse them without
calling forth the primitive images. The lesser symbols of public debate, the
more casual chatter of politics, are always referred back to these proto-
symbols, and if possible associated with them. The question of a proper fare
on a municipal subway is symbolized as an issue between the People and
the Interests, and then the People is inserted in the symbol American, so that
finally in the heat of a campaign, an eight cent fare becomes unAmerican.
The Revolutionary fathers died to prevent it. Lincoln suffered that it might
not come to pass, resistance to it was implied in the death of those who
sleep in France.
Because of its power to siphon emotion out of distinct ideas, the symbol
is both a mechanism of solidarity, and a mechanism of exploitation. It
enables people to work for a common end, but just because the few who are
strategically placed must choose the concrete objectives, the symbol is also
an instrument by which a few can fatten on many, deflect criticism, and
seduce men into facing agony for objects they do not understand.
Many aspects of our subjection to symbols are not flattering if we
choose to think of ourselves as realistic, self-sufficient, and self-governing
personalities. Yet it is impossible to conclude that symbols are altogether
instruments of the devil. In the realm of science and contemplation they are
undoubtedly the tempter himself. But in the world of action they may be
beneficent, and are sometimes a necessity. The necessity is often imagined,
the peril manufactured. But when quick results are imperative, the
manipulation of masses through symbols may be the only quick way of
having a critical thing done. It is often more important to act than to
understand. It is sometimes true that the action would fail if everyone
understood it. There are many affairs which cannot wait for a referendum or
endure publicity, and there are times, during war for example, when a
nation, an army, and even its commanders must trust strategy to a very few
minds; when two conflicting opinions, though one happens to be right, are
more perilous than one opinion which is wrong. The wrong opinion may
have bad results, but the two opinions may entail disaster by dissolving
unity.115
Thus Foch and Sir Henry Wilson, who foresaw the impending disaster
to Cough's army, as a consequence of the divided and scattered reserves,
nevertheless kept their opinions well within a small circle, knowing that
even the risk of a smashing defeat was less certainly destructive, than would
have been an excited debate in the newspapers. For what matters most
under the kind of tension which prevailed in March, 1918, is less the
rightness of a particular move than the unbroken expectation as to the
source of command. Had Foch "gone to the people" he might have won the
debate, but long before he could have won it, the armies which he was to
command would have dissolved. For the spectacle of a row on Olympus is
diverting and destructive.
But so also is a conspiracy of silence. Says Captain Wright: "It is in the
High Command and not in the line, that the art of camouflage is most
practiced, and reaches to highest flights. All chiefs everywhere are now kept
painted, by the busy work of numberless publicists, so as to be mistaken for
Napoleons—at a distance….It becomes almost impossible to displace these
Napoleons, whatever their incompetence, because of the enormous public
support created by hiding or glossing failure, and exaggerating or inventing
success…. But the most insidious and worst effect of this so highly
organized falsity is on the generals themselves: modest and patriotic as they
mostly are, and as most men must be to take up and follow the noble
profession of arms, they themselves are ultimately affected by these
universal illusions, and reading it every morning in the paper, they also
grow persuaded they are thunderbolts of war and infallible, however much
they fail, and that their maintenance in command is an end so sacred that it
justifies the use of any means…. These various conditions, of which this
great deceit is the greatest, at last emancipate all General Staffs from all
control. They no longer live for the nation: the nation lives, or rather dies,
for them. Victory or defeat ceases to be the prime interest. What matters to
these semi-sovereign corporations is whether dear old Willie or poor old
Harry is going to be at their head, or the Chantilly party prevail over the
Boulevard des Invalides party."116
Yet Captain Wright who can be so eloquent and so discerning about the
dangers of silence is forced nevertheless to approve the silence of Foch in
not publicly destroying the illusions. There is here a complicated paradox,
arising as we shall see more fully later on, because the traditional
democratic view of life is conceived, not for emergencies and dangers, but
for tranquillity and harmony. And so where masses of people must
coöperate in an uncertain and eruptive environment, it is usually necessary
to secure unity and flexibility without real consent. The symbol does that. It
obscures personal intention, neutralizes discrimination, and obfuscates
individual purpose. It immobilizes personality, yet at the same time it
enormously sharpens the intention of the group and welds that group, as
nothing else in a crisis can weld it, to purposeful action. It renders the mass
mobile though it immobilizes personality. The symbol is the instrument by
which in the short run the mass escapes from its own inertia, the inertia of
indecision, or the inertia of headlong movement, and is rendered capable of
being led along the zigzag of a complex situation.

But in the longer run, the give and take increases between the leaders and
the led. The word most often used to describe the state of mind in the rank
and file about its leaders is morale. That is said to be good when the
individuals do the part allotted to them with all their energy; when each
man's whole strength is evoked by the command from above. It follows that
every leader must plan his policy with this in mind. He must consider his
decision not only on "the merits," but also in its effect on any part of his
following whose continued support he requires. If he is a general planning
an attack, he knows that his organized military units will scatter into mobs
if the percentage of casualties rises too high.
In the Great War previous calculations were upset to an extraordinary
degree, for "out of every nine men who went to France five became
casualties."117 The limit of endurance was far greater than anyone had
supposed. But there was a limit somewhere. And so, partly because of its
effect on the enemy, but also in great measure because of its effect on the
troops and their families, no command in this war dared to publish a candid
statement of its losses. In France the casualty lists were never published. In
England, America, and Germany publication of the losses of a big battle
were spread out over long periods so as to destroy a unified impression of
the total. Only the insiders knew until long afterwards what the Somme had
cost, or the Flanders battles;118 and Ludendorff undoubtedly had a very
much more accurate idea of these casualties than any private person in
London, Paris or Chicago. All the leaders in every camp did their best to
limit the amount of actual war which any one soldier or civilian could
vividly conceive. But, of course, among old veterans like the French troops
of 1917, a great deal more is known about war than ever reaches the public.
Such an army begins to judge its commanders in terms of its own suffering.
And then, when another extravagant promise of victory turns out to be the
customary bloody defeat, you may find that a mutiny breaks out over some
comparatively minor blunder,119 like Nivelle's offensive of 1917, because it
is a cumulative blunder. Revolutions and mutinies generally follow a small
sample of a big series of evils.120
The incidence of policy determines the relation between leader and
following. If those whom he needs in his plan are remote from the place
where the action takes place, if the results are hidden or postponed, if the
individual obligations are indirect or not yet due, above all if assent is an
exercise of some pleasurable emotion, the leader is likely to have a free
hand. Those programs are immediately most popular, like prohibition
among teetotalers, which do not at once impinge upon the private habits of
the followers. That is one great reason why governments have such a free
hand in foreign affairs. Most of the frictions between two states involve a
series of obscure and long-winded contentions, occasionally on the frontier,
but far more often in regions about which school geographies have supplied
no precise ideas. In Czechoslovakia America is regarded as the Liberator; in
American newspaper paragraphs and musical comedy, in American
conversation by and large, it has never been finally settled whether the
country we liberated is Czechoslavia or Jugoslovakia.
In foreign affairs the incidence of policy is for a very long time confined
to an unseen environment. Nothing that happens out there is felt to be
wholly real. And so, because in the ante-bellum period, nobody has to fight
and nobody has to pay, governments go along according to their lights
without much reference to their people. In local affairs the cost of a policy
is more easily visible. And therefore, all but the most exceptional leaders
prefer policies in which the costs are as far as possible indirect.
They do not like direct taxation. They do not like to pay as they go.
They like long term debts. They like to have the voters believe that the
foreigner will pay. They have always been compelled to calculate prosperity
in terms of the producer rather than in terms of the consumer, because the
incidence on the consumer is distributed over so many trivial items. Labor
leaders have always preferred an increase of money wages to a decrease in
prices. There has always been more popular interest in the profits of
millionaires, which are visible but comparatively unimportant, than in the
wastes of the industrial system, which are huge but elusive. A legislature
dealing with a shortage of houses, such as exists when this is written,
illustrates this rule, first by doing nothing to increase the number of houses,
second by smiting the greedy landlord on the hip, third by investigating the
profiteering builders and working men. For a constructive policy deals with
remote and uninteresting factors, while a greedy landlord, or a profiteering
plumber is visible and immediate.
But while people will readily believe that in an unimagined future and
in unseen places a certain policy will benefit them, the actual working out
of policy follows a different logic from their opinions. A nation may be
induced to believe that jacking up the freight rates will make the railroads
prosperous. But that belief will not make the roads prosperous, if the impact
of those rates on farmers and shippers is such as to produce a commodity
price beyond what the consumer can pay. Whether the consumer will pay
the price depends not upon whether he nodded his head nine months
previously at the proposal to raise rates and save business, but on whether
he now wants a new hat or a new automobile enough to pay for them.

Leaders often pretend that they have merely uncovered a program which
existed in the minds of their public. When they believe it, they are usually
deceiving themselves. Programs do not invent themselves synchronously in
a multitude of minds. That is not because a multitude of minds is
necessarily inferior to that of the leaders, but because thought is the
function of an organism, and a mass is not an organism.
This fact is obscured because the mass is constantly exposed to
suggestion. It reads not the news, but the news with an aura of suggestion
about it, indicating the line of action to be taken. It hears reports, not
objective as the facts are, but already stereotyped to a certain pattern of
behavior. Thus the ostensible leader often finds that the real leader is a
powerful newspaper proprietor. But if, as in a laboratory, one could remove
all suggestion and leading from the experience of a multitude, one would, I
think, find something like this: A mass exposed to the same stimuli would
develop responses that could theoretically be charted in a polygon of error.
There would be a certain group that felt sufficiently alike to be classified
together. There would be variants of feeling at both ends. These
classifications would tend to harden as individuals in each of the
classifications made their reactions vocal. That is to say, when the vague
feelings of those who felt vaguely had been put into words, they would
know more definitely what they felt, and would then feel it more definitely.
Leaders in touch with popular feeling are quickly conscious of these
reactions. They know that high prices are pressing upon the mass, or that
certain classes of individuals are becoming unpopular, or that feeling
towards another nation is friendly or hostile. But, always barring the effect
of suggestion which is merely the assumption of leadership by the reporter,
there would be nothing in the feeling of the mass that fatally determined the
choice of any particular policy. All that the feeling of the mass demands is
that policy as it is developed and exposed shall be, if not logically, then by
analogy and association, connected with the original feeling.
So when a new policy is to be launched, there is a preliminary bid for
community of feeling, as in Mark Antony's speech to the followers of
Brutus.121 In the first phase, the leader vocalizes the prevalent opinion of
the mass. He identifies himself with the familiar attitudes of his audience,
sometimes by telling a good story, sometimes by brandishing his patriotism,
often by pinching a grievance. Finding that he is trustworthy, the multitude
milling hither and thither may turn in towards him. He will then be
expected to set forth a plan of campaign. But he will not find that plan in
the slogans which convey the feelings of the mass. It will not even always
be indicated by them. Where the incidence of policy is remote, all that is
essential is that the program shall be verbally and emotionally connected at
the start with what has become vocal in the multitude. Trusted men in a
familiar role subscribing to the accepted symbols can go a very long way on
their own initiative without explaining the substance of their programs.
But wise leaders are not content to do that. Provided they think publicity
will not strengthen opposition too much, and that debate will not delay
action too long, they seek a certain measure of consent. They take, if not the
whole mass, then the subordinates of the hierarchy sufficiently into their
confidence to prepare them for what might happen, and to make them feel
that they have freely willed the result. But however sincere the leader may
be, there is always, when the facts are very complicated, a certain amount
of illusion in these consultations. For it is impossible that all the
contingencies shall be as vivid to the whole public as they are to the more
experienced and the more imaginative. A fairly large percentage are bound
to agree without having taken the time, or without possessing the
background, for appreciating the choices which the leader presents to them.
No one, however, can ask for more. And only theorists do. If we have had
our day in court, if what we had to say was heard, and then if what is done
comes out well, most of us do not stop to consider how much our opinion
affected the business in hand.
And therefore, if the established powers are sensitive and well-
informed, if they are visibly trying to meet popular feeling, and actually
removing some of the causes of dissatisfaction, no matter how slowly they
proceed, provided they are seen to be proceeding, they have little to fear. It
takes stupendous and persistent blundering, plus almost infinite
tactlessness, to start a revolution from below. Palace revolutions,
interdepartmental revolutions, are a different matter. So, too, is demagogy.
That stops at relieving the tension by expressing the feeling. But the
statesman knows that such relief is temporary, and if indulged too often,
unsanitary. He, therefore, sees to it that he arouses no feeling which he
cannot sluice into a program that deals with the facts to which the feelings
refer.
But all leaders are not statesmen, all leaders hate to resign, and most
leaders find it hard to believe that bad as things are, the other fellow would
not make them worse. They do not passively wait for the public to feel the
incidence of policy, because the incidence of that discovery is generally
upon their own heads. They are, therefore, intermittently engaged in
mending their fences and consolidating their position.
The mending of fences consists in offering an occasional scapegoat, in
redressing a minor grievance affecting a powerful individual or faction,
rearranging certain jobs, placating a group of people who want an arsenal in
their home town, or a law to stop somebody's vices. Study the daily activity
of any public official who depends on election and you can enlarge this list.
There are Congressmen elected year after year who never think of
dissipating their energy on public affairs. They prefer to do a little service
for a lot of people on a lot of little subjects, rather than to engage in trying
to do a big service out there in the void. But the number of people to whom
any organization can be a successful valet is limited, and shrewd politicians
take care to attend either the influential, or somebody so blatantly
uninfluential that to pay any attention to him is a mark of sensational
magnanimity. The far greater number who cannot be held by favors, the
anonymous multitude, receive propaganda.
The established leaders of any organization have great natural
advantages. They are believed to have better sources of information. The
books and papers are in their offices. They took part in the important
conferences. They met the important people. They have responsibility. It is,
therefore, easier for them to secure attention and to speak in a convincing
tone. But also they have a very great deal of control over the access to the
facts. Every official is in some degree a censor. And since no one can
suppress information, either by concealing it or forgetting to mention it,
without some notion of what he wishes the public to know, every leader is
in some degree a propagandist. Strategically placed, and compelled often to
choose even at the best between the equally cogent though conflicting
ideals of safety for the institution, and candor to his public, the official finds
himself deciding more and more consciously what facts, in what setting, in
what guise he shall permit the public to know.

That the manufacture of consent is capable of great refinements no one, I
think, denies. The process by which public opinions arise is certainly no
less intricate than it has appeared in these pages, and the opportunities for
manipulation open to anyone who understands the process are plain enough.
The creation of consent is not a new art. It is a very old one which was
supposed to have died out with the appearance of democracy. But it has not
died out. It has, in fact, improved enormously in technic, because it is now
based on analysis rather than on rule of thumb. And so, as a result of
psychological research, coupled with the modern means of communication,
the practice of democracy has turned a corner. A revolution is taking place,
infinitely more significant than any shifting of economic power.
Within the life of the generation now in control of affairs, persuasion
has become a self-conscious art and a regular organ of popular government.
None of us begins to understand the consequences, but it is no daring
prophecy to say that the knowledge of how to create consent will alter every
political calculation and modify every political premise. Under the impact
of propaganda, not necessarily in the sinister meaning of the word alone,
the old constants of our thinking have become variables. It is no longer
possible, for example, to believe in the original dogma of democracy; that
the knowledge needed for the management of human affairs comes up
spontaneously from the human heart. Where we act on that theory we
expose ourselves to self-deception, and to forms of persuasion that we
cannot verify. It has been demonstrated that we cannot rely upon intuition,
conscience, or the accidents of casual opinion if we are to deal with the
world beyond our reach.
114. The English Constitution, p. 127. D. Appleton & Company, 1914.
115. Captain Peter S. Wright, Assistant Secretary of the Supreme War Council, At the Supreme War
Council, is well worth careful reading on secrecy and unity of command, even though in respect
to the allied leaders he wages a passionate polemic.
116. Op. cit., pp. 98, 101-105.
117. Op. cit., p. 37. Figures taken by Captain Wright from the statistical abstract of the war in the
Archives of the War Office. The figures refer apparently to the English losses alone, possibly to
the English and French.
118. Op cit., p. 34, the Somme cost nearly 500,000 casualties; the Arras and Flanders offensives of
1917 cost 650,000 British casualties.
119. The Allies suffered many bloodier defeats than that on the Chemin des Dames.
120. Cf. Pierrefeu's account, op. cit., on the causes of the Soissons mutinies, and the method adopted
by Pétain to deal with them. Vol. I, Part III, et seq.
121. Excellently analyzed in Martin, The Behavior of Crowds, pp. 130-132.
Part VI.
The Image of Democracy
Table of Contents
"I confess that in America I saw more than America;
I sought the image of democracy itself."
Alexis de Tocqueville.
Chapter XVI.
The Self-Centered Man
Table of Contents

Since Public Opinion is supposed to be the prime mover in democracies,
one might reasonably expect to find a vast literature. One does not find it.
There are excellent books on government and parties, that is, on the
machinery which in theory registers public opinions after they are formed.
But on the sources from which these public opinions arise, on the processes
by which they are derived, there is relatively little. The existence of a force
called Public Opinion is in the main taken for granted, and American
political writers have been most interested either in finding out how to
make government express the common will, or in how to prevent the
common will from subverting the purposes for which they believe the
government exists. According to their traditions they have wished either to
tame opinion or to obey it. Thus the editor of a notable series of text-books
writes that "the most difficult and the most momentous question of
government (is) how to transmit the force of individual opinion into public
action."122
But surely there is a still more momentous question, the question of how
to validate our private versions of the political scene. There is, as I shall try
to indicate further on, the prospect of radical improvement by the
development of principles already in operation. But this development will
depend on how well we learn to use knowledge of the way opinions are put
together to watch over our own opinions when they are being put together.
For casual opinion, being the product of partial contact, of tradition, and
personal interests, cannot in the nature of things take kindly to a method of
political thought which is based on exact record, measurement, analysis and
comparison. Just those qualities of the mind which determine what shall
seem interesting, important, familiar, personal, and dramatic, are the
qualities which in the first instance realistic opinion frustrates. Therefore,
unless there is in the community at large a growing conviction that
prejudice and intuition are not enough, the working out of realistic opinion,
which takes time, money, labor, conscious effort, patience, and equanimity,
will not find enough support. That conviction grows as self-criticism
increases, and makes us conscious of buncombe, contemptuous of ourselves
when we employ it, and on guard to detect it. Without an ingrained habit of
analyzing opinion when we read, talk, and decide, most of us would hardly
suspect the need of better ideas, nor be interested in them when they appear,
nor be able to prevent the new technic of political intelligence from being
manipulated.
Yet democracies, if we are to judge by the oldest and most powerful of
them, have made a mystery out of public opinion. There have been skilled
organizers of opinion who understood the mystery well enough to create
majorities on election day. But these organizers have been regarded by
political science as low fellows or as "problems," not as possessors of the
most effective knowledge there was on how to create and operate public
opinion. The tendency of the people who have voiced the ideas of
democracy, even when they have not managed its action, the tendency of
students, orators, editors, has been to look upon Public Opinion as men in
other societies looked upon the uncanny forces to which they ascribed the
last word in the direction of events.
For in almost every political theory there is an inscrutable element
which in the heyday of that theory goes unexamined. Behind the
appearances there is a Fate, there are Guardian Spirits, or Mandates to a
Chosen People, a Divine Monarchy, a Vice-Regent of Heaven, or a Class of
the Better Born. The more obvious angels, demons, and kings are gone out
of democratic thinking, but the need for believing that there are reserve
powers of guidance persists. It persisted for those thinkers of the Eighteenth
Century who designed the matrix of democracy. They had a pale god, but
warm hearts, and in the doctrine of popular sovereignty they found the
answer to their need of an infallible origin for the new social order. There
was the mystery, and only enemies of the people touched it with profane
and curious hands.

They did not remove the veil because they were practical politicians in a
bitter and uncertain struggle. They had themselves felt the aspiration of
democracy, which is ever so much deeper, more intimate and more
important than any theory of government. They were engaged, as against
the prejudice of ages, in the assertion of human dignity. What possessed
them was not whether John Smith had sound views on any public question,
but that John Smith, scion of a stock that had always been considered
inferior, would now bend his knee to no other man. It was this spectacle that
made it bliss "in that dawn to be alive." But every analyst seems to degrade
that dignity, to deny that all men are reasonable all the time, or educated, or
informed, to note that people are fooled, that they do not always know their
own interests, and that all men are not equally fitted to govern.
The critics were about as welcome as a small boy with a drum. Every
one of these observations on the fallibility of man was being exploited ad
nauseam. Had democrats admitted there was truth in any of the aristocratic
arguments they would have opened a breach in the defenses. And so just as
Aristotle had to insist that the slave was a slave by nature, the democrats
had to insist that the free man was a legislator and administrator by nature.
They could not stop to explain that a human soul might not yet have, or
indeed might never have, this technical equipment, and that nevertheless it
had an inalienable right not to be used as the unwilling instrument of other
men. The superior people were still too strong and too unscrupulous to have
refrained from capitalizing so candid a statement.
So the early democrats insisted that a reasoned righteousness welled up
spontaneously out of the mass of men. All of them hoped that it would,
many of them believed that it did, although the cleverest, like Thomas
Jefferson, had all sorts of private reservations. But one thing was certain: if
public opinion did not come forth spontaneously, nobody in that age
believed it would come forth at all. For in one fundamental respect the
political science on which democracy was based was the same science that
Aristotle formulated. It was the same science for democrat and aristocrat,
royalist and republican, in that its major premise assumed the art of
government to be a natural endowment. Men differed radically when they
tried to name the men so endowed; but they agreed in thinking that the
greatest question of all was to find those in whom political wisdom was
innate. Royalists were sure that kings were born to govern. Alexander
Hamilton thought that while "there are strong minds in every walk of life…
the representative body, with too few exceptions to have any influence on
the spirit of the government, will be composed of landholders, merchants,
and men of the learned professions."123 Jefferson thought the political
faculties were deposited by God in farmers and planters, and sometimes
spoke as if they were found in all the people.124 The main premise was the
same: to govern was an instinct that appeared, according to your social
preferences, in one man or a chosen few, in all males, or only in males who
were white and twenty-one, perhaps even in all men and all women.
In deciding who was most fit to govern, knowledge of the world was
taken for granted. The aristocrat believed that those who dealt with large
affairs possessed the instinct, the democrats asserted that all men possessed
the instinct and could therefore deal with large affairs. It was no part of
political science in either case to think out how knowledge of the world
could be brought to the ruler. If you were for the people you did not try to
work out the question of how to keep the voter informed. By the age of
twenty-one he had his political faculties. What counted was a good heart, a
reasoning mind, a balanced judgment. These would ripen with age, but it
was not necessary to consider how to inform the heart and feed the reason.
Men took in their facts as they took in their breath.

But the facts men could come to possess in this effortless way were limited.
They could know the customs and more obvious character of the place
where they lived and worked. But the outer world they had to conceive, and
they did not conceive it instinctively, nor absorb trustworthy knowledge of
it just by living. Therefore, the only environment in which spontaneous
politics were possible was one confined within the range of the ruler's direct
and certain knowledge. There is no escaping this conclusion, wherever you
found government on the natural range of men's faculties. "If," as Aristotle
said,125 "the citizens of a state are to judge and distribute offices according
to merit, then they must know each other's characters; where they do not
possess this knowledge, both the election to offices and the decision of law
suits will go wrong."
Obviously this maxim was binding upon every school of political
thought. But it presented peculiar difficulties to the democrats. Those who
believed in class government could fairly claim that in the court of the king,
or in the country houses of the gentry, men did know each other's
characters, and as long as the rest of mankind was passive, the only
characters one needed to know were the characters of men in the ruling
class. But the democrats, who wanted to raise the dignity of all men, were
immediately involved by the immense size and confusion of their ruling
class—the male electorate. Their science told them that politics was an
instinct, and that the instinct worked in a limited environment. Their hopes
bade them insist that all men in a very large environment could govern. In
this deadly conflict between their ideals and their science, the only way out
was to assume without much discussion that the voice of the people was the
voice of God.
The paradox was too great, the stakes too big, their ideal too precious
for critical examination. They could not show how a citizen of Boston was
to stay in Boston and conceive the views of a Virginian, how a Virginian in
Virginia could have real opinions about the government at Washington, how
Congressmen in Washington could have opinions about China or Mexico.
For in that day it was not possible for many men to have an unseen
environment brought into the field of their judgment. There had been some
advances, to be sure, since Aristotle. There were a few newspapers, and
there were books, better roads perhaps, and better ships. But there was no
great advance, and the political assumptions of the Eighteenth Century had
essentially to be those that had prevailed in political science for two
thousand years. The pioneer democrats did not possess the material for
resolving the conflict between the known range of man's attention and their
illimitable faith in his dignity.
Their assumptions antedated not only the modern newspaper, the world-
wide press services, photography and moving pictures, but, what is really
more significant, they antedated measurement and record, quantitative and
comparative analysis, the canons of evidence, and the ability of
psychological analysis to correct and discount the prejudices of the witness.
I do not mean to say that our records are satisfactory, our analysis unbiased,
our measurements sound. I do mean to say that the key inventions have
been made for bringing the unseen world into the field of judgment. They
had not been made in the time of Aristotle, and they were not yet important
enough to be visible for political theory in the age of Rousseau,
Montesquieu, or Thomas Jefferson. In a later chapter I think we shall see
that even in the latest theory of human reconstruction, that of the English
Guild Socialists, all the deeper premises have been taken over from this
older system of political thought.
That system, whenever it was competent and honest, had to assume that
no man could have more than a very partial experience of public affairs. In
the sense that he can give only a little time to them, that assumption is still
true, and of the utmost consequence. But ancient theory was compelled to
assume, not only that men could give little attention to public questions, but
that the attention available would have to be confined to matters close at
hand. It would have been visionary to suppose that a time would come
when distant and complicated events could conceivably be reported,
analyzed, and presented in such a form that a really valuable choice could
be made by an amateur. That time is now in sight. There is no longer any
doubt that the continuous reporting of an unseen environment is feasible. It
is often done badly, but the fact that it is done at all shows that it can be
done, and the fact that we begin to know how badly it is often done, shows
that it can be done better. With varying degrees of skill and honesty distant
complexities are reported every day by engineers and accountants for
business men, by secretaries and civil servants for officials, by intelligence
officers for the General Staff, by some journalists for some readers. These
are crude beginnings but radical, far more radical in the literal meaning of
that word than the repetition of wars, revolutions, abdications and
restorations; as radical as the change in the scale of human life which has
made it possible for Mr. Lloyd George to discuss Welsh coal mining after
breakfast in London, and the fate of the Arabs before dinner in Paris.
For the possibility of bringing any aspect of human affairs within the
range of judgment breaks the spell which has lain upon political ideas.
There have, of course, been plenty of men who did not realize that the range
of attention was the main premise of political science. They have built on
sand. They have demonstrated in their own persons the effects of a very
limited and self-centered knowledge of the world. But for the political
thinkers who have counted, from Plato and Aristotle through Machiavelli
and Hobbes to the democratic theorists, speculation has revolved around the
self-centered man who had to see the whole world by means of a few
pictures in his head.
122. Albert Bushnell Hart in the Introductory note to A. Lawrence Lowell's Public Opinion and
Popular Government.
123. The Federalist, Nos. 35, 36. Cf. comment by Henry Jones Ford in his Rise and Growth of
American Politics. Ch. V.
124. See below p. 268.
125. Politics, Bk. VII, Ch. 4.
Chapter XVII.
The Self-Contained Community
Table of Contents

That groups of self-centered people would engage in a struggle for
existence if they rubbed against each other has always been evident. This
much truth there is at any rate in that famous passage in the Leviathan
where Hobbes says that "though there had never been any time wherein
particular men were in a condition of war one against another, yet at all
times kings and persons of sovereign authority because of their
independency, are in continual jealousies and in the state and posture of
gladiators, having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one
another…"126

To circumvent this conclusion one great branch of human thought, which
had and has many schools, proceeded in this fashion: it conceived an ideally
just pattern of human relations in which each person had well defined
functions and rights. If he conscientiously filled the role allotted to him, it
did not matter whether his opinions were right or wrong. He did his duty,
the next man did his, and all the dutiful people together made a harmonious
world. Every caste system illustrates this principle; you find it in Plato's
Republic and in Aristotle, in the feudal ideal, in the circles of Dante's
Paradise, in the bureaucratic type of socialism, and in laissez-faire, to an
amazing degree in syndicalism, guild socialism, anarchism, and in the
system of international law idealized by Mr. Robert Lansing. All of them
assume a pre-established harmony, inspired, imposed, or innate, by which
the self-opinionated person, class, or community is orchestrated with the
rest of mankind. The more authoritarian imagine a conductor for the
symphony who sees to it that each man plays his part; the anarchistic are
inclined to think that a more divine concord would be heard if each player
improvised as he went along.
But there have also been philosophers who were bored by these
schemes of rights and duties, took conflict for granted, and tried to see how
their side might come out on top. They have always seemed more realistic,
even when they seemed alarming, because all they had to do was to
generalize the experience that nobody could escape. Machiavelli is the
classic of this school, a man most mercilessly maligned, because he
happened to be the first naturalist who used plain language in a field
hitherto preempted by supernaturalists.127 He has a worse name and more
disciples than any political thinker who ever lived. He truly described the
technic of existence for the self-contained state. That is why he has the
disciples. He has the bad name chiefly because he cocked his eye at the
Medici family, dreamed in his study at night where he wore his "noble court
dress" that Machiavelli was himself the Prince, and turned a pungent
description of the way things are done into an eulogy on that way of doing
them.
In his most infamous chapter128 he wrote that "a prince ought to take
care that he never lets anything slip from his lips that is not replete with the
above-named five qualities, that he may appear to him who hears and sees
him altogether merciful, faithful, humane, upright, and religious. There is
nothing more necessary to appear to have than this last quality, inasmuch as
men judge generally more by the eye than by the hand, because it belongs
to everybody to see you, to few to come in touch with you. Everyone sees
what you appear to be, few really know what you are, and those few dare
not oppose themselves to the opinion of the many, who have the majesty of
the state to defend them; and in the actions of all men, and especially of
princes, which it is not prudent to challenge, one judges by the result….
One prince of the present time, whom it is not well to name, never preaches
anything else but peace and good faith, and to both he is most hostile, and
either, if he had kept it, would have deprived him of reputation and
kingdom many a time."
That is cynical. But it is the cynicism of a man who saw truly without
knowing quite why he saw what he saw. Machiavelli is thinking of the run
of men and princes "who judge generally more by the eye than by the
hand," which is his way of saying that their judgments are subjective. He
was too close to earth to pretend that the Italians of his day saw the world
steadily and saw it whole. He would not indulge in fantasies, and he had not
the materials for imagining a race of men that had learned how to correct
their vision.
The world, as he found it, was composed of people whose vision could
rarely be corrected, and Machiavelli knew that such people, since they see
all public relations in a private way, are involved in perpetual strife. What
they see is their own personal, class, dynastic, or municipal version of
affairs that in reality extend far beyond the boundaries of their vision. They
see their aspect. They see it as right. But they cross other people who are
similarly self-centered. Then their very existence is endangered, or at least
what they, for unsuspected private reasons, regard as their existence and
take to be a danger. The end, which is impregnably based on a real though
private experience justifies the means. They will sacrifice any one of these
ideals to save all of them,… "one judges by the result…"

These 
elemental 
truths 
confronted 
the 
democratic 
philosophers.
Consciously or otherwise, they knew that the range of political knowledge
was limited, that the area of self-government would have to be limited, and
that self-contained states when they rubbed against each other were in the
posture of gladiators. But they knew just as certainly, that there was in men
a will to decide their own fate, and to find a peace that was not imposed by
force. How could they reconcile the wish and the fact?
They looked about them. In the city states of Greece and Italy they
found a chronicle of corruption, intrigue and war.129 In their own cities they
saw faction, artificiality, fever. This was no environment in which the
democratic ideal could prosper, no place where a group of independent and
equally competent people managed their own affairs spontaneously. They
looked further, guided somewhat perhaps by Jean Jacques Rousseau, to
remote, unspoiled country villages. They saw enough to convince
themselves that there the ideal was at home. Jefferson in particular felt this,
and Jefferson more than any other man formulated the American image of
democracy. From the townships had come the power that had carried the
American Revolution to victory. From the townships were to come the
votes that carried Jefferson's party to power. Out there in the farming
communities of Massachusetts and Virginia, if you wore glasses that
obliterated the slaves, you could see with your mind's eye the image of what
democracy was to be.
"The American Revolution broke out," says de Tocqueville,130 "and the
doctrine of the sovereignty of the people, which had been nurtured in the
townships, took possession of the state." It certainly took possession of the
minds of those men who formulated and popularized the stereotypes of
democracy. "The cherishment of the people was our principle," wrote
Jefferson.131 But the people he cherished almost exclusively were the small
landowning farmers: "Those who labor in the earth are the chosen people of
God, if ever He had a chosen people, whose breasts He has made his
peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue. It is the focus in which
He keeps alive that sacred fire, which otherwise might escape from the face
of the earth. Corruption of morals in the mass of cultivators is a
phenomenon of which no age nor nation has furnished an example."
However much of the romantic return to nature may have entered into
this exclamation, there was also an element of solid sense. Jefferson was
right in thinking that a group of independent farmers comes nearer to
fulfilling the requirements of spontaneous democracy than any other human
society. But if you are to preserve the ideal, you must fence off these ideal
communities from the abominations of the world. If the farmers are to
manage their own affairs, they must confine affairs to those they are
accustomed to managing. Jefferson drew all these logical conclusions. He
disapproved of manufacture, of foreign commerce, and a navy, of intangible
forms of property, and in theory of any form of government that was not
centered in the small self-governing group. He had critics in his day: one of
them remarked that "wrapt up in the fullness of self-consequence and strong
enough, in reality, to defend ourselves against every invader, we might
enjoy an eternal rusticity and live, forever, thus apathized and vulgar under
the shelter of a selfish, satisfied indifference."132

The democratic ideal, as Jefferson moulded it, consisting of an ideal
environment and a selected class, did not conflict with the political science
of his time. It did conflict with the realities. And when the ideal was stated
in absolute terms, partly through exuberance and partly for campaign
purposes, it was soon forgotten that the theory was originally devised for
very special conditions. It became the political gospel, and supplied the
stereotypes through which Americans of all parties have looked at politics.
That gospel was fixed by the necessity that in Jefferson's time no one
could have conceived public opinions that were not spontaneous and
subjective. The democratic tradition is therefore always trying to see a
world where people are exclusively concerned with affairs of which the
causes and effects all operate within the region they inhabit. Never has
democratic theory been able to conceive itself in the context of a wide and
unpredictable environment. The mirror is concave. And although democrats
recognize that they are in contact with external affairs, they see quite surely
that every contact outside that self-contained group is a threat to democracy
as originally conceived. That is a wise fear. If democracy is to be
spontaneous, the interests of democracy must remain simple, intelligible,
and easily managed. Conditions must approximate those of the isolated
rural township if the supply of information is to be left to casual experience.
The environment must be confined within the range of every man's direct
and certain knowledge.
The democrat has understood what an analysis of public opinion seems
to demonstrate: that in dealing with an unseen environment decisions "are
manifestly settled at haphazard, which clearly they ought not to be."133 So
he has always tried in one way or another to minimize the importance of
that unseen environment. He feared foreign trade because trade involves
foreign connections; he distrusted manufactures because they produced big
cities and collected crowds; if he had nevertheless to have manufactures, he
wanted protection in the interest of self-sufficiency. When he could not find
these conditions in the real world, he went passionately into the wilderness,
and founded Utopian communities far from foreign contacts. His slogans
reveal his prejudice. He is for Self-Government, Self-Determination,
Independence. Not one of these ideas carries with it any notion of consent
or community beyond the frontiers of the self-governing groups. The field
of democratic action is a circumscribed area. Within protected boundaries
the aim has been to achieve self-sufficiency and avoid entanglement. This
rule is not confined to foreign policy, but it is plainly evident there, because
life outside the national boundaries is more distinctly alien than any life
within. And as history shows, democracies in their foreign policy have had
generally to choose between splendid isolation and a diplomacy that
violated their ideals. The most successful democracies, in fact, Switzerland,
Denmark, Australia, New Zealand, and America until recently, have had no
foreign policy in the European sense of that phrase. Even a rule like the
Monroe Doctrine arose from the desire to supplement the two oceans by a
glacis of states that were sufficiently republican to have no foreign policy.
Whereas danger is a great, perhaps an indispensable condition of
autocracy,134 security was seen to be a necessity if democracy was to work.
There must be as little disturbance as possible of the premise of a self-
contained community. Insecurity involves surprises. It means that there are
people acting upon your life, over whom you have no control, with whom
you cannot consult. It means that forces are at large which disturb the
familiar routine, and present novel problems about which quick and unusual
decisions are required. Every democrat feels in his bones that dangerous
crises are incompatible with democracy, because he knows that the inertia
of masses is such that to act quickly a very few must decide and the rest
follow rather blindly. This has not made non-resistants out of democrats,
but it has resulted in all democratic wars being fought for pacifist aims.
Even when the wars are in fact wars of conquest, they are sincerely
believed to be wars in defense of civilization.
These various attempts to enclose a part of the earth's surface were not
inspired by cowardice, apathy, or, what one of Jefferson's critics called a
willingness to live under monkish discipline. The democrats had caught
sight of a dazzling possibility, that every human being should rise to his full
stature, freed from man-made limitations. With what they knew of the art of
government, they could, no more than Aristotle before them, conceive a
society of autonomous individuals, except an enclosed and simple one.
They could, then, select no other premise if they were to reach the
conclusion that all the people could spontaneously manage their public
affairs.

Having adopted the premise because it was necessary to their keenest hope,
they drew other conclusions as well. Since in order to have spontaneous
self-government, you had to have a simple self-contained community, they
took it for granted that one man was as competent as the next to manage
these simple and self-contained affairs. Where the wish is father to the
thought such logic is convincing. Moreover, the doctrine of the
omnicompetent citizen is for most practical purposes true in the rural
township. Everybody in a village sooner or later tries his hand at everything
the village does. There is rotation in office by men who are jacks of all
trades. There was no serious trouble with the doctrine of the omnicompetent
citizen until the democratic stereotype was universally applied, so that men
looked at a complicated civilization and saw an enclosed village.
Not only was the individual citizen fitted to deal with all public affairs,
but he was consistently public-spirited and endowed with unflagging
interest. He was public-spirited enough in the township, where he knew
everybody and was interested in everybody's business. The idea of enough
for the township turned easily into the idea of enough for any purpose, for
as we have noted, quantitative thinking does not suit a stereotype. But there
was another turn to the circle. Since everybody was assumed to be
interested enough in important affairs, only those affairs came to seem
important in which everybody was interested.
This meant that men formed their picture of the world outside from the
unchallenged pictures in their heads. These pictures came to them well
stereotyped by their parents and teachers, and were little corrected by their
own experience. Only a few men had affairs that took them across state
lines. Even fewer had reason to go abroad. Most voters lived their whole
lives in one environment, and with nothing but a few feeble newspapers,
some pamphlets, political speeches, their religious training, and rumor to go
on, they had to conceive that larger environment of commerce and finance,
of war and peace. The number of public opinions based on any objective
report was very small in proportion to those based on casual fancy.
And so for many different reasons, self-sufficiency was a spiritual ideal
in the formative period. The physical isolation of the township, the
loneliness of the pioneer, the theory of democracy, the Protestant tradition,
and the limitations of political science all converged to make men believe
that out of their own consciences they must extricate political wisdom. It is
not strange that the deduction of laws from absolute principles should have
usurped so much of their free energy. The American political mind had to
live on its capital. In legalism it found a tested body of rules from which
new rules could be spun without the labor of earning new truths from
experience. The formulae became so curiously sacred that every good
foreign observer has been amazed at the contrast between the dynamic
practical energy of the American people and the static theorism of their
public life. That steadfast love of fixed principles was simply the only way
known of achieving self-sufficiency. But it meant that the public opinions of
any one community about the outer world consisted chiefly of a few
stereotyped images arranged in a pattern deduced from their legal and their
moral codes, and animated by the feeling aroused by local experiences.
Thus democratic theory, starting from its fine vision of ultimate human
dignity, was forced by lack of the instruments of knowledge for reporting its
environment, to fall back upon the wisdom and experience which happened
to have accumulated in the voter. God had, in the words of Jefferson, made
men's breasts "His peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue."
These chosen people in their self-contained environment had all the facts
before them. The environment was so familiar that one could take it for
granted that men were talking about substantially the same things. The only
real disagreements, therefore, would be in judgments about the same facts.
There was no need to guarantee the sources of information. They were
obvious, and equally accessible to all men. Nor was there need to trouble
about the ultimate criteria. In the self-contained community one could
assume, or at least did assume, a homogeneous code of morals. The only
place, therefore, for differences of opinion was in the logical application of
accepted standards to accepted facts. And since the reasoning faculty was
also well standardized, an error in reasoning would be quickly exposed in a
free discussion. It followed that truth could be obtained by liberty within
these limits. The community could take its supply of information for
granted; its codes it passed on through school, church, and family, and the
power to draw deductions from a premise, rather than the ability to find the
premise, was regarded as the chief end of intellectual training.
126. Leviathan, Ch. XIII. Of the Natural Condition of Mankind as concerning their Felicity and
Misery.
127. F. S. Oliver in his Alexander Hamilton, says of Machiavelli (p. 174): "Assuming the conditions
which exist—the nature of man and of things—to be unchangeable, he proceeds in a calm,
unmoral way, like a lecturer on frogs, to show how a valiant and sagacious ruler can best turn
events to his own advantage and the security of his dynasty."
128. The Prince, Ch. XVIII. "Concerning the way in which Princes should keep faith." Translation
by W. K. Marriott.
129. "Democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and contention… and have in general
been as short in their lives as they have been violent in their deaths." Madison, Federalist, No.
10.
130. Democracy in America, Vol. I, p. 51. Third Edition
131. Cited in Charles Beard, Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy. Ch. XIV.
132. Op. cit., p. 426.
133. Aristotle, Politics, Bk. VII, Ch. IV.
134. Fisher Ames, frightened by the democratic revolution of 1800, wrote to Rufus King in 1802:
"We need, as all nations do, the compression on the outside of our circle of a formidable
neighbor, whose presence shall at all times excite stronger fears than demagogues can inspire
the people with towards their government." Cited by Ford, Rise and Growth of American
Politics, p. 69.
Chapter XVIII.
The Role of Force, Patronage and Privilege
Table of Contents

"It has happened as was to have been foreseen," wrote Hamilton,135 "the
measures of the Union have not been executed; the delinquencies of the
States have, step by step, matured themselves to an extreme which has at
length arrested all the wheels of the national government and brought them
to an awful stand."… For "in our case the concurrence of thirteen distinct
sovereign wills is requisite, under the confederation, to the complete
execution of every important measure that proceeds from the Union." How
could it be otherwise, he asked: "The rulers of the respective members…
will undertake to judge of the propriety of the measures themselves. They
will consider the conformity of the thing proposed or required to their
immediate 
interests 
or 
aims; 
the 
momentary 
conveniences 
or
inconveniences that would attend its adoption. All this will be done, and in
a spirit of interested and suspicious scrutiny, without that knowledge of
national circumstances and reasons of state which is essential to right
judgment, and with that strong predilection in favor of local objects which
can hardly fail to mislead the decision. The same process must be repeated
in every member of which the body is constituted; and the execution of the
plans framed by the councils of the whole, will always fluctuate on the
discretion of the ill-informed and prejudiced opinion of every part. Those
who have been conversant in the proceedings of popular assemblies, who
have seen how difficult it often is, when there is no exterior pressure of
circumstances, to bring them to harmonious resolutions on important points,
will readily conceive how impossible it must be to induce a number of such
assemblies, deliberating at a distance from each other, at different times,
and under different impressions, long to coöperate in the same views and
pursuits."
Over ten years of storm and stress with a congress that was, as John
Adams said,136 "only a diplomatic assembly," had furnished the leaders of
the revolution "with an instructive but afflicting lesson"137 in what happens
when a number of self-centered communities are entangled in the same
environment. And so, when they went to Philadelphia in May of 1787,
ostensibly to revise the Articles of Confederation, they were really in full
reaction against the fundamental premise of Eighteenth Century democracy.
Not only were the leaders consciously opposed to the democratic spirit of
the time, feeling, as Madison said, that "democracies have ever been
spectacles of turbulence and contention," but within the national frontiers
they were determined to offset as far as they could the ideal of self-
governing communities in self-contained environments. The collisions and
failures of concave democracy, where men spontaneously managed all their
own affairs, were before their eyes. The problem as they saw it, was to
restore government as against democracy. They understood government to
be the power to make national decisions and enforce them throughout the
nation; democracy they believed was the insistence of localities and classes
upon self-determination in accordance with their immediate interests and
aims.
They could not consider in their calculations the possibility of such an
organization of knowledge that separate communities would act
simultaneously on the same version of the facts. We just begin to conceive
this possibility for certain parts of the world where there is free circulation
of news and a common language, and then only for certain aspects of life.
The whole idea of a voluntary federalism in industry and world politics is
still so rudimentary, that, as we see in our own experience, it enters only a
little, and only very modestly, into practical politics. What we, more than a
century later, can only conceive as an incentive to generations of
intellectual effort, the authors of the Constitution had no reason to conceive
at all. In order to set up national government, Hamilton and his colleagues
had to make plans, not on the theory that men would coöperate because
they had a sense of common interest, but on the theory that men could be
governed, if special interests were kept in equilibrium by a balance of
power. "Ambition," Madison said,138 "must be made to counteract
ambition."
They did not, as some writers have supposed, intend to balance every
interest so that the government would be in a perpetual deadlock. They
intended to deadlock local and class interest to prevent these from
obstructing government. "In framing a government which is to be
administered by men over men," wrote Madison,139 "the great difficulty lies
in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed, and in
the next place, oblige it to control itself." In one very important sense, then,
the doctrine of checks and balances was the remedy of the federalist leaders
for the problem of public opinion. They saw no other way to substitute "the
mild influence of the magistracy" for the "sanguinary agency of the
sword"140 except by devising an ingenious machine to neutralize local
opinion. They did not understand how to manipulate a large electorate, any
more than they saw the possibility of common consent upon the basis of
common information. It is true that Aaron Burr taught Hamilton a lesson
which impressed him a good deal when he seized control of New York City
in 1800 by the aid of Tammany Hall. But Hamilton was killed before he
was able to take account of this new discovery, and, as Mr. Ford says,141
Burr's pistol blew the brains out of the Federal party.

When the constitution was written, "politics could still be managed by
conference and agreement among gentlemen"142 and it was to the gentry
that Hamilton turned for a government. It was intended that they should
manage national affairs when local prejudice had been brought into
equilibrium by the constitutional checks and balances. No doubt Hamilton,
who belonged to this class by adoption, had a human prejudice in their
favor. But that by itself is a thin explanation of his statecraft. Certainly there
can be no question of his consuming passion for union, and it is, I think, an
inversion of the truth to argue that he made the Union to protect class
privileges, instead of saying that he used class privileges to make the
Union. "We must take man as we find him," Hamilton said, "and if we
expect him to serve the public we must interest his passions in doing so."143
He needed men to govern, whose passions could be most quickly attached
to a national interest. These were the gentry, the public creditors,
manufacturers, shippers, and traders,144 and there is probably no better
instance in history of the adaptation of shrewd means to clear ends, than in
the series of fiscal measures, by which Hamilton attached the provincial
notables to the new government.
Although the constitutional convention worked behind closed doors,
and although ratification was engineered by "a vote of probably not more
than one-sixth of the adult males,"145 there was little or no pretence. The
Federalists argued for union, not for democracy, and even the word republic
had an unpleasant sound to George Washington when he had been for more
than two years a republican president. The constitution was a candid
attempt to limit the sphere of popular rule; the only democratic organ it was
intended the government should possess was the House, based on a suffrage
highly limited by property qualifications. And even at that, the House, it
was believed, would be so licentious a part of the government, that it was
carefully checked and balanced by the Senate, the electoral college, the
Presidential veto, and by judicial interpretation.
Thus at the moment when the French Revolution was kindling popular
feeling the world over, the American revolutionists of 1776 came under a
constitution which went back, as far as it was expedient, to the British
Monarchy for a model. This conservative reaction could not endure. The
men who had made it were a minority, their motives were under suspicion,
and when Washington went into retirement, the position of the gentry was
not strong enough to survive the inevitable struggle for the succession. The
anomaly between the original plan of the Fathers and the moral feeling of
the age was too wide not to be capitalized by a good politician.

Jefferson referred to his election as "the great revolution of 1800," but more
than anything else it was a revolution in the mind. No great policy was
altered, but a new tradition was established. For it was Jefferson who first
taught the American people to regard the Constitution as an instrument of
democracy, and he stereotyped the images, the ideas, and even many of the
phrases, in which Americans ever since have described politics to each
other. So complete was the mental victory, that twenty-five years later de
Tocqueville, who was received in Federalist homes, noted that even those
who were "galled by its continuance"—were not uncommonly heard to
"laud the delights of a republican government, and the advantages of
democratic institutions when they are in public."146
The Constitutional Fathers with all their sagacity had failed to see that a
frankly undemocratic constitution would not long be tolerated. The bold
denial of popular rule was bound to offer an easy point of attack to a man,
like Jefferson, who so far as his constitutional opinions ran, was not a bit
more ready than Hamilton to turn over government to the "unrefined" will
of the people.147 The Federalist leaders had been men of definite
convictions who stated them bluntly. There was little real discrepancy
between their public and their private views. But Jefferson's mind was a
mass of ambiguities, not solely because of its defects, as Hamilton and his
biographers have thought, but because he believed in a union and he
believed in spontaneous democracies, and in the political science of his age
there was no satisfactory way to reconcile the two. Jefferson was confused
in thought and action because he had a vision of a new and tremendous idea
that no one had thought out in all its bearings. But though popular
sovereignty was not clearly understood by anybody, it seemed to imply so
great an enhancement of human life, that no constitution could stand which
frankly denied it. The frank denials were therefore expunged from
consciousness, and the document, which is on its face an honest example of
limited constitutional democracy, was talked and thought about as an
instrument for direct popular rule. Jefferson actually reached the point of
believing that the Federalists had perverted the Constitution, of which in his
fancy they were no longer the authors. And so the Constitution was, in
spirit, rewritten. Partly by actual amendment, partly by practice, as in the
case of the electoral college, but chiefly by looking at it through another set
of stereotypes, the facade was no longer permitted to look oligarchic.
The American people came to believe that their Constitution was a
democratic instrument, and treated it as such. They owe that fiction to the
victory of Thomas Jefferson, and a great conservative fiction it has been. It
is a fair guess that if everyone had always regarded the Constitution as did
the authors of it, the Constitution would have been violently overthrown,
because loyalty to the Constitution and loyalty to democracy would have
seemed incompatible. Jefferson resolved that paradox by teaching the
American people to read the Constitution as an expression of democracy.
He himself stopped there. But in the course of twenty-five years or so social
conditions had changed so radically, that Andrew Jackson carried out the
political revolution for which Jefferson had prepared the tradition.148

The political center of that revolution was the question of patronage. By the
men who founded the government public office was regarded as a species
of property, not lightly to be disturbed, and it was undoubtedly their hope
that the offices would remain in the hands of their social class. But the
democratic theory had as one of its main principles the doctrine of the
omnicompetent citizen. Therefore, when people began to look at the
Constitution as a democratic instrument, it was certain that permanence in
office would seem undemocratic. The natural ambitions of men coincided
here with the great moral impulse of their age. Jefferson had popularized
the idea without carrying it ruthlessly into practice, and removals on party
grounds were comparatively few under the Virginian Presidents. It was
Jackson who founded the practice of turning public office into patronage.
Curious as it sounds to us, the principle of rotation in office with short
terms was regarded as a great reform. Not only did it acknowledge the new
dignity of the average man by treating him as fit for any office, not only did
it destroy the monopoly of a small social class and appear to open careers to
talent, but "it had been advocated for centuries as a sovereign remedy for
political corruption," and as the one way to prevent the creation of a
bureaucracy.149 The practice of rapid change in public office was the
application to a great territory of the image of democracy derived from the
self-contained village.
Naturally it did not have the same results in the nation that it had in the
ideal community on which the democratic theory was based. It produced
quite unexpected results, for it founded a new governing class to take the
place of the submerged federalists. Unintentionally, patronage did for a
large electorate what Hamilton's fiscal measures had done for the upper
classes. We often fail to realize how much of the stability of our
government we owe to patronage. For it was patronage that weaned natural
leaders from too much attachment to the self-centered community, it was
patronage that weakened the local spirit and brought together in some kind
of peaceful cooperation, the very men who, as provincial celebrities, would,
in the absence of a sense of common interest, have torn the union apart.
But of course, the democratic theory was not supposed to produce a new
governing class, and it has never accommodated itself to the fact. When the
democrat wanted to abolish monopoly of offices, to have rotation and short
terms, he was thinking of the township where anyone could do a public
service, and return humbly to his own farm. The idea of a special class of
politicians was just what the democrat did not like. But he could not have
what he did like, because his theory was derived from an ideal environment,
and he was living in a real one. The more deeply he felt the moral impulse
of democracy, the less ready he was to see the profound truth of Hamilton's
statement that communities deliberating at a distance and under different
impressions could not long coöperate in the same views and pursuits. For
that truth postpones anything like the full realization of democracy in public
affairs until the art of obtaining common consent has been radically
improved. And so while the revolution under Jefferson and Jackson
produced the patronage which made the two party system, which created a
substitute for the rule of the gentry, and a discipline for governing the
deadlock of the checks and balances, all that happened, as it were, invisibly.
Thus, rotation in office might be the ostensible theory, in practice the
offices oscillated between the henchmen. Tenure might not be a permanent
monopoly, but the professional politician was permanent. Government
might be, as President Harding once said, a simple thing, but winning
elections was a sophisticated performance. The salaries in office might be
as ostentatiously frugal as Jefferson's home-spun, but the expenses of party
organization and the fruits of victory were in the grand manner. The
stereotype of democracy controlled the visible government; the corrections,
the exceptions and adaptations of the American people to the real facts of
their environment have had to be invisible, even when everybody knew all
about them. It was only the words of the law, the speeches of politicians, the
platforms, and the formal machinery of administration that have had to
conform to the pristine image of democracy.

If one had asked a philosophical democrat how these self-contained
communities were to coöperate, when their public opinions were so self-
centered, he would have pointed to representative government embodied in
the Congress. And nothing would surprise him more than the discovery of
how steadily the prestige of representative government has declined, while
the power of the Presidency has grown.
Some critics have traced this to the custom of sending only local
celebrities to Washington. They have thought that if Congress could consist
of the nationally eminent men, the life of the capital would be more
brilliant. It would be, of course, and it would be a very good thing if retiring
Presidents and Cabinet officers followed the example of John Quincy
Adams. But the absence of these men does not explain the plight of
Congress, for its decline began when it was relatively the most eminent
branch of the government. Indeed it is more probable that the reverse is
true, and that Congress ceased to attract the eminent as it lost direct
influence on the shaping of national policy.
The main reason for the discredit, which is world wide, is, I think, to be
found in the fact that a congress of representatives is essentially a group of
blind men in a vast, unknown world. With some exceptions, the only
method recognized in the Constitution or in the theory of representative
government, by which Congress can inform itself, is to exchange opinions
from the districts. There is no systematic, adequate, and authorized way for
Congress to know what is going on in the world. The theory is that the best
man of each district brings the best wisdom of his constituents to a central
place, and that all these wisdoms combined are all the wisdom that
Congress needs. Now there is no need to question the value of expressing
local opinions and exchanging them. Congress has great value as the
market-place of a continental nation. In the coatrooms, the hotel lobbies, the
boarding houses of Capitol Hill, at the tea-parties of the Congressional
matrons, and from occasional entries into the drawing rooms of
cosmopolitan Washington, new vistas are opened, and wider horizons. But
even if the theory were applied, and the districts always sent their wisest
men, the sum or a combination of local impressions is not a wide enough
base for national policy, and no base at all for the control of foreign policy.
Since the real effects of most laws are subtle and hidden, they cannot be
understood by filtering local experiences through local states of mind. They
can be known only by controlled reporting and objective analysis. And just
as the head of a large factory cannot know how efficient it is by talking to
the foreman, but must examine cost sheets and data that only an accountant
can dig out for him, so the lawmaker does not arrive at a true picture of the
state of the union by putting together a mosaic of local pictures. He needs to
know the local pictures, but unless he possesses instruments for calibrating
them, one picture is as good as the next, and a great deal better.
The President does come to the assistance of Congress by delivering
messages on the state of the Union. He is in a position to do that because he
presides over a vast collection of bureaus and their agents, which report as
well as act. But he tells Congress what he chooses to tell it. He cannot be
heckled, and the censorship as to what is compatible with the public interest
is in his hands. It is a wholly one-sided and tricky relationship, which
sometimes reaches such heights of absurdity, that Congress, in order to
secure an important document has to thank the enterprise of a Chicago
newspaper, or the calculated indiscretion of a subordinate official. So bad is
the contact of legislators with necessary facts that they are forced to rely
either on private tips or on that legalized atrocity, the Congressional
investigation, where Congressmen, starved of their legitimate food for
thought, go on a wild and feverish man-hunt, and do not stop at
cannibalism.
Except for the little that these investigations yield, the occasional
communications 
from 
the 
executive 
departments, 
interested 
and
disinterested data collected by private persons, such newspapers,
periodicals, and books as Congressmen read, and a new and excellent
practice of calling for help from expert bodies like the Interstate Commerce
Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, and the Tariff Commission,
the creation of Congressional opinion is incestuous. From this it follows
either that legislation of a national character is prepared by a few informed
insiders, and put through by partisan force; or that the legislation is broken
up into a collection of local items, each of which is enacted for a local
reason. Tariff schedules, navy yards, army posts, rivers and harbors, post
offices and federal buildings, pensions and patronage: these are fed out to
concave communities as tangible evidence of the benefits of national life.
Being concave, they can see the white marble building which rises out of
federal funds to raise local realty values and employ local contractors more
readily than they can judge the cumulative cost of the pork barrel. It is fair
to say that in a large assembly of men, each of whom has practical
knowledge only of his own district, laws dealing with translocal affairs are
rejected or accepted by the mass of Congressmen without creative
participation of any kind. They participate only in making those laws that
can be treated as a bundle of local issues. For a legislature without effective
means of information and analysis must oscillate between blind regularity,
tempered by occasional insurgency, and logrolling. And it is the logrolling
which makes the regularity palatable, because it is by logrolling that a
Congressman proves to his more active constituents that he is watching
their interests as they conceive them.
This is no fault of the individual Congressman's, except when he is
complacent about it. The cleverest and most industrious representative
cannot hope to understand a fraction of the bills on which he votes. The best
he can do is to specialize on a few bills, and take somebody's word about
the rest. I have known Congressmen, when they were boning up on a
subject, to study as they had not studied since they passed their final
examinations, many large cups of black coffee, wet towels and all. They
had to dig for information, sweat over arranging and verifying facts, which,
in any consciously organized government, should have been easily available
in a form suitable for decision. And even when they really knew a subject,
their anxieties had only begun. For back home the editors, the board of
trade, the central federated union, and the women's clubs had spared
themselves these labors, and were prepared to view the Congressman's
performance through local spectacles.

What patronage did to attach political chieftains to the national government,
the infinite variety of local subsidies and privileges do for self-centered
communities. Patronage and pork amalgamate and stabilize thousands of
special opinions, local discontents, private ambitions. There are but two
other alternatives. One is government by terror and obedience, the other is
government based on such a highly developed system of information,
analysis, and self-consciousness that "the knowledge of national
circumstances and reasons of state" is evident to all men. The autocratic
system is in decay, the voluntary system is in its very earliest development;
and so, in calculating the prospects of association among large groups of
people, a League of Nations, industrial government, or a federal union of
states, the degree to which the material for a common consciousness exists,
determines how far cooperation will depend upon force, or upon the milder
alternative to force, which is patronage and privilege. The secret of great
state-builders, like Alexander Hamilton, is that they know how to calculate
these principles.
135. Federalist, No. 15
136. Ford, op. cit., p. 36.
137. Federalist, No. 15.
138. Federalist, No. 51, cited by Ford, op. cit., p. 60.
139. Id.
140. _Federalist, No. 15.
141. Ford, op. cit., p. 119.
142. Op. cit., p. 144
143. Op. cit., p. 47
144. Beard, Economic Interpretation of the Constitution, passim.
145. Beard, op. cit., p. 325.
146. Democracy in America, Vol. I, Ch. X (Third Edition, 1838), p. 216.
147. Cf. his plan for the Constitution of Virginia, his ideas for a senate of property holders, and his
views on the judicial veto. Beard, Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy, pp. 450 et seq.
148. The reader who has any doubts as to the extent of the revolution that separated Hamilton's
opinions from Jackson's practice should turn to Mr. Henry Jones Ford's Rise and Growth of
American Politics.
149. Ford, op. cit., p. 169.
Chapter XIX.
The Old Image in a New Form: Guild Socialism
Table of Contents

Whenever the quarrels of self-centered groups become unbearable,
reformers in the past found themselves forced to choose between two great
alternatives. They could take the path to Rome and impose a Roman peace
upon the warring tribes. They could take the path to isolation, to autonomy
and self-sufficiency. Almost always they chose that path which they had
least recently travelled. If they had tried out the deadening monotony of
empire, they cherished above all other things the simple freedom of their
own community. But if they had seen this simple freedom squandered in
parochial jealousies they longed for the spacious order of a great and
powerful state.
Whichever choice they made, the essential difficulty was the same. If
decisions were decentralized they soon floundered in a chaos of local
opinions. If they were centralized, the policy of the state was based on the
opinions of a small social set at the capital. In any case force was necessary
to defend one local right against another, or to impose law and order on the
localities, or to resist class government at the center, or to defend the whole
society, centralized or decentralized, against the outer barbarian.
Modern democracy and the industrial system were both born in a time
of reaction against kings, crown government, and a regime of detailed
economic regulation. In the industrial sphere this reaction took the form of
extreme devolution, known as laissez-faire individualism. Each economic
decision was to be made by the man who had title to the property involved.
Since almost everything was owned by somebody, there would be
somebody to manage everything. This was plural sovereignty with a
vengeance.
It was economic government by anybody's economic philosophy,
though it was supposed to be controlled by immutable laws of political
economy that must in the end produce harmony. It produced many splendid
things, but enough sordid and terrible ones to start counter-currents. One of
these was the trust, which established a kind of Roman peace within
industry, and a Roman predatory imperialism outside. People turned to the
legislature for relief. They invoked representative government, founded on
the image of the township farmer, to regulate the semi-sovereign
corporations. The working class turned to labor organization. There
followed a period of increasing centralization and a sort of race of
armaments. The trusts interlocked, the craft unions federated and combined
into a labor movement, the political system grew stronger at Washington
and weaker in the states, as the reformers tried to match its strength against
big business.
In this period practically all the schools of socialist thought from the
Marxian left to the New Nationalists around Theodore Roosevelt, looked
upon centralization as the first stage of an evolution which would end in the
absorption of all the semi-sovereign powers of business by the political
state. The evolution never took place, except for a few months during the
war. That was enough, and there was a turn of the wheel against the
omnivorous state in favor of several new forms of pluralism. But this time
society was to swing back not to the atomic individualism of Adam Smith's
economic man and Thomas Jefferson's farmer, but to a sort of molecular
individualism of voluntary groups.
One of the interesting things about all these oscillations of theory is that
each in turn promises a world in which no one will have to follow
Machiavelli in order to survive. They are all established by some form of
coercion, they all exercise coercion in order to maintain themselves, and
they are all discarded as a result of coercion. Yet they do not accept
coercion, either physical power or special position, patronage, or privilege,
as part of their ideal. The individualist said that self-enlightened self-
interest would bring internal and external peace. The socialist is sure that
the motives to aggression will disappear. The new pluralist hopes they
will.150 Coercion is the surd in almost all social theory, except the
Machiavellian. The temptation to ignore it, because it is absurd,
inexpressible, and unmanageable, becomes overwhelming in any man who
is trying to rationalize human life.

The lengths to which a clever man will sometimes go in order to escape a
full recognition of the role of force is shown by Mr. G. D. H. Cole's book on
Guild Socialism. The present state, he says, "is primarily an instrument of
coercion;"151 in a guild socialist society there will be no sovereign power,
though there will be a coordinating body. He calls this body the Commune.
He then begins to enumerate the powers of the Commune, which, we
recall, is to be primarily not an instrument of coercion.152 It settles price
disputes. Sometimes it fixes prices, allocates the surplus or distributes the
loss. It allocates natural resources, and controls the issue of credit. It also
"allocates communal labor-power." It ratifies the budgets of the guilds and
the civil services. It levies taxes. "All questions of income" fall within its
jurisdiction. It "allocates" income to the non-productive members of the
community. It is the final arbiter in all questions of policy and jurisdiction
between the guilds. It passes constitutional laws fixing the functions of the
functional bodies. It appoints the judges. It confers coercive powers upon
the guilds, and ratifies their by-laws wherever these involve coercion. It
declares war and makes peace. It controls the armed forces. It is the
supreme representative of the nation abroad. It settles boundary questions
within the national state. It calls into existence new functional bodies, or
distributes new functions to old ones. It runs the police. It makes whatever
laws are necessary to regulate personal conduct and personal property.
These powers are exercised not by one commune, but by a federal
structure of local and provincial communes with a National commune at the
top. Mr. Cole is, of course, welcome to insist that this is not a sovereign
state, but if there is a coercive power now enjoyed by any modern
government for which he has forgotten to make room, I cannot think of it.
He tells us, however, that Guild society will be non-coercive: "we want
to build a new society which will be conceived in the spirit, not of coercion,
but of free service."153 Everyone who shares that hope, as most men and
women do, will therefore look closely to see what there is in the Guild
Socialist plan which promises to reduce coercion to its lowest limits, even
though the Guildsmen of to-day have already reserved for their communes
the widest kind of coercive power. It is acknowledged at once that the new
society cannot be brought into existence by universal consent. Mr. Cole is
too honest to shirk the element of force required to make the transition.154
And while obviously he cannot predict how much civil war there might be,
he is quite clear that there would have to be a period of direct action by the
trade unions.

But leaving aside the problems of transition, and any consideration of what
the effect is on their future action, when men have hacked their way through
to the promised land, let us imagine the Guild Society in being. What keeps
it running as a non-coercive society?
Mr. Cole has two answers to this question. One is the orthodox Marxian
answer that the abolition of capitalist property will remove the motive to
aggression. Yet he does not really believe that, because if he did, he would
care as little as does the average Marxian how the working class is to run
the government, once it is in control. If his diagnosis were correct, the
Marxian would be quite right: if the disease were the capitalist class and
only the capitalist class, salvation would automatically follow its extinction.
But Mr. Cole is enormously concerned about whether the society which
follows the revolution is to be run by state collectivism, by guilds or
cooperative societies, by a democratic parliament or by functional
representation. In fact, it is as a new theory of representative government
that guild socialism challenges attention.
The guildsmen do not expect a miracle to result from the disappearance
of capitalist property rights. They do expect, and of course quite rightly, that
if equality of income were the rule, social relations would be profoundly
altered. But they differ, as far as I can make out, from the orthodox Russian
communist in this respect: The communist proposes to establish equality by
force of the dictatorship of the proletariat, believing that if once people
were equalized both in income and in service, they would then lose the
incentives to aggression. The guildsmen also propose to establish equality
by force, but are shrewd enough to see that if an equilibrium is to be
maintained they have to provide institutions for maintaining it. Guildsmen,
therefore, put their faith in what they believe to be a new theory of
democracy.
Their object, says Mr. Cole, is "to get the mechanism right, and to adjust
it as far as possible to the expression of men's social wills." [Reference: Op.
cit., p. 16.] These wills need to be given opportunity for self-expression in
self-government "in any and every form of social action." Behind these
words is the true democratic impulse, the desire to enhance human dignity,
as well as the traditional assumption that this human dignity is impugned,
unless each person's will enters into the management of everything that
affects him. The guildsman, like the earlier democrat therefore, looks about
him for an environment in which this ideal of self-government can be
realized. A hundred years and more have passed since Rousseau and
Jefferson, and the center of interest has shifted from the country to the city.
The new democrat can no longer turn to the idealized rural township for the
image of democracy. He turns now to the workshop. "The spirit of
association must be given free play in the sphere in which it is best able to
find expression. This is manifestly the factory, in which men have the habit
and tradition of working together. The factory is the natural and
fundamental unit of industrial democracy. This involves, not only that the
factory must be free, as far as possible, to manage its own affairs, but also
that the democratic unit of the factory must be made the basis of the larger
democracy of the Guild, and that the larger organs of Guild administration
and government must be based largely on the principle of factory
representation."155
Factory is, of course, a very loose word, and Mr. Cole asks us to take it
as meaning mines, shipyards, docks, stations, and every place which is "a
natural center of production."156 But a factory in this sense is quite a
different thing from an industry. The factory, as Mr. Cole conceives it, is a
work place where men are really in personal contact, an environment small
enough to be known directly to all the workers. "This democracy if it is to
be real, must come home to, and be exercisable directly by, every individual
member of the Guild."157 This is important, because Mr. Cole, like
Jefferson, is seeking a natural unit of government. The only natural unit is a
perfectly familiar environment. Now a large plant, a railway system, a great
coal field, is not a natural unit in this sense. Unless it is a very small factory
indeed, what Mr. Cole is really thinking about is the shop. That is where
men can be supposed to have "the habit and tradition of working together."
The rest of the plant, the rest of the industry, is an inferred environment.

Anybody can see, and almost everybody will admit, that self-government in
the purely internal affairs of the shop is government of affairs that "can be
taken in at a single view."158 But dispute would arise as to what constitute
the internal affairs of a shop. Obviously the biggest interests, like wages,
standards of production, the purchase of supplies, the marketing of the
product, the larger planning of work, are by no means purely internal. The
shop democracy has freedom, subject to enormous limiting conditions from
the outside. It can deal to a certain extent with the arrangement of work laid
out for the shop, it can deal with the temper and temperament of
individuals, it can administer petty industrial justice, and act as a court of
first instance in somewhat larger individual disputes. Above all it can act as
a unit in dealing with other shops, and perhaps with the plant as a whole.
But isolation is impossible. The unit of industrial democracy is thoroughly
entangled in foreign affairs. And it is the management of these external
relations that constitutes the test of the guild socialist theory.
They have to be managed by representative government arranged in a
federal order from the shop to the plant, the plant to the industry, the
industry 
to 
the 
nation, 
with 
intervening 
regional 
grouping 
of
representatives. But all this structure derives from the shop, and all its
peculiar virtues are ascribed to this source. The representatives who choose
the representatives who choose the representatives who finally "coordinate"
and "regulate" the shops are elected, Mr. Cole asserts, by a true democracy.
Because they come originally from a self-governing unit, the whole federal
organism will be inspired by the spirit and the reality of self-government.
Representatives will aim to carry out the workers' "actual will as understood
by themselves,"159 that is, as understood by the individual in the shops.
A government run literally on this principle would, if history is any
guide, be either a perpetual logroll, or a chaos of warring shops. For while
the worker in the shop can have a real opinion about matters entirely within
the shop, his "will" about the relation of that shop to the plant, the industry,
and the nation is subject to all the limitations of access, stereotype, and self-
interest that surround any other self-centered opinion. His experience in the
shop at best brings only aspects of the whole to his attention. His opinion of
what is right within the shop he can reach by direct knowledge of the
essential facts. His opinion of what is right in the great complicated
environment out of sight is more likely to be wrong than right if it is a
generalization from the experience of the individual shop. As a matter of
experience, the representatives of a guild society would find, just as the
higher trade union officials find today, that on a great number of questions
which they have to decide there is no "actual will as understood" by the
shops.

The guildsmen insist, however, that such criticism is blind because it
ignores a great political discovery. You may be quite right, they would say,
in thinking that the representatives of the shops would have to make up
their own minds on many questions about which the shops have no opinion.
But you are simply entangled in an ancient fallacy: you are looking for
somebody to represent a group of people. He cannot be found. The only
representative possible is one who acts for "some particular function,"160
and therefore each person must help choose as many representatives "as
there are distinct essential groups of functions to be performed."
Assume then that the representatives speak, not for the men in the
shops, but for certain functions in which the men are interested. They are,
mind you, disloyal if they do not carry out the will of the group about the
function, as understood by the group.161 These functional representatives
meet. Their business is to coordinate and regulate. By what standard does
each judge the proposals of the other, assuming, as we must, that there is
conflict of opinion between the shops, since if there were not, there would
be no need to coordinate and regulate?
Now the peculiar virtue of functional democracy is supposed to be that
men vote candidly according to their own interests, which it is assumed
they know by daily experience. They can do that within the self-contained
group. But in its external relations the group as a whole, or its
representative, is dealing with matters that transcend immediate experience.
The shop does not arrive spontaneously at a view of the whole situation.
Therefore, the public opinions of a shop about its rights and duties in the
industry and in society, are matters of education or propaganda, not the
automatic product of shop-consciousness. Whether the guildsmen elect a
delegate, or a representative, they do not escape the problem of the
orthodox democrat. Either the group as a whole, or the elected spokesman,
must stretch his mind beyond the limits of direct experience. He must vote
on questions coming up from other shops, and on matters coming from
beyond the frontiers of the whole industry. The primary interest of the shop
does not even cover the function of a whole industrial vocation. The
function of a vocation, a great industry, a district, a nation is a concept, not
an experience, and has to be imagined, invented, taught and believed. And
even though you define function as carefully as possible, once you admit
that the view of each shop on that function will not necessarily coincide
with the view of other shops, you are saying that the representative of one
interest is concerned in the proposals made by other interests. You are
saying that he must conceive a common interest. And in voting for him you
are choosing a man who will not simply represent your view of your
function, which is all that you know at first hand, but a man who will
represent your views about other people's views of that function. You are
voting as indefinitely as the orthodox democrat.

The guildsmen in their own minds have solved the question of how to
conceive a common interest by playing with the word function. They
imagine a society in which all the main work of the world has been
analysed into functions, and these functions in turn synthesized
harmoniously.162 They suppose essential agreement about the purposes of
society as a whole, and essential agreement about the role of every
organized group in carrying out those purposes. It was a nice sentiment,
therefore, which led them to take the name of their theory from an
institution that arose in a Catholic feudal society. But they should remember
that the scheme of function which the wise men of that age assumed was
not worked out by mortal man. It is unclear how the guildsmen think the
scheme is going to be worked out and made acceptable in the modern
world. Sometimes they seem to argue that the scheme will develop from
trade union organization, at other times that the communes will define the
constitutional function of the groups. But it makes a considerable practical
difference whether they believe that the groups define their own functions
or not.
In either case, Mr. Cole assumes that society can be carried on by a
social contract based on an accepted idea of "distinct essential groups of
functions." How does one recognize these distinct essential groups? So far
as I can make out, Mr. Cole thinks that a function is what a group of people
are interested in. "The essence of functional democracy is that a man should
count as many times over as there are functions in which he is
interested."163 Now there are at least two meanings to the word interested.
You can use it to mean that a man is involved, or that his mind is occupied.
John Smith, for example, may have been tremendously interested in the
Stillman divorce case. He may have read every word of the news in every
lobster edition. On the other hand, young Guy Stillman, whose legitimacy
was at stake, probably did not trouble himself at all. John Smith was
interested in a suit that did not affect his "interests," and Guy was
uninterested in one that would determine the whole course of his life. Mr.
Cole, I am afraid, leans towards John Smith. He is answering the "very
foolish objection" that to vote by functions is to be voting very often: "If a
man is not interested enough to vote, and cannot be aroused to interest
enough to make him vote, on, say, a dozen distinct subjects, he waives his
right to vote and the result is no less democratic than if he voted blindly and
without interest."
Mr. Cole thinks that the uninstructed voter "waives his right to vote."
From this it follows that the votes of the instructed reveal their interest, and
their interest defines the function.164 "Brown, Jones, and Robinson must
therefore have, not one vote each, but as many different functional votes as
there are different questions calling for associative action in which they are
interested."165 I am considerably in doubt whether Mr. Cole thinks that
Brown, Jones and Robinson should qualify in any election where they
assert that they are interested, or that somebody else, not named, picks the
functions in which they are entitled to be interested. If I were asked to say
what I believe Mr. Cole thinks, it would be that he has smoothed over the
difficulty by the enormously strange assumption that it is the uninstructed
voter who waives his right to vote; and has concluded that whether
functional voting is arranged by a higher power, or "from below" on the
principle that a man may vote when it interests him to vote, only the
instructed will be voting anyway, and therefore the institution will work.
But there are two kinds of uninstructed voter. There is the man who
does not know and knows that he does not know. He is generally an
enlightened person. He is the man who waives his right to vote. But there is
also the man who is uninstructed and does not know that he is, or care. He
can always be gotten to the polls, if the party machinery is working. His
vote is the basis of the machine. And since the communes of the guild
society have large powers over taxation, wages, prices, credit, and natural
resources, it would be preposterous to assume that elections will not be
fought at least as passionately as our own.
The way people exhibit their interest will not then delimit the functions
of a functional society. There are two other ways that function might be
defined. One would be by the trade unions which fought the battle that
brought guild socialism into being. Such a struggle would harden groups of
men together in some sort of functional relation, and these groups would
then become the vested interests of the guild socialist society. Some of
them, like the miners and railroad men, would be very strong, and probably
deeply attached to the view of their function which they learned from the
battle with capitalism. It is not at all unlikely that certain favorably placed
trade unions would under a socialist state become the center of coherence
and government. But a guild society would inevitably find them a tough
problem to deal with, for direct action would have revealed their strategic
power, and some of their leaders at least would not offer up this power
readily on the altar of freedom. In order to "coordinate" them, guild society
would have to gather together its strength, and fairly soon one would find, I
think, that the radicals under guild socialism would be asking for
communes strong enough to define the functions of the guilds.
But if you are going to have the government (commune) define
functions, the premise of the theory disappears. It had to suppose that a
scheme of functions was obvious in order that the concave shops would
voluntarily relate themselves to society. If there is no settled scheme of
functions in every voter's head, he has no better way under guild socialism
than under orthodox democracy of turning a self-centered opinion into a
social judgment. And, of course, there can be no such settled scheme,
because, even if Mr. Cole and his friends devised a good one, the shop
democracies from which all power derives, would judge the scheme in
operation by what they learn of it and by what they can imagine. The guilds
would see the same scheme differently. And so instead of the scheme being
the skeleton that keeps guild society together, the attempt to define what the
scheme ought to be, would be under guild socialism as elsewhere, the main
business of politics. If we could allow Mr. Cole his scheme of functions we
could allow him almost everything. Unfortunately he has inserted in his
premise what he wishes a guild society to deduce.166
150. See G. D. H. Cole, Social Theory, p. 142.
151. Cole, Guild Socialism, p. 107.
152. Op. cit. Ch. VIII.
153. Op. cit., p. 141.
154. Cf. op. cit., Ch. X.
155. Op. cit., p. 40.
156. Op. cit., p. 41
157. Op. cit., p. 40.
158. Aristotle, Politics, Bk. VII, Ch. IV.
159. Op. cit., p. 42.
160. Op. cit., pp. 23-24.
161. Cf. Part V, "The Making of a Common Will."
162. Cf. op. cit., Ch. XIX.
163. Social Theory, p. 102 et seq.
164. Cf. Ch. XVIII of this book. "Since everybody was assumed to be interested enough in
important affairs, only those affairs came to seem important in which everybody was
interested."
165. Guild Socialism, p. 24.
166. I have dealt with Mr. Cole's theory rather than with the experience of Soviet Russia because,
while the testimony is fragmentary, all competent observers seem to agree that Russia in 1921
does not illustrate a communist state in working order. Russia is in revolution, and what you can
learn from Russia is what a revolution is like. You can learn very little about what a communist
society would be like. It is, however, immensely significant that, first as practical revolutionists
and then as public officials, the Russian communists have relied not upon the spontaneous
democracy of the Russian people, but on the discipline, special interest and the noblesse oblige
of a specialized class-the loyal and indoctrinated members of the Communist party. In the
"transition," on which no time limit has been set, I believe, the cure for class government and
the coercive state is strictly homeopathic.
There is also the question of why I selected Mr. Cole's books rather than the much more
closely reasoned "Constitution for the Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain" by Sidney and
Beatrice Webb. I admire that book very much; but I have not been able to convince myself that
it is not an intellectual tour de force. Mr. Cole seems to me far more authentically in the spirit of
the socialist movement, and therefore, a better witness.
Chapter XX.
A New Image
Table of Contents

The lesson is, I think, a fairly clear one. In the absence of institutions and
education by which the environment is so successfully reported that the
realities of public life stand out sharply against self-centered opinion, the
common interests very largely elude public opinion entirely, and can be
managed only by a specialized class whose personal interests reach beyond
the locality. This class is irresponsible, for it acts upon information that is
not common property, in situations that the public at large does not
conceive, and it can be held to account only on the accomplished fact.
The democratic theory by failing to admit that self-centered opinions
are not sufficient to procure good government, is involved in perpetual
conflict between theory and practice. According to the theory, the full
dignity of man requires that his will should be, as Mr. Cole says, expressed
"in any and every form of social action." It is supposed that the expression
of their will is the consuming passion of men, for they are assumed to
possess by instinct the art of government. But as a matter of plain
experience, self-determination is only one of the many interests of a human
personality. The desire to be the master of one's own destiny is a strong
desire, but it has to adjust itself to other equally strong desires, such as the
desire for a good life, for peace, for relief from burdens. In the original
assumptions of democracy it was held that the expression of each man's will
would spontaneously satisfy not only his desire for self-expression, but his
desire for a good life, because the instinct to express one's self in a good life
was innate.
The emphasis, therefore, has always been on the mechanism for
expressing the will. The democratic El Dorado has always been some
perfect environment, and some perfect system of voting and representation,
where the innate good will and instinctive statesmanship of every man
could be translated into action. In limited areas and for brief periods the
environment has been so favorable, that is to say so isolated, and so rich in
opportunity, that the theory worked well enough to confirm men in thinking
that it was sound for all time and everywhere. Then when the isolation
ended, and society became complex, and men had to adjust themselves
closely to one another, the democrat spent his time trying to devise more
perfect units of voting, in the hope that somehow he would, as Mr. Cole
says, "get the mechanism right, and adjust it as far as possible to men's
social wills." But while the democratic theorist was busy at this, he was far
away from the actual interests of human nature. He was absorbed by one
interest: self-government. Mankind was interested in all kinds of other
things, in order, in its rights, in prosperity, in sights and sounds and in not
being bored. In so far as spontaneous democracy does not satisfy their other
interests, it seems to most men most of the time to be an empty thing.
Because the art of successful self-government is not instinctive, men do not
long desire self-government for its own sake. They desire it for the sake of
the results. That is why the impulse to self-government is always strongest
as a protest against bad conditions.
The democratic fallacy has been its preoccupation with the origin of
government rather than with the processes and results. The democrat has
always assumed that if political power could be derived in the right way, it
would be beneficent. His whole attention has been on the source of power,
since he is hypnotized by the belief that the great thing is to express the will
of the people, first because expression is the highest interest of man, and
second because the will is instinctively good. But no amount of regulation
at the source of a river will completely control its behavior, and while
democrats have been absorbed in trying to find a good mechanism for
originating social power, that is to say a good mechanism of voting and
representation, they neglected almost every other interest of men. For no
matter how power originates, the crucial interest is in how power is
exercised. What determines the quality of civilization is the use made of
power. And that use cannot be controlled at the source.
If you try to control government wholly at the source, you inevitably
make all the vital decisions invisible. For since there is no instinct which
automatically makes political decisions that produce a good life, the men
who actually exercise power not only fail to express the will of the people,
because on most questions no will exists, but they exercise power according
to opinions which are hidden from the electorate.
If, then, you root out of the democratic philosophy the whole
assumption in all its ramifications that government is instinctive, and that
therefore it can be managed by self-centered opinions, what becomes of the
democratic faith in the dignity of man? It takes a fresh lease of life by
associating itself with the whole personality instead of with a meager aspect
of it. For the traditional democrat risked the dignity of man on one very
precarious assumption, that he would exhibit that dignity instinctively in
wise laws and good government. Voters did not do that, and so the democrat
was forever being made to look a little silly by tough-minded men. But if,
instead of hanging human dignity on the one assumption about self-
government, you insist that man's dignity requires a standard of living, in
which his capacities are properly exercised, the whole problem changes.
The criteria which you then apply to government are whether it is
producing a certain minimum of health, of decent housing, of material
necessities, of education, of freedom, of pleasures, of beauty, not simply
whether at the sacrifice of all these things, it vibrates to the self-centered
opinions that happen to be floating around in men's minds. In the degree to
which these criteria can be made exact and objective, political decision,
which is inevitably the concern of comparatively few people, is actually
brought into relation with the interests of men.
There is no prospect, in any time which we can conceive, that the whole
invisible environment will be so clear to all men that they will
spontaneously arrive at sound public opinions on the whole business of
government. And even if there were a prospect, it is extremely doubtful
whether many of us would wish to be bothered, or would take the time to
form an opinion on "any and every form of social action" which affects us.
The only prospect which is not visionary is that each of us in his own
sphere will act more and more on a realistic picture of the invisible world,
and that we shall develop more and more men who are expert in keeping
these pictures realistic. Outside the rather narrow range of our own possible
attention, social control depends upon devising standards of living and
methods of audit by which the acts of public officials and industrial
directors are measured. We cannot ourselves inspire or guide all these acts,
as the mystical democrat has always imagined. But we can steadily increase
our real control over these acts by insisting that all of them shall be plainly
recorded, and their results objectively measured. I should say, perhaps, that
we can progressively hope to insist. For the working out of such standards
and of such audits has only begun.
Part VII.
Newspapers
Table of Contents
Chapter XXI.
The Buying Public
Table of Contents

The idea that men have to go forth and study the world in order to govern it,
has played a very minor part in political thought. It could figure very little,
because the machinery for reporting the world in any way useful to
government made comparatively little progress from the time of Aristotle to
the age in which the premises of democracy were established.
Therefore, if you had asked a pioneer democrat where the information
was to come from on which the will of the people was to be based, he
would have been puzzled by the question. It would have seemed a little as if
you had asked him where his life or his soul came from. The will of the
people, he almost always assumed, exists at all times; the duty of political
science was to work out the inventions of the ballot and representative
government. If they were properly worked out and applied under the right
conditions, such as exist in the self-contained village or the self-contained
shop, the mechanism would somehow overcome the brevity of attention
which Aristotle had observed, and the narrowness of its range, which the
theory of a self-contained community tacitly acknowledged. We have seen
how even at this late date the guild socialists are transfixed by the notion
that if only you can build on the right unit of voting and representation, an
intricate cooperative commonwealth is possible.
Convinced that the wisdom was there if only you could find it,
democrats have treated the problem of making public opinions as a problem
in civil liberties.167 "Who ever knew Truth put to the worse, in a free and
open encounter?"168 Supposing that no one has ever seen it put to the
worse, are we to believe then that the truth is generated by the encounter,
like fire by rubbing two sticks? Behind this classic doctrine of liberty,
which American democrats embodied in their Bill of Rights, there are, in
fact, several different theories of the origin of truth. One is a faith that in the
competition of opinions, the truest will win because there is a peculiar
strength in the truth. This is probably sound if you allow the competition to
extend over a sufficiently long time. When men argue in this vein they have
in mind the verdict of history, and they think specifically of heretics
persecuted when they lived, canonized after they were dead. Milton's
question rests also on a belief that the capacity to recognize truth is inherent
in all men, and that truth freely put in circulation will win acceptance. It
derives no less from the experience, which has shown that men are not
likely to discover truth if they cannot speak it, except under the eye of an
uncomprehending policeman.
No one can possibly overestimate the practical value of these civil
liberties, nor the importance of maintaining them. When they are in
jeopardy, the human spirit is in jeopardy, and should there come a time
when they have to be curtailed, as during a war, the suppression of thought
is a risk to civilization which might prevent its recovery from the effects of
war, if the hysterics, who exploit the necessity, were numerous enough to
carry over into peace the taboos of war. Fortunately, the mass of men is too
tolerant long to enjoy the professional inquisitors, as gradually, under the
criticism of men not willing to be terrorized, they are revealed as mean-
spirited creatures who nine-tenths of the time do not know what they are
talking about.169
But in spite of its fundamental importance, civil liberty in this sense
does not guarantee public opinion in the modern world. For it always
assumes, either that truth is spontaneous, or that the means of securing truth
exist when there is no external interference. But when you are dealing with
an invisible environment, the assumption is false. The truth about distant or
complex matters is not self-evident, and the machinery for assembling
information is technical and expensive. Yet political science, and especially
democratic political science, has never freed itself from the original
assumption of Aristotle's politics sufficiently to restate the premises, so that
political thought might come to grips with the problem of how to make the
invisible world visible to the citizens of a modern state.
So deep is the tradition, that until quite recently, for example, political
science was taught in our colleges as if newspapers did not exist. I am not
referring to schools of journalism, for they are trade schools, intended to
prepare men and women for a career. I am referring to political science as
expounded to future business men, lawyers, public officials, and citizens at
large. In that science a study of the press and the sources of popular
information found no place. It is a curious fact. To anyone not immersed in
the routine interests of political science, it is almost inexplicable that no
American student of government, no American sociologist, has ever written
a book on news-gathering. There are occasional references to the press, and
statements that it is not, or that it ought to be, "free" and "truthful." But I
can find almost nothing else. And this disdain of the professionals finds its
counterpart in public opinions. Universally it is admitted that the press is
the chief means of contact with the unseen environment. And practically
everywhere it is assumed that the press should do spontaneously for us what
primitive democracy imagined each of us could do spontaneously for
himself, that every day and twice a day it will present us with a true picture
of all the outer world in which we are interested.

This insistent and ancient belief that truth is not earned, but inspired,
revealed, supplied gratis, comes out very plainly in our economic prejudices
as readers of newspapers. We expect the newspaper to serve us with truth
however unprofitable the truth may be. For this difficult and often
dangerous service, which we recognize as fundamental, we expected to pay
until recently the smallest coin turned out by the mint. We have accustomed
ourselves now to paying two and even three cents on weekdays, and on
Sundays, for an illustrated encyclopedia and vaudeville entertainment
attached, we have screwed ourselves up to paying a nickel or even a dime.
Nobody thinks for a moment that he ought to pay for his newspaper. He
expects the fountains of truth to bubble, but he enters into no contract, legal
or moral, involving any risk, cost or trouble to himself. He will pay a
nominal price when it suits him, will stop paying whenever it suits him, will
turn to another paper when that suits him. Somebody has said quite aptly
that the newspaper editor has to be re-elected every day.
This casual and one-sided relationship between readers and press is an
anomaly of our civilization. There is nothing else quite like it, and it is,
therefore, hard to compare the press with any other business or institution.
It is not a business pure and simple, partly because the product is regularly
sold below cost, but chiefly because the community applies one ethical
measure to the press and another to trade or manufacture. Ethically a
newspaper is judged as if it were a church or a school. But if you try to
compare it with these you fail; the taxpayer pays for the public school, the
private school is endowed or supported by tuition fees, there are subsidies
and collections for the church. You cannot compare journalism with law,
medicine or engineering, for in every one of these professions the consumer
pays for the service. A free press, if you judge by the attitude of the readers,
means newspapers that are virtually given away.
Yet the critics of the press are merely voicing the moral standards of the
community, when they expect such an institution to live on the same plane
as that on which the school, the church, and the disinterested professions
are supposed to live. This illustrates again the concave character of
democracy. No need for artificially acquired information is felt to exist. The
information must come naturally, that is to say gratis, if not out of the heart
of the citizen, then gratis out of the newspaper. The citizen will pay for his
telephone, his railroad rides, his motor car, his entertainment. But he does
not pay openly for his news.
He will, however, pay handsomely for the privilege of having someone
read about him. He will pay directly to advertise. And he will pay indirectly
for the advertisements of other people, because that payment, being
concealed in the price of commodities is part of an invisible environment
that he does not effectively comprehend. It would be regarded as an outrage
to have to pay openly the price of a good ice cream soda for all the news of
the world, though the public will pay that and more when it buys the
advertised commodities. The public pays for the press, but only when the
payment is concealed.

Circulation is, therefore, the means to an end. It becomes an asset only
when it can be sold to the advertiser, who buys it with revenues secured
through indirect taxation of the reader.170 The kind of circulation which the
advertiser will buy depends on what he has to sell. It may be "quality" or
"mass." On the whole there is no sharp dividing line, for in respect to most
commodities sold by advertising, the customers are neither the small class
of the very rich nor the very poor. They are the people with enough surplus
over bare necessities to exercise discretion in their buying. The paper,
therefore, which goes into the homes of the fairly prosperous is by and large
the one which offers most to the advertiser. It may also go into the homes of
the poor, but except for certain lines of goods, an analytical advertising
agent does not rate that circulation as a great asset, unless, as seems to be
the case with certain of Mr. Hearst's properties, the circulation is enormous.
A newspaper which angers those whom it pays best to reach through
advertisements is a bad medium for an advertiser. And since no one ever
claimed that advertising was philanthropy, advertisers buy space in those
publications which are fairly certain to reach their future customers. One
need not spend much time worrying about the unreported scandals of the
dry-goods merchants. They represent nothing really significant, and
incidents of this sort are less common than many critics of the press
suppose. The real problem is that the readers of a newspaper, unaccustomed
to paying the cost of newsgathering, can be capitalized only by turning
them into circulation that can be sold to manufacturers and merchants. And
those whom it is most important to capitalize are those who have the most
money to spend. Such a press is bound to respect the point of view of the
buying public. It is for this buying public that newspapers are edited and
published, for without that support the newspaper cannot live. A newspaper
can flout an advertiser, it can attack a powerful banking or traction interest,
but if it alienates the buying public, it loses the one indispensable asset of
its existence.
Mr. John L. Given,171 formerly of the New York Evening Sun, stated in
1914 that out of over two thousand three hundred dailies published in the
United States, there were about one hundred and seventy-five printed in
cities having over one hundred thousand inhabitants. These constitute the
press for "general news." They are the key papers which collect the news
dealing with great events, and even the people who do not read any one of
the one hundred and seventy-five depend ultimately upon them for news of
the outer world. For they make up the great press associations which
coöperate in the exchange of news. Each is, therefore, not only the
informant of its own readers, but it is the local reporter for the newspapers
of other cities. The rural press and the special press by and large, take their
general news from these key papers. And among these there are some very
much richer than others, so that for international news, in the main, the
whole press of the nation may depend upon the reports of the press
associations and the special services of a few metropolitan dailies.
Roughly speaking, the economic support for general news gathering is
in the price paid for advertised goods by the fairly prosperous sections of
cities with more than one hundred thousand inhabitants. These buying
publics are composed of the members of families, who depend for their
income chiefly on trade, merchandising, the direction of manufacture, and
finance. They are the clientele among whom it pays best to advertise in a
newspaper. They wield a concentrated purchasing power, which may be less
in volume than the aggregate for farmers and workingmen; but within the
radius covered by a daily newspaper they are the quickest assets.

They have, moreover, a double claim to attention. They are not only the
best customers for the advertiser, they include the advertisers. Therefore the
impression made by the newspapers on this public matters deeply.
Fortunately this public is not unanimous. It may be "capitalistic" but it
contains divergent views on what capitalism is, and how it is to be run.
Except in times of danger, this respectable opinion is sufficiently divided to
permit of considerable differences of policy. These would be greater still if
it were not that publishers are themselves usually members of these urban
communities, and honestly see the world through the lenses of their
associates and friends.
They are engaged in a speculative business,172 which depends on the
general condition of trade, and more peculiarly on a circulation based not
on a marriage contract with their readers, but on free love. The object of
every publisher is, therefore, to turn his circulation from a medley of catch-
as-catch-can news stand buyers into a devoted band of constant readers. A
newspaper that can really depend upon the loyalty of its readers is as
independent as a newspaper can be, given the economics of modern
journalism.173 A body of readers who stay by it through thick and thin is a
power greater than any which the individual advertiser can wield, and a
power great enough to break up a combination of advertisers. Therefore,
whenever you find a newspaper betraying its readers for the sake of an
advertiser, you can be fairly certain either that the publisher sincerely shares
the views of the advertiser, or that he thinks, perhaps mistakenly, he cannot
count upon the support of his readers if he openly resists dictation. It is a
question of whether the readers, who do not pay in cash for their news, will
pay for it in loyalty.
167. The best study is Prof. Zechariah Chafee's, Freedom of Speech.
168. Milton, Areopagitica, cited at the opening of Mr. Chafee's book. For comment on this classic
doctrine of liberty as stated by Milton, John Stuart Mill, and Mr. Bertrand Russel, see my
Liberty and the News, Ch. II.
169. Cf. for example, the publications of the Lusk Committee in New York, and the public
statements and prophecies of Mr. Mitchell Palmer, who was Attorney-General of the United
States during the period of President Wilson's illness.
170. "An established newspaper is entitled to fix its advertising rates so that its net receipts from
circulation may be left on the credit side of the profit and loss account. To arrive at net receipts,
I would deduct from the gross the cost of promotion, distribution, and other expenses incidental
to circulation." From an address by Mr. Adolph S. Ochs, publisher of the New York Times, at the
Philadelphia Convention of the Associated Advertising Clubs of The World, June 26, 1916.
Cited, Elmer Davis, History of The New York Times, 1851-1921, pp. 397-398.
171. Making a Newspaper, p. 13. This is the best technical book I know, and should be read by
everyone who undertakes to discuss the press. Mr. G. B. Diblee, who wrote the volume on The
Newspaper in the Home University Library says (p. 253), that "on the press for pressmen I only
know of one good book, Mr. Given's."
172. Sometimes so speculative that in order to secure credit the publisher has to go into bondage to
his creditors. Information on this point is very difficult to obtain, and for that reason its general
importance is often much exaggerated.
173. "It is an axiom in newspaper publishing—'more readers, more independence of the influence of
advertisers; fewer readers and more dependence on the advertiser' It may seem like a
contradiction (yet it is the truth) to assert: the greater the number of advertisers, the less
influence they are individually able to exercise with the publisher." Adolph S. Ochs, of. supra.
Chapter XXII.
The Constant Reader
Table of Contents

The loyalty of the buying public to a newspaper is not stipulated in any
bond. In almost every other enterprise the person who expects to be served
enters into an agreement that controls his passing whims. At least he pays
for what he obtains. In the publishing of periodicals the nearest approach to
an agreement for a definite time is the paid subscription, and that is not, I
believe, a great factor in the economy of a metropolitan daily. The reader is
the sole and the daily judge of his loyalty, and there can be no suit against
him for breach of promise or nonsupport.
Though everything turns on the constancy of the reader, there does not
exist even a vague tradition to call that fact to the reader's mind. His
constancy depends on how he happens to feel, or on his habits. And these
depend not simply on the quality of the news, but more often on a number
of obscure elements that in our casual relation to the press, we hardly take
the trouble to make conscious. The most important of these is that each of
us tends to judge a newspaper, if we judge it at all, by its treatment of that
part of the news in which we feel ourselves involved. The newspaper deals
with a multitude of events beyond our experience. But it deals also with
some events within our experience. And by its handling of those events we
most frequently decide to like it or dislike it, to trust it or refuse to have the
sheet in the house. If the newspaper gives a satisfactory account of that
which we think we know, our business, our church, our party, it is fairly
certain to be immune from violent criticism by us. What better criterion
does the man at the breakfast table possess than that the newspaper version
checks up with his own opinion? Therefore, most men tend to hold the
newspaper most strictly accountable in their capacity, not of general
readers, but of special pleaders on matters of their own experience.
Rarely is anyone but the interested party able to test the accuracy of a
report. If the news is local, and if there is competition, the editor knows that
he will probably hear from the man who thinks his portrait unfair and
inaccurate. But if the news is not local, the corrective diminishes as the
subject matter recedes into the distance. The only people who can correct
what they think is a false picture of themselves printed in another city are
members of groups well enough organized to hire publicity men.
Now it is interesting to note that the general reader of a newspaper has
no standing in law if he thinks he is being misled by the news. It is only the
aggrieved party who can sue for slander or libel, and he has to prove a
material injury to himself. The law embodies the tradition that general news
is not a matter of common concern,174 except as to matter which is vaguely
described as immoral or seditious.
But the body of the news, though unchecked as a whole by the
disinterested reader, consists of items about which some readers have very
definite preconceptions. Those items are the data of his judgment, and news
which men read without this personal criterion, they judge by some other
standard than their standard of accuracy. They are dealing here with a
subject matter which to them is indistinguishable from fiction. The canon of
truth cannot be applied. They do not boggle over such news if it conforms
to their stereotypes, and they continue to read it if it interests them.175

There are newspapers, even in large cities, edited on the principle that the
readers wish to read about themselves. The theory is that if enough people
see their own names in the paper often enough, can read about their
weddings, funerals, sociables, foreign travels, lodge meetings, school
prizes, their fiftieth birthdays, their sixtieth birthdays, their silver weddings,
their outings and clambakes, they will make a reliable circulation.
The classic formula for such a newspaper is contained in a letter written
by Horace Greeley on April 3, 1860, to "Friend Fletcher" who was about to
start a country newspaper:176
"I. Begin with a clear conception that the subject of deepest
interest to an average human being is himself; next to that he
is most concerned about his neighbors. Asia and the Tongo
Islands stand a long way after these in his regard…. Do not
let a new church be organized, or new members be added to
one already existing, a farm be sold, a new house raised, a
mill set in motion, a store opened, nor anything of interest to
a dozen families occur, without having the fact duly, though
briefly, chronicled in your columns. If a farmer cuts a big
tree, or grows a mammoth beet, or harvests a bounteous
yield of wheat or corn, set forth the fact as concisely and
unexceptionally as possible."
The function of becoming, as Mr. Lee puts it, "the printed diary of the
home town" is one that every newspaper no matter where it is published
must in some measure fill. And where, as in a great city like New York, the
general newspapers circulated broadcast cannot fill it, there exist small
newspapers published on Greeley's pattern for sections of the city. In the
boroughs of Manhattan and the Bronx there are perhaps twice as many local
dailies as there are general newspapers.177 And they are supplemented by
all kinds of special publications for trades, religions, nationalities.
These diaries are published for people who find their own lives
interesting. But there are also great numbers of people who find their own
lives dull, and wish, like Hedda Gabler, to live a more thrilling life. For
them there are published a few whole newspapers, and sections of others,
devoted to the personal lives of a set of imaginary people, with whose
gorgeous vices the reader can in his fancy safely identify himself. Mr.
Hearst's unflagging interest in high society caters to people who never hope
to be in high society, and yet manage to derive some enhancement out of
the vague feeling that they are part of the life that they read about. In the
great cities "the printed diary of the home town" tends to be the printed
diary of a smart set.
And it is, as we have already noted, the dailies of the cities which carry
the burden of bringing distant news to the private citizen. But it is not
primarily their political and social news which holds the circulation. The
interest in that is intermittent, and few publishers can bank on it alone. The
newspaper, therefore, takes to itself a variety of other features, all primarily
designed to hold a body of readers together, who so far as big news is
concerned, are not able to be critical. Moreover, in big news the competition
in any one community is not very serious. The press services standardize
the main events; it is only once in a while that a great scoop is made; there
is apparently not a very great reading public for such massive reporting as
has made the New York Times of recent years indispensable to men of all
shades of opinion. In order to differentiate themselves and collect a steady
public most papers have to go outside the field of general news. They go to
the dazzling levels of society, to scandal and crime, to sports, pictures,
actresses, advice to the lovelorn, highschool notes, women's pages, buyer's
pages, cooking receipts, chess, whist, gardening, comic strips, thundering
partisanship, not because publishers and editors are interested in everything
but news, but because they have to find some way of holding on to that
alleged host of passionately interested readers, who are supposed by some
critics of the press to be clamoring for the truth and nothing but the truth.
The newspaper editor occupies a strange position. His enterprises
depend upon indirect taxation levied by his advertisers upon his readers; the
patronage of the advertisers depends upon the editor's skill in holding
together an effective group of customers. These customers deliver judgment
according to their private experiences and their stereotyped expectations,
for in the nature of things they have no independent knowledge of most
news they read. If the judgment is not unfavorable, the editor is at least
within range of a circulation that pays. But in order to secure that
circulation, he cannot rely wholly upon news of the greater environment.
He handles that as interestingly as he can, of course, but the quality of the
general news, especially about public affairs, is not in itself sufficient to
cause very large numbers of readers to discriminate among the dailies.
This somewhat left-handed relationship between newspapers and public
information is reflected in the salaries of newspaper men. Reporting, which
theoretically constitutes the foundation of the whole institution, is the most
poorly paid branch of newspaper work, and is the least regarded. By and
large, able men go into it only by necessity or for experience, and with the
definite intention of being graduated as soon as possible. For straight
reporting is not a career that offers many great rewards. The rewards in
journalism go to specialty work, to signed correspondence which has
editorial quality, to executives, and to men with a knack and flavor of their
own. This is due, no doubt, to what economists call the rent of ability. But
this economic principle operates with such peculiar violence in journalism
that newsgathering does not attract to itself anything like the number of
trained and able men which its public importance would seem to demand.
The fact that the able men take up "straight reporting" with the intention of
leaving it as soon as possible is, I think, the chief reason why it has never
developed in sufficient measure those corporate traditions that give to a
profession prestige and a jealous self-respect. For it is these corporate
traditions which engender the pride of craft, which tend to raise the
standards of admission, punish breaches of the code, and give men the
strength to insist upon their status in society.

Yet all this does not go to the root of the matter. For while the economics of
journalism is such as to depress the value of news reporting, it is, I am
certain, a false determinism which would abandon the analysis at that point.
The intrinsic power of the reporter appears to be so great, the number of
very able men who pass through reporting is so large, that there must be
some deeper reason why, comparatively speaking, so little serious effort has
gone into raising the vocation to the level say of medicine, engineering, or
law.
Mr. Upton Sinclair speaks for a large body of opinion in America,178
when he claims that in what he calls "The Brass Check" he has found this
deeper reason:
"The Brass Check is found in your pay envelope every week
—you who write and print and distribute our newspapers and
magazines. The Brass check is the price of your shame—you
who take the fair body of truth and sell it in the market place,
who betray the virgin hopes of mankind into the loathsome
brothel of Big Business."179
It would seem from this that there exists a body of known truth, and a
set of well founded hopes, which are prostituted by a more or less conscious
conspiracy of the rich owners of newspapers. If this theory is correct, then a
certain conclusion follows. It is that the fair body of truth would be
inviolate in a press not in any way connected with Big Business. For if it
should happen that a press not controlled by, and not even friendly with,
Big Business somehow failed to contain the fair body of truth, something
would be wrong with Mr. Sinclair's theory.
There is such a press. Strange to say, in proposing a remedy Mr. Sinclair
does not advise his readers to subscribe to the nearest radical newspaper.
Why not? If the troubles of American journalism go back to the Brass
Check of Big Business why does not the remedy lie in reading the papers
that do not in any remote way accept the Brass Check? Why subsidize a
"National News" with a large board of directors "of all creeds or causes" to
print a paper full of facts "regardless of what is injured, the Steel Trust or
the I. W. W., the Standard Oil Company or the Socialist Party?" If the
trouble is Big Business, that is, the Steel Trust, Standard Oil and the like,
why not urge everybody to read I. W. W. or Socialist papers? Mr. Sinclair
does not say why not. But the reason is simple. He cannot convince
anybody, not even himself, that the anti-capitalist press is the remedy for
the capitalist press. He ignores the anti-capitalist press both in his theory of
the Brass Check and in his constructive proposal. But if you are diagnosing
American journalism you cannot ignore it. If what you care about is "the
fair body of truth," you do not commit the gross logical error of assembling
all the instances of unfairness and lying you can find in one set of
newspapers, ignore all the instances you could easily find in another set,
and then assign as the cause of the lying, the one supposedly common
characteristic of the press to which you have confined your investigation. If
you are going to blame "capitalism" for the faults of the press, you are
compelled to prove that those faults do not exist except where capitalism
controls. That Mr. Sinclair cannot do this, is shown by the fact that while in
his diagnosis he traces everything to capitalism, in his prescription he
ignores both capitalism and anti-capitalism.
One would have supposed that the inability to take any non-capitalist
paper as a model of truthfulness and competence would have caused Mr.
Sinclair, and those who agree with him, to look somewhat more critically at
their assumptions. They would have asked themselves, for example, where
is the fair body of truth, that Big Business prostitutes, but anti-Big Business
does not seem to obtain? For that question leads, I believe, to the heart of
the matter, to the question of what is news.
174. The reader will not mistake this as a plea for censorship. It might, however, be a good thing if
there were competent tribunals, preferably not official ones, where charges of untruthfulness and
unfairness in the general news could be sifted. Cf. Liberty and the News, pp. 73-76.
175. Note, for example, how absent is indignation in Mr. Upton Sinclair against socialist papers,
even those which are as malignantly unfair to employers as certain of the papers cited by him
are unfair to radicals.
176. Cited, James Melvin Lee, The History of American Journalism, p. 405.
177. Cf. John L. Given, Making a Newspaper, p. 13.
178. Mr. Hilaire Belloc makes practically the same analysis for English newspapers. Cf. The Free
Press.
179. Upton Sinclair, The Brass Check. A Study of American Journalism. p. 116.
Chapter XXIII.
The Nature of News
Table of Contents

All the reporters in the world working all the hours of the day could not
witness all the happenings in the world. There are not a great many
reporters. And none of them has the power to be in more than one place at a
time. Reporters are not clairvoyant, they do not gaze into a crystal ball and
see the world at will, they are not assisted by thought-transference. Yet the
range of subjects these comparatively few men manage to cover would be a
miracle indeed, if it were not a standardized routine.
Newspapers do not try to keep an eye on all mankind.180 They have
watchers stationed at certain places, like Police Headquarters, the Coroner's
Office, the County Clerk's Office, City Hall, the White House, the Senate,
House of Representatives, and so forth. They watch, or rather in the
majority of cases they belong to associations which employ men who watch
"a comparatively small number of places where it is made known when the
life of anyone… departs from ordinary paths, or when events worth telling
about occur. For example, John Smith, let it be supposed, becomes a broker.
For ten years he pursues the even tenor of his way and except for his
customers and his friends no one gives him a thought. To the newspapers he
is as if he were not. But in the eleventh year he suffers heavy losses and, at
last, his resources all gone, summons his lawyer and arranges for the
making of an assignment. The lawyer posts off to the County Clerk's office,
and a clerk there makes the necessary entries in the official docket. Here in
step the newspapers. While the clerk is writing Smith's business obituary a
reporter glances over his shoulder and a few minutes later the reporters
know Smith's troubles and are as well informed concerning his business
status as they would be had they kept a reporter at his door every day for
over ten years.181
When Mr. Given says that the newspapers know "Smith's troubles" and
"his business status," he does not mean that they know them as Smith
knows them, or as Mr. Arnold Bennett would know them if he had made
Smith the hero of a three volume novel. The newspapers know only "in a
few minutes" the bald facts which are recorded in the County Clerk's
Office. That overt act "uncovers" the news about Smith. Whether the news
will be followed up or not is another matter. The point is that before a series
of events become news they have usually to make themselves noticeable in
some more or less overt act. Generally too, in a crudely overt act. Smith's
friends may have known for years that he was taking risks, rumors may
even have reached the financial editor if Smith's friends were talkative. But
apart from the fact that none of this could be published because it would be
libel, there is in these rumors nothing definite on which to peg a story.
Something definite must occur that has unmistakable form. It may be the
act of going into bankruptcy, it may be a fire, a collision, an assault, a riot,
an arrest, a denunciation, the introduction of a bill, a speech, a vote, a
meeting, the expressed opinion of a well known citizen, an editorial in a
newspaper, a sale, a wage-schedule, a price change, the proposal to build a
bridge…. There must be a manifestation. The course of events must assume
a certain definable shape, and until it is in a phase where some aspect is an
accomplished fact, news does not separate itself from the ocean of possible
truth.

Naturally there is room for wide difference of opinion as to when events
have a shape that can be reported. A good journalist will find news oftener
than a hack. If he sees a building with a dangerous list, he does not have to
wait until it falls into the street in order to recognize news. It was a great
reporter who guessed the name of the next Indian Viceroy when he heard
that Lord So-and-So was inquiring about climates. There are lucky shots but
the number of men who can make them is small. Usually it is the
stereotyped shape assumed by an event at an obvious place that uncovers
the run of the news. The most obvious place is where people's affairs touch
public authority. De minimis non curat lex. It is at these places that
marriages, births, deaths, contracts, failures, arrivals, departures, lawsuits,
disorders, epidemics and calamities are made known.
In the first instance, therefore, the news is not a mirror of social
conditions, but the report of an aspect that has obtruded itself. The news
does not tell you how the seed is germinating in the ground, but it may tell
you when the first sprout breaks through the surface. It may even tell you
what somebody says is happening to the seed under ground. It may tell you
that the sprout did not come up at the time it was expected. The more
points, then, at which any happening can be fixed, objectified, measured,
named, the more points there are at which news can occur.
So, if some day a legislature, having exhausted all other ways of
improving mankind, should forbid the scoring of baseball games, it might
still be possible to play some sort of game in which the umpire decided
according to his own sense of fair play how long the game should last,
when each team should go to bat, and who should be regarded as the
winner. If that game were reported in the newspapers it would consist of a
record of the umpire's decisions, plus the reporter's impression of the hoots
and cheers of the crowd, plus at best a vague account of how certain men,
who had no specified position on the field moved around for a few hours on
an unmarked piece of sod. The more you try to imagine the logic of so
absurd a predicament, the more clear it becomes that for the purposes of
newsgathering, (let alone the purposes of playing the game) it is impossible
to do much without an apparatus and rules for naming, scoring, recording.
Because that machinery is far from perfect, the umpire's life is often a
distracted one. Many crucial plays he has to judge by eye. The last vestige
of dispute could be taken out of the game, as it has been taken out of chess
when people obey the rules, if somebody thought it worth his while to
photograph every play. It was the moving pictures which finally settled a
real doubt in many reporters' minds, owing to the slowness of the human
eye, as to just what blow of Dempsey's knocked out Carpentier.
Wherever there is a good machinery of record, the modern news service
works with great precision. There is one on the stock exchange, and the
news of price movements is flashed over tickers with dependable accuracy.
There is a machinery for election returns, and when the counting and
tabulating are well done, the result of a national election is usually known
on the night of the election. In civilized communities deaths, births,
marriages and divorces are recorded, and are known accurately except
where there is concealment or neglect. The machinery exists for some, and
only some, aspects of industry and government, in varying degrees of
precision for securities, money and staples, bank clearances, realty
transactions, wage scales. It exists for imports and exports because they
pass through a custom house and can be directly recorded. It exists in
nothing like the same degree for internal trade, and especially for trade over
the counter.
It will be found, I think, that there is a very direct relation between the
certainty of news and the system of record. If you call to mind the topics
which form the principal indictment by reformers against the press, you
find they are subjects in which the newspaper occupies the position of the
umpire in the unscored baseball game. All news about states of mind is of
this character: so are all descriptions of personalities, of sincerity,
aspiration, motive, intention, of mass feeling, of national feeling, of public
opinion, the policies of foreign governments. So is much news about what
is going to happen. So are questions turning on private profit, private
income, wages, working conditions, the efficiency of labor, educational
opportunity, 
unemployment,182 
monotony, 
health, 
discrimination,
unfairness, restraint of trade, waste, "backward peoples," conservatism,
imperialism, radicalism, liberty, honor, righteousness. All involve data that
are at best spasmodically recorded. The data may be hidden because of a
censorship or a tradition of privacy, they may not exist because nobody
thinks record important, because he thinks it red tape, or because nobody
has yet invented an objective system of measurement. Then the news on
these subjects is bound to be debatable, when it is not wholly neglected.
The events which are not scored are reported either as personal and
conventional opinions, or they are not news. They do not take shape until
somebody protests, or somebody investigates, or somebody publicly, in the
etymological meaning of the word, makes an issue of them.
This is the underlying reason for the existence of the press agent. The
enormous discretion as to what facts and what impressions shall be reported
is steadily convincing every organized group of people that whether it
wishes to secure publicity or to avoid it, the exercise of discretion cannot be
left to the reporter. It is safer to hire a press agent who stands between the
group and the newspapers. Having hired him, the temptation to exploit his
strategic position is very great. "Shortly before the war," says Mr. Frank
Cobb, "the newspapers of New York took a census of the press agents who
were regularly employed and regularly accredited and found that there were
about twelve hundred of them. How many there are now (1919) I do not
pretend to know, but what I do know is that many of the direct channels to
news have been closed and the information for the public is first filtered
through publicity agents. The great corporations have them, the banks have
them, the railroads have them, all the organizations of business and of social
and political activity have them, and they are the media through which news
comes. Even statesmen have them."183
Were reporting the simple recovery of obvious facts, the press agent
would be little more than a clerk. But since, in respect to most of the big
topics of news, the facts are not simple, and not at all obvious, but subject
to choice and opinion, it is natural that everyone should wish to make his
own choice of facts for the newspapers to print. The publicity man does
that. And in doing it, he certainly saves the reporter much trouble, by
presenting him a clear picture of a situation out of which he might
otherwise make neither head nor tail. But it follows that the picture which
the publicity man makes for the reporter is the one he wishes the public to
see. He is censor and propagandist, responsible only to his employers, and
to the whole truth responsible only as it accords with the employers'
conception of his own interests.
The development of the publicity man is a clear sign that the facts of
modern life do not spontaneously take a shape in which they can be known.
They must be given a shape by somebody, and since in the daily routine
reporters cannot give a shape to facts, and since there is little disinterested
organization of intelligence, the need for some formulation is being met by
the interested parties.

The good press agent understands that the virtues of his cause are not news,
unless they are such strange virtues that they jut right out of the routine of
life. This is not because the newspapers do not like virtue, but because it is
not worth while to say that nothing has happened when nobody expected
anything to happen. So if the publicity man wishes free publicity he has,
speaking quite accurately, to start something. He arranges a stunt: obstructs
the traffic, teases the police, somehow manages to entangle his client or his
cause with an event that is already news. The suffragists knew this, did not
particularly enjoy the knowledge but acted on it, and kept suffrage in the
news long after the arguments pro and con were straw in their mouths, and
people were about to settle down to thinking of the suffrage movement as
one of the established institutions of American life.184
Fortunately the suffragists, as distinct from the feminists, had a perfectly
concrete objective, and a very simple one. What the vote symbolizes is not
simple, as the ablest advocates and the ablest opponents knew. But the right
to vote is a simple and familiar right. Now in labor disputes, which are
probably the chief item in the charges against newspapers, the right to
strike, like the right to vote, is simple enough. But the causes and objects of
a particular strike are like the causes and objects of the woman's movement,
extremely subtle.
Let us suppose the conditions leading up to a strike are bad. What is the
measure of evil? A certain conception of a proper standard of living,
hygiene, economic security, and human dignity. The industry may be far
below the theoretical standard of the community, and the workers may be
too wretched to protest. Conditions may be above the standard, and the
workers may protest violently. The standard is at best a vague measure.
However, we shall assume that the conditions are below par, as par is
understood by the editor. Occasionally without waiting for the workers to
threaten, but prompted say by a social worker, he will send reporters to
investigate, and will call attention to bad conditions. Necessarily he cannot
do that often. For these investigations cost time, money, special talent, and a
lot of space. To make plausible a report that conditions are bad, you need a
good many columns of print. In order to tell the truth about the steel worker
in the Pittsburgh district, there was needed a staff of investigators, a great
deal of time, and several fat volumes of print. It is impossible to suppose
that any daily newspaper could normally regard the making of Pittsburgh
Surveys, or even Interchurch Steel Reports, as one of its tasks. News which
requires so much trouble as that to obtain is beyond the resources of a daily
press.185
The bad conditions as such are not news, because in all but exceptional
cases, journalism is not a first hand report of the raw material. It is a report
of that material after it has been stylized. Thus bad conditions might
become news if the Board of Health reported an unusually high death rate
in an industrial area. Failing an intervention of this sort, the facts do not
become news, until the workers organize and make a demand upon their
employers. Even then, if an easy settlement is certain the news value is low,
whether or not the conditions themselves are remedied in the settlement.
But if industrial relations collapse into a strike or lockout the news value
increases. If the stoppage involves a service on which the readers of the
newspapers immediately depend, or if it involves a breach of order, the
news value is still greater.
The underlying trouble appears in the news through certain easily
recognizable symptoms, a demand, a strike, disorder. From the point of
view of the worker, or of the disinterested seeker of justice, the demand, the
strike, and the disorder, are merely incidents in a process that for them is
richly complicated. But since all the immediate realities lie outside the
direct experience both of the reporter, and of the special public by which
most newspapers are supported, they have normally to wait for a signal in
the shape of an overt act. When that signal comes, say through a walkout of
the men or a summons for the police, it calls into play the stereotypes
people have about strikes and disorders. The unseen struggle has none of its
own flavor. It is noted abstractly, and that abstraction is then animated by
the immediate experience of the reader and reporter. Obviously this is a
very different experience from that which the strikers have. They feel, let us
say, the temper of the foreman, the nerve-racking monotony of the machine,
the depressingly bad air, the drudgery of their wives, the stunting of their
children, the dinginess of their tenements. The slogans of the strike are
invested with these feelings. But the reporter and reader see at first only a
strike and some catchwords. They invest these with their feelings. Their
feelings may be that their jobs are insecure because the strikers are stopping
goods they need in their work, that there will be shortage and higher prices,
that it is all devilishly inconvenient. These, too, are realities. And when they
give color to the abstract news that a strike has been called, it is in the
nature of things that the workers are at a disadvantage. It is in the nature,
that is to say, of the existing system of industrial relations that news arising
from grievances or hopes by workers should almost invariably be
uncovered by an overt attack on production.
You have, therefore, the circumstances in all their sprawling complexity,
the overt act which signalizes them, the stereotyped bulletin which
publishes the signal, and the meaning that the reader himself injects, after
he has derived that meaning from the experience which directly affects him.
Now the reader's experience of a strike may be very important indeed, but
from the point of view of the central trouble which caused the strike, it is
eccentric. Yet this eccentric meaning is automatically the most
interesting.186 To enter imaginatively into the central issues is for the reader
to step out of himself, and into very different lives.
It follows that in the reporting of strikes, the easiest way is to let the
news be uncovered by the overt act, and to describe the event as the story of
interference with the reader's life. That is where his attention is first
aroused, and his interest most easily enlisted. A great deal, I think myself
the crucial part, of what looks to the worker and the reformer as deliberate
misrepresentation on the part of newspapers, is the direct outcome of a
practical difficulty in uncovering the news, and the emotional difficulty of
making distant facts interesting unless, as Emerson says, we can "perceive
(them) to be only a new version of our familiar experience" and can "set
about translating (them) at once into our parallel facts."187
If you study the way many a strike is reported in the press, you will
find, very often, that the issues are rarely in the headlines, barely in the
leading paragraphs, and sometimes not even mentioned anywhere. A labor
dispute in another city has to be very important before the news account
contains any definite information as to what is in dispute. The routine of the
news works that way, with modifications it works that way in regard to
political issues and international news as well. The news is an account of
the overt phases that are interesting, and the pressure on the newspaper to
adhere to this routine comes from many sides. It comes from the economy
of noting only the stereotyped phase of a situation. It comes from the
difficulty of finding journalists who can see what they have not learned to
see. It comes from the almost unavoidable difficulty of finding sufficient
space in which even the best journalist can make plausible an
unconventional view. It comes from the economic necessity of interesting
the reader quickly, and the economic risk involved in not interesting him at
all, or of offending him by unexpected news insufficiently or clumsily
described. All these difficulties combined make for uncertainty in the editor
when there are dangerous issues at stake, and cause him naturally to prefer
the indisputable fact and a treatment more readily adapted to the reader's
interest. The indisputable fact and the easy interest, are the strike itself and
the reader's inconvenience.
All the subtler and deeper truths are in the present organization of
industry very unreliable truths. They involve judgments about standards of
living, productivity, human rights that are endlessly debatable in the
absence of exact record and quantitative analysis. And as long as these do
not exist in industry, the run of news about it will tend, as Emerson said,
quoting from Isocrates, "to make of moles mountains, and of mountains
moles."188 Where there is no constitutional procedure in industry, and no
expert sifting of evidence and the claims, the fact that is sensational to the
reader is the fact that almost every journalist will seek. Given the industrial
relations that so largely prevail, even where there is conference or
arbitration, but no independent filtering of the facts for decision, the issue
for the newspaper public will tend not to be the issue for the industry. And
so to try disputes by an appeal through the newspapers puts a burden upon
newspapers and readers which they cannot and ought not to carry. As long
as real law and order do not exist, the bulk of the news will, unless
consciously and courageously corrected, work against those who have no
lawful and orderly method of asserting themselves. The bulletins from the
scene of action will note the trouble that arose from the assertion, rather
than the reasons which led to it. The reasons are intangible.

The editor deals with these bulletins. He sits in his office, reads them, rarely
does he see any large portion of the events themselves. He must, as we have
seen, woo at least a section of his readers every day, because they will leave
him without mercy if a rival paper happens to hit their fancy. He works
under enormous pressure, for the competition of newspapers is often a
matter of minutes. Every bulletin requires a swift but complicated
judgment. It must be understood, put in relation to other bulletins also
understood, and played up or played down according to its probable interest
for the public, as the editor conceives it. Without standardization, without
stereotypes, without routine judgments, without a fairly ruthless disregard
of subtlety, the editor would soon die of excitement. The final page is of a
definite size, must be ready at a precise moment; there can be only a certain
number of captions on the items, and in each caption there must be a
definite number of letters. Always there is the precarious urgency of the
buying public, the law of libel, and the possibility of endless trouble. The
thing could not be managed at all without systematization, for in a
standardized product there is economy of time and effort, as well as a
partial guarantee against failure.
It is here that newspapers influence each other most deeply. Thus when
the war broke out, the American newspapers were confronted with a subject
about which they had no previous experience. Certain dailies, rich enough
to pay cable tolls, took the lead in securing news, and the way that news
was presented became a model for the whole press. But where did that
model come from? It came from the English press, not because Northcliffe
owned American newspapers, but because at first it was easier to buy
English correspondence, and because, later, it was easier for American
journalists to read English newspapers than it was for them to read any
others. London was the cable and news center, and it was there that a
certain technic for reporting the war was evolved. Something similar
occurred in the reporting of the Russian Revolution. In that instance, access
to Russia was closed by military censorship, both Russian and Allied, and
closed still more effectively by the difficulties of the Russian language. But
above all it was closed to effective news reporting by the fact that the
hardest thing to report is chaos, even though it is an evolving chaos. This
put the formulating of Russian news at its source in Helsingfors,
Stockholm, Geneva, Paris and London, into the hands of censors and
propagandists. They were for a long time subject to no check of any kind.
Until they had made themselves ridiculous they created, let us admit, out of
some genuine aspects of the huge Russian maelstrom, a set of stereotypes
so evocative of hate and fear, that the very best instinct of journalism, its
desire to go and see and tell, was for a long time crushed.189

Every newspaper when it reaches the reader is the result of a whole series
of selections as to what items shall be printed, in what position they shall be
printed, how much space each shall occupy, what emphasis each shall have.
There are no objective standards here. There are conventions. Take two
newspapers published in the same city on the same morning. The headline
of one reads: "Britain pledges aid to Berlin against French aggression;
France openly backs Poles." The headline of the second is "Mrs. Stillman's
Other Love." Which you prefer is a matter of taste, but not entirely a matter
of the editor's taste. It is a matter of his judgment as to what will absorb the
half hour's attention a certain set of readers will give to his newspaper. Now
the problem of securing attention is by no means equivalent to displaying
the news in the perspective laid down by religious teaching or by some
form of ethical culture. It is a problem of provoking feeling in the reader, of
inducing him to feel a sense of personal identification with the stories he is
reading. News which does not offer this opportunity to introduce oneself
into the struggle which it depicts cannot appeal to a wide audience. The
audience must participate in the news, much as it participates in the drama,
by personal identification. Just as everyone holds his breath when the
heroine is in danger, as he helps Babe Ruth swing his bat, so in subtler form
the reader enters into the news. In order that he shall enter he must find a
familiar foothold in the story, and this is supplied to him by the use of
stereotypes. They tell him that if an association of plumbers is called a
"combine" it is appropriate to develop his hostility; if it is called a "group of
leading business men" the cue is for a favorable reaction.
It is in a combination of these elements that the power to create opinion
resides. Editorials reinforce. Sometimes in a situation that on the news
pages is too confusing to permit of identification, they give the reader a clue
by means of which he engages himself. A clue he must have if, as most of
us must, he is to seize the news in a hurry. A suggestion of some sort he
demands, which tells him, so to speak, where he, a man conceiving himself
to be such and such a person, shall integrate his feelings with the news he
reads.
"It has been said" writes Walter Bagehot,190 "that if you can
only get a middleclass Englishman to think whether there are
'snails in Sirius,' he will soon have an opinion on it. It will be
difficult to make him think, but if he does think, he cannot
rest in a negative, he will come to some decision. And on
any ordinary topic, of course, it is so. A grocer has a full
creed as to foreign policy, a young lady a complete theory of
the sacraments, as to which neither has any doubt whatever."
Yet that same grocer will have many doubts about his groceries, and that
young lady, marvelously certain about the sacraments, may have all kinds
of doubts as to whether to marry the grocer, and if not whether it is proper
to accept his attentions. The ability to rest in the negative implies either a
lack of interest in the result, or a vivid sense of competing alternatives. In
the case of foreign policy or the sacraments, the interest in the results is
intense, while means for checking the opinion are poor. This is the plight of
the reader of the general news. If he is to read it at all he must be interested,
that is to say, he must enter into the situation and care about the outcome.
But if he does that he cannot rest in a negative, and unless independent
means of checking the lead given him by his newspaper exists, the very fact
that he is interested may make it difficult to arrive at that balance of
opinions which may most nearly approximate the truth. The more
passionately involved he becomes, the more he will tend to resent not only
a different view, but a disturbing bit of news. That is why many a
newspaper finds that, having honestly evoked the partisanship of its readers,
it can not easily, supposing the editor believes the facts warrant it, change
position. If a change is necessary, the transition has to be managed with the
utmost skill and delicacy. Usually a newspaper will not attempt so
hazardous a performance. It is easier and safer to have the news of that
subject taper off and disappear, thus putting out the fire by starving it.
180. See the illuminating chapter in Mr. John L. Given's book, already cited, on "Uncovering the
News," Ch. V.
181. Op. cit., p. 57.
182. Think of what guess work went into the Reports of Unemployment in 1921.
183. Address before the Women's City Club of New York, Dec. 11, 1919. Reprinted, New Republic,
Dec. 31, 1919, p. 44.
184. Cf. Inez Haynes Irwin, The Story of the Woman's Party. It is not only a good account of a vital
part of a great agitation, but a reservoir of material on successful, non-revolutionary, non-
conspiring agitation under modern conditions of public attention, public interest, and political
habit.
185. Not long ago Babe Ruth was jailed for speeding. Released from jail just before the afternoon
game started, he rushed into his waiting automobile, and made up for time lost in jail by
breaking the speed laws on his way to the ball grounds. No policeman stopped him, but a
reporter timed him, and published his speed the next morning. Babe Ruth is an exceptional man.
Newspapers cannot time all motorists. They have to take their news about speeding from the
police.
186. Cf. Ch. XI, "The Enlisting of Interest."
187. From his essay entitled Art and Criticism. The quotation occurs in a passage cited on page 87
of Professor R. W. Brown's, The Writer's Art.
188. Id., supra
189. Cf. A Test of the News, by Walter Lippmann and Charles Merz, assisted by Faye Lippmann,
New Republic, August 4, 1920.
190. On the Emotion of Conviction, Literary Studies, Vol. Ill, p. 172.
Chapter XXIV.
News, Truth, and a Conclusion
Table of Contents
As we begin to make more and more exact studies of the press, much will
depend upon the hypothesis we hold. If we assume with Mr. Sinclair, and
most of his opponents, that news and truth are two words for the same
thing, we shall, I believe, arrive nowhere. We shall prove that on this point
the newspaper lied. We shall prove that on that point Mr. Sinclair's account
lied. We shall demonstrate that Mr. Sinclair lied when he said that
somebody lied, and that somebody lied when he said Mr. Sinclair lied. We
shall vent our feelings, but we shall vent them into air.
The hypothesis, which seems to me the most fertile, is that news and
truth are not the same thing, and must be clearly distinguished.191 The
function of news is to signalize an event, the function of truth is to bring to
light the hidden facts, to set them into relation with each other, and make a
picture of reality on which men can act. Only at those points, where social
conditions take recognizable and measurable shape, do the body of truth
and the body of news coincide. That is a comparatively small part of the
whole field of human interest. In this sector, and only in this sector, the tests
of the news are sufficiently exact to make the charges of perversion or
suppression more than a partisan judgment. There is no defense, no
extenuation, no excuse whatever, for stating six times that Lenin is dead,
when the only information the paper possesses is a report that he is dead
from a source repeatedly shown to be unreliable. The news, in that instance,
is not "Lenin Dead" but "Helsingfors Says Lenin is Dead." And a
newspaper can be asked to take the responsibility of not making Lenin more
dead than the source of the news is reliable; if there is one subject on which
editors are most responsible it is in their judgment of the reliability of the
source. But when it comes to dealing, for example, with stories of what the
Russian people want, no such test exists.
The absence of these exact tests accounts, I think, for the character of
the profession, as no other explanation does. There is a very small body of
exact knowledge, which it requires no outstanding ability or training to deal
with. The rest is in the journalist's own discretion. Once he departs from the
region where it is definitely recorded at the County Clerk's office that John
Smith has gone into bankruptcy, all fixed standards disappear. The story of
why John Smith failed, his human frailties, the analysis of the economic
conditions on which he was shipwrecked, all of this can be told in a
hundred different ways. There is no discipline in applied psychology, as
there is a discipline in medicine, engineering, or even law, which has
authority to direct the journalist's mind when he passes from the news to the
vague realm of truth. There are no canons to direct his own mind, and no
canons that coerce the reader's judgment or the publisher's. His version of
the truth is only his version. How can he demonstrate the truth as he sees it?
He cannot demonstrate it, any more than Mr. Sinclair Lewis can
demonstrate that he has told the whole truth about Main Street. And the
more he understands his own weaknesses, the more ready he is to admit that
where there is no objective test, his own opinion is in some vital measure
constructed out of his own stereotypes, according to his own code, and by
the urgency of his own interest. He knows that he is seeing the world
through subjective lenses. He cannot deny that he too is, as Shelley
remarked, a dome of many-colored glass which stains the white radiance of
eternity.
And by this knowledge his assurance is tempered. He may have all
kinds of moral courage, and sometimes has, but he lacks that sustaining
conviction of a certain technic which finally freed the physical sciences
from theological control. It was the gradual development of an irrefragable
method that gave the physicist his intellectual freedom as against all the
powers of the world. His proofs were so clear, his evidence so sharply
superior to tradition, that he broke away finally from all control. But the
journalist has no such support in his own conscience or in fact. The control
exercised over him by the opinions of his employers and his readers, is not
the control of truth by prejudice, but of one opinion by another opinion that
it is not demonstrably less true. Between Judge Gary's assertion that the
unions will destroy American institutions, and Mr. Gomper's assertion that
they are agencies of the rights of man, the choice has, in large measure, to
be governed by the will to believe.
The task of deflating these controversies, and reducing them to a point
where they can be reported as news, is not a task which the reporter can
perform. It is possible and necessary for journalists to bring home to people
the uncertain character of the truth on which their opinions are founded, and
by criticism and agitation to prod social science into making more usable
formulations of social facts, and to prod statesmen into establishing more
visible institutions. The press, in other words, can fight for the extension of
reportable truth. But as social truth is organized to-day, the press is not
constituted to furnish from one edition to the next the amount of knowledge
which the democratic theory of public opinion demands. This is not due to
the Brass Check, as the quality of news in radical papers shows, but to the
fact that the press deals with a society in which the governing forces are so
imperfectly recorded. The theory that the press can itself record those forces
is false. It can normally record only what has been recorded for it by the
working of institutions. Everything else is argument and opinion, and
fluctuates with the vicissitudes, the self-consciousness, and the courage of
the human mind.
If the press is not so universally wicked, nor so deeply conspiring, as
Mr. Sinclair would have us believe, it is very much more frail than the
democratic theory has as yet admitted. It is too frail to carry the whole
burden of popular sovereignty, to supply spontaneously the truth which
democrats hoped was inborn. And when we expect it to supply such a body
of truth we employ a misleading standard of judgment. We misunderstand
the limited nature of news, the illimitable complexity of society; we
overestimate our own endurance, public spirit, and all-round competence.
We suppose an appetite for uninteresting truths which is not discovered by
any honest analysis of our own tastes.
If the newspapers, then, are to be charged with the duty of translating
the whole public life of mankind, so that every adult can arrive at an
opinion on every moot topic, they fail, they are bound to fail, in any future
one can conceive they will continue to fail. It is not possible to assume that
a world, carried on by division of labor and distribution of authority, can be
governed by universal opinions in the whole population. Unconsciously the
theory sets up the single reader as theoretically omnicompetent, and puts
upon the press the burden of accomplishing whatever representative
government, industrial organization, and diplomacy have failed to
accomplish. Acting upon everybody for thirty minutes in twenty-four hours,
the press is asked to create a mystical force called Public Opinion that will
take up the slack in public institutions. The press has often mistakenly
pretended that it could do just that. It has at great moral cost to itself,
encouraged a democracy, still bound to its original premises, to expect
newspapers to supply spontaneously for every organ of government, for
every social problem, the machinery of information which these do not
normally supply themselves. Institutions, having failed to furnish
themselves with instruments of knowledge, have become a bundle of
"problems," which the population as a whole, reading the press as a whole,
is supposed to solve.
The press, in other words, has come to be regarded as an organ of direct
democracy, charged on a much wider scale, and from day to day, with the
function often attributed to the initiative, referendum, and recall. The Court
of Public Opinion, open day and night, is to lay down the law for
everything all the time. It is not workable. And when you consider the
nature of news, it is not even thinkable. For the news, as we have seen, is
precise in proportion to the precision with which the event is recorded.
Unless the event is capable of being named, measured, given shape, made
specific, it either fails to take on the character of news, or it is subject to the
accidents and prejudices of observation.
Therefore, on the whole, the quality of the news about modern society is
an index of its social organization. The better the institutions, the more all
interests concerned are formally represented, the more issues are
disentangled, the more objective criteria are introduced, the more perfectly
an affair can be presented as news. At its best the press is a servant and
guardian of institutions; at its worst it is a means by which a few exploit
social disorganization to their own ends. In the degree to which institutions
fail to function, the unscrupulous journalist can fish in troubled waters, and
the conscientious one must gamble with uncertainties.
The press is no substitute for institutions. It is like the beam of a
searchlight that moves restlessly about, bringing one episode and then
another out of darkness into vision. Men cannot do the work of the world by
this light alone. They cannot govern society by episodes, incidents, and
eruptions. It is only when they work by a steady light of their own, that the
press, when it is turned upon them, reveals a situation intelligible enough
for a popular decision. The trouble lies deeper than the press, and so does
the remedy. It lies in social organization based on a system of analysis and
record, and in all the corollaries of that principle; in the abandonment of the
theory of the omnicompetent citizen, in the decentralization of decision, in
the coordination of decision by comparable record and analysis. If at the
centers of management there is a running audit, which makes work
intelligible to those who do it, and those who superintend it, issues when
they arise are not the mere collisions of the blind. Then, too, the news is
uncovered for the press by a system of intelligence that is also a check upon
the press.
That is the radical way. For the troubles of the press, like the troubles of
representative government, be it territorial or functional, like the troubles of
industry, be it capitalist, cooperative, or communist, go back to a common
source: to the failure of self-governing people to transcend their casual
experience and their prejudice, by inventing, creating, and organizing a
machinery of knowledge. It is because they are compelled to act without a
reliable picture of the world, that governments, schools, newspapers and
churches make such small headway against the more obvious failings of
democracy, against violent prejudice, apathy, preference for the curious
trivial as against the dull important, and the hunger for sideshows and three
legged calves. This is the primary defect of popular government, a defect
inherent in its traditions, and all its other defects can, I believe, be traced to
this one.
191. When I wrote Liberty and the News, I did not understand this distinction clearly enough to
state it, but cf. p. 89 ff.
Part VIII.
Organized Intelligence
Table of Contents
Chapter XXV.
The Entering Wedge
Table of Contents

If the remedy were interesting, American pioneers like Charles McCarthy,
Robert Valentine, and Frederick W. Taylor would not have had to fight so
hard for a hearing. But it is clear why they had to fight, and why bureaus of
governmental research, industrial audits, budgeting and the like are the ugly
ducklings of reform. They reverse the process by which interesting public
opinions are built up. Instead of presenting a casual fact, a large screen of
stereotypes, and a dramatic identification, they break down the drama,
break through the stereotypes, and offer men a picture of facts, which is
unfamiliar and to them impersonal. When this is not painful, it is dull, and
those to whom it is painful, the trading politician and the partisan who has
much to conceal, often exploit the dullness that the public feels, in order to
remove the pain that they feel.

Yet every complicated community has sought the assistance of special men,
of augurs, priests, elders. Our own democracy, based though it was on a
theory of universal competence, sought lawyers to manage its government,
and to help manage its industry. It was recognized that the specially trained
man was in some dim way oriented to a wider system of truth than that
which arises spontaneously in the amateur's mind. But experience has
shown that the traditional lawyer's equipment was not enough assistance.
The Great Society had grown furiously and to colossal dimensions by the
application of technical knowledge. It was made by engineers who had
learned to use exact measurements and quantitative analysis. It could not be
governed, men began to discover, by men who thought deductively about
rights and wrongs. It could be brought under human control only by the
technic which had created it. Gradually, then, the more enlightened
directing minds have called in experts who were trained, or had trained
themselves, to make parts of this Great Society intelligible to those who
manage it. These men are known by all kinds of names, as statisticians,
accountants, auditors, industrial counsellors, engineers of many species,
scientific managers, personnel administrators, research men, "scientists,"
and sometimes just as plain private secretaries. They have brought with
them each a jargon of his own, as well as filing cabinets, card catalogues,
graphs, loose-leaf contraptions, and above all the perfectly sound ideal of an
executive who sits before a flat-top desk, one sheet of typewritten paper
before him, and decides on matters of policy presented in a form ready for
his rejection or approval.
This whole development has been the work, not so much of a
spontaneous creative evolution, as of blind natural selection. The statesman,
the executive, the party leader, the head of a voluntary association, found
that if he had to discuss two dozen different subjects in the course of the
day, somebody would have to coach him. He began to clamor for
memoranda. He found he could not read his mail. He demanded somebody
who would blue-pencil the interesting sentences in the important letters. He
found he could not digest the great stacks of type-written reports that grew
mellow on his desk. He demanded summaries. He found he could not read
an unending series of figures. He embraced the man who made colored
pictures of them. He found that he really did not know one machine from
another. He hired engineers to pick them, and tell him how much they cost
and what they could do. He peeled off one burden after another, as a man
will take off first his hat, then his coat, then his collar, when he is struggling
to move an unwieldy load.

Yet curiously enough, though he knew that he needed help, he was slow to
call in the social scientist. The chemist, the physicist, the geologist, had a
much earlier and more friendly reception. Laboratories were set up for
them, inducements offered, for there was quick appreciation of the victories
over nature. But the scientist who has human nature as his problem is in a
different case. There are many reasons for this: the chief one, that he has so
few victories to exhibit. He has so few, because unless he deals with the
historic past, he cannot prove his theories before offering them to the
public. The physical scientist can make an hypothesis, test it, revise the
hypothesis hundreds of times, and, if after all that, he is wrong, no one else
has to pay the price. But the social scientist cannot begin to offer the
assurance of a laboratory test, and if his advice is followed, and he is
wrong, the consequences may be incalculable. He is in the nature of things
far more responsible, and far less certain.
But more than that. In the laboratory sciences the student has conquered
the dilemma of thought and action. He brings a sample of the action to a
quiet place, where it can be repeated at will, and examined at leisure. But
the social scientist is constantly being impaled on a dilemma. If he stays in
his library, where he has the leisure to think, he has to rely upon the
exceedingly casual and meager printed record that comes to him through
official reports, newspapers, and interviews. If he goes out into "the world"
where things are happening, he has to serve a long, often wasteful,
apprenticeship, before he is admitted to the sanctum where they are being
decided. What he cannot do is to dip into action and out again whenever it
suits him. There are no privileged listeners. The man of affairs, observing
that the social scientist knows only from the outside what he knows, in part
at least, from the inside, recognizing that the social scientist's hypothesis is
not in the nature of things susceptible of laboratory proof, and that
verification is possible only in the "real" world, has developed a rather low
opinion of social scientists who do not share his views of public policy.
In his heart of hearts the social scientist shares this estimate of himself.
He has little inner certainty about his own work. He only half believes in it,
and being sure of nothing, he can find no compelling reason for insisting on
his own freedom of thought. What can he actually claim for it, in the light
of his own conscience?192 His data are uncertain, his means of verification
lacking. The very best qualities in him are a source of frustration. For if he
is really critical and saturated in the scientific spirit, he cannot be
doctrinaire, and go to Armageddon against the trustees and the students and
the Civic Federation and the conservative press for a theory of which he is
not sure. If you are going to Armageddon, you have to battle for the Lord,
but the political scientist is always a little doubtful whether the Lord called
him.
Consequently if so much of social science is apologetic rather than
constructive, the explanation lies in the opportunities of social science, not
in "capitalism." The physical scientists achieved their freedom from
clericalism by working out a method that produced conclusions of a sort
that could not be suppressed or ignored. They convinced themselves and
acquired dignity, and knew what they were fighting for. The social scientist
will acquire his dignity and his strength when he has worked out his
method. He will do that by turning into opportunity the need among
directing men of the Great Society for instruments of analysis by which an
invisible and made intelligible.
But as things go now, the social scientist assembles his data out of a
mass of unrelated material. Social processes are recorded spasmodically,
quite often as accidents of administration. A report to Congress, a debate, an
investigation, legal briefs, a census, a tariff, a tax schedule; the material,
like the skull of the Piltdown man, has to be put together by ingenious
inference before the student obtains any sort of picture of the event he is
studying. Though it deals with the conscious life of his fellow citizens, it is
all too often distressingly opaque, because the man who is trying to
generalize has practically no supervision of the way his data are collected.
Imagine medical research conducted by students who could rarely go into a
hospital, were deprived of animal experiment, and compelled to draw
conclusions from the stories of people who had been ill, the reports of
nurses, each of whom had her own system of diagnosis, and the statistics
compiled by the Bureau of Internal Revenue on the excess profits of
druggists. The social scientist has usually to make what he can out of
categories that were uncritically in the mind of an official who administered
some part of a law, or who was out to justify, to persuade, to claim, or to
prove. The student knows this, and, as a protection against it, has developed
that branch of scholarship which is an elaborated suspicion about where to
discount his information.
That is a virtue, but it becomes a very thin virtue when it is merely a
corrective for the unwholesome position of social science. For the scholar is
condemned to guess as shrewdly as he can why in a situation not clearly
understood something or other may have happened. But the expert who is
employed as the mediator among representatives, and as the mirror and
measure of administration, has a very different control of the facts. Instead
of being the man who generalizes from the facts dropped to him by the men
of action, he becomes the man who prepares the facts for the men of action.
This is a profound change in his strategic position. He no longer stands
outside, chewing the cud provided by busy men of affairs, but he takes his
place in front of decision instead of behind it. To-day the sequence is that
the man of affairs finds his facts, and decides on the basis of them; then,
some time later, the social scientist deduces excellent reasons why he did or
did not decide wisely. This ex post facto relationship is academic in the bad
sense of that fine word. The real sequence should be one where the
disinterested expert first finds and formulates the facts for the man of
action, and later makes what wisdom he can out of comparison between the
decision, which he understands, and the facts, which he organized.

For the physical sciences this change in strategic position began slowly, and
then accelerated rapidly. There was a time when the inventor and the
engineer were romantic half-starved outsiders, treated as cranks. The
business man and the artisan knew all the mysteries of their craft. Then the
mysteries grew more mysterious, and at last industry began to depend upon
physical laws and chemical combinations that no eye could see, and only a
trained mind could conceive. The scientist moved from his noble garret in
the Latin Quarter into office buildings and laboratories. For he alone could
construct a working image of the reality on which industry rested. From the
new relationship he took as much as he gave, perhaps more: pure science
developed faster than applied, though it drew its economic support, a great
deal of its inspiration, and even more of its relevancy, from constant contact
with practical decision. But physical science still labored under the
enormous limitation that the men who made decisions had only their
commonsense to guide them. They administered without scientific aid a
world complicated by scientists. Again they had to deal with facts they
could not apprehend, and as once they had to call in engineers, they now
have to call in statisticians, accountants, experts of all sorts.
These practical students are the true pioneers of a new social science.
They are "in mesh with the driving wheels"193 and from this practical
engagement of science and action, both will benefit radically: action by the
clarification of its beliefs; beliefs by a continuing test in action. We are in
the earliest beginnings. But if it is conceded that all large forms of human
association must, because of sheer practical difficulty, contain men who will
come to see the need for an expert reporting of their particular environment,
then the imagination has a premise on which to work. In the exchange of
technic and result among expert staffs, one can see, I think, the beginning of
experimental method in social science. When each school district and
budget, and health department, and factory, and tariff schedule, is the
material of knowledge for every other, the number of comparable
experiences begins to approach the dimensions of genuine experiment. In
forty-eight states, and 2400 cities, and 277,000 school houses, 270,000
manufacturing establishments, 27,000 mines and quarries, there is a wealth
of experience, if only it were recorded and available. And there is, too,
opportunity for trial and error at such slight risk that any reasonable
hypothesis might be given a fair test without shaking the foundations of
society.
The wedge has been driven, not only by some directors of industry and
some statesmen who had to have help, but by the bureaus of municipal
research,194 the legislative reference libraries, the specialized lobbies of
corporations and trade unions and public causes, and by voluntary
organizations like the League of Women Voters, the Consumers' League, the
Manufacturers' Associations: by hundreds of trade associations, and
citizens' unions; by publications like the Searchlight on Congress and the
Survey; and by foundations like the General Education Board. Not all by
any means are disinterested. That is not the point. All of them do begin to
demonstrate the need for interposing some form of expertness between the
private citizen and the vast environment in which he is entangled.
192. Cf. Charles E. Merriam, The Present State of the Study of Politics, American Political Science
Review, Vol. XV. No. 2, May, 1921.
193. Cf. The Address of the President of the American Philosophical Association, Mr. Ralph Barton
Perry, Dec. 28, 1920. Published in the Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Meeting.
194. The number of these organizations in the United States is very great. Some are alive, some half
dead. They are in rapid flux. Lists of them supplied to me by Dr. L. D. Upson of the Detroit
Bureau of Governmental Research, Miss Rebecca B. Rankin of the Municipal Reference Library
of New York City, Mr. Edward A. Fitzpatrick, Secretary of the State Board of Education
(Wisconsin), Mr. Savel Zimand of the Bureau of Industrial Research (New York City), run into
the hundreds.
Chapter XXVI.
Intelligence Work
Table of Contents

The practice of democracy has been ahead of its theory. For the theory
holds that the adult electors taken together make decisions out of a will that
is in them. But just as there grew up governing hierarchies which were
invisible in theory, so there has been a large amount of constructive
adaptation, also unaccounted for in the image of democracy. Ways have
been found to represent many interests and functions that are normally out
of sight.
We are most conscious of this in our theory of the courts, when we
explain their legislative powers and their vetoes on the theory that there are
interests to be guarded which might be forgotten by the elected officials.
But the Census Bureau, when it counts, classifies, and correlates people,
things, and changes, is also speaking for unseen factors in the environment.
The Geological Survey makes mineral resources evident, the Department of
Agriculture represents in the councils of the nation factors of which each
farmer sees only an infinitesimal part. School authorities, the Tariff
Commission, the consular service, the Bureau of Internal Revenue give
representation to persons, ideas, and objects which would never
automatically find themselves represented in this perspective by an election.
The Children's Bureau is the spokesman of a whole complex of interests
and functions not ordinarily visible to the voter, and, therefore, incapable of
becoming spontaneously a part of his public opinions. Thus the printing of
comparative statistics of infant mortality is often followed by a reduction of
the death rate of babies. Municipal officials and voters did not have, before
publication, a place in their picture of the environment for those babies. The
statistics made them visible, as visible as if the babies had elected an
alderman to air their grievances.
In the State Department the government maintains a Division of Far
Eastern Affairs. What is it for? The Japanese and the Chinese Governments
both maintain ambassadors in Washington. Are they not qualified to speak
for the Far East? They are its representatives. Yet nobody would argue that
the American Government could learn all that it needed to know about the
Far East by consulting these ambassadors. Supposing them to be as candid
as they know how to be, they are still limited channels of information.
Therefore, to supplement them we maintain embassies in Tokio and Peking,
and consular agents at many points. Also, I assume, some secret agents.
These people are supposed to send reports which pass through the Division
of Far Eastern Affairs to the Secretary of State. Now what does the
Secretary expect of the Division? I know one who expected it to spend its
appropriation. But there are Secretaries to whom special revelation is
denied, and they turn to their divisions for help. The last thing they expect
to find is a neat argument justifying the American position.
What they demand is that the experts shall bring the Far East to the
Secretary's desk, with all the elements in such relation that it is as if he were
in contact with the Far East itself. The expert must translate, simplify,
generalize, but the inference from the result must apply in the East, not
merely on the premises of the report. If the Secretary is worth his salt, the
very last thing he will tolerate in his experts is the suspicion that they have a
"policy." He does not want to know from them whether they like Japanese
policy in China. He wants to know what different classes of Chinese and
Japanese, English, Frenchmen, Germans, and Russians, think about it, and
what they are likely to do because of what they think. He wants all that
represented to him as the basis of his decision. The more faithfully the
Division represents what is not otherwise represented, either by the
Japanese or American ambassadors, or the Senators and Congressmen from
the Pacific coast, the better Secretary of State he will be. He may decide to
take his policy from the Pacific Coast, but he will take his view of Japan
from Japan.

It is no accident that the best diplomatic service in the world is the one in
which the divorce between the assembling of knowledge and the control of
policy is most perfect. During the war in many British Embassies and in the
British Foreign Office there were nearly always men, permanent officials or
else special appointees, who quite successfully discounted the prevailing
war mind. They discarded the rigmarole of being pro and con, of having
favorite nationalities, and pet aversions, and undelivered perorations in their
bosoms. They left that to the political chiefs. But in an American Embassy I
once heard an ambassador say that he never reported anything to
Washington which would not cheer up the folks at home. He charmed all
those who met him, helped many a stranded war worker, and was superb
when he unveiled a monument.
He did not understand that the power of the expert depends upon
separating himself from those who make the decisions, upon not caring, in
his expert self, what decision is made. The man who, like the ambassador,
takes a line, and meddles with the decision, is soon discounted. There he is,
just one more on that side of the question. For when he begins to care too
much, he begins to see what he wishes to see, and by that fact ceases to see
what he is there to see. He is there to represent the unseen. He represents
people who are not voters, functions of voters that are not evident, events
that are out of sight, mute people, unborn people, relations between things
and people. He has a constituency of intangibles. And intangibles cannot be
used to form a political majority, because voting is in the last analysis a test
of strength, a sublimated battle, and the expert represents no strength
available in the immediate. But he can exercise force by disturbing the line
up of the forces. By making the invisible visible, he confronts the people
who exercise material force with a new environment, sets ideas and feelings
at work in them, throws them out of position, and so, in the profoundest
way, affects the decision.
Men cannot long act in a way that they know is a contradiction of the
environment as they conceive it. If they are bent on acting in a certain way
they have to reconceive the environment, they have to censor out, to
rationalize. But if in their presence, there is an insistent fact which is so
obtrusive that they cannot explain it away, one of three courses is open.
They can perversely ignore it, though they will cripple themselves in the
process, will overact their part and come to grief. They can take it into
account but refuse to act. They pay in internal discomfort and frustration.
Or, and I believe this to be the most frequent case, they adjust their whole
behavior to the enlarged environment.
The idea that the expert is an ineffectual person because he lets others
make the decisions is quite contrary to experience. The more subtle the
elements that enter into the decision, the more irresponsible power the
expert wields. He is certain, moreover, to exercise more power in the future
than ever he did before, because increasingly the relevant facts will elude
the voter and the administrator. All governing agencies will tend to organize
bodies of research and information, which will throw out tentacles and
expand, as have the intelligence departments of all the armies in the world.
But the experts will remain human beings. They will enjoy power, and their
temptation will be to appoint themselves censors, and so absorb the real
function of decision. Unless their function is correctly defined they will
tend to pass on the facts they think appropriate, and to pass down the
decisions they approve. They will tend, in short, to become a bureaucracy.
The only institutional safeguard is to separate as absolutely as it is
possible to do so the staff which executes from the staff which investigates.
The two should be parallel but quite distinct bodies of men, recruited
differently, paid if possible from separate funds, responsible to different
heads, intrinsically uninterested in each other's personal success. In
industry, the auditors, accountants, and inspectors should be independent of
the manager, the superintendents, foremen, and in time, I believe, we shall
come to see that in order to bring industry under social control the
machinery of record will have to be independent of the boards of directors
and the shareholders.

But in building the intelligence sections of industry and politics, we do not
start on cleared ground. And, apart from insisting on this basic separation of
function, it would be cumbersome to insist too precisely on the form which
in any particular instance the principle shall take. There are men who
believe in intelligence work, and will adopt it; there are men who do not
understand it, but cannot do their work without it; there are men who will
resist. But provided the principle has a foothold somewhere in every social
agency it will make progress, and the way to begin is to begin. In the
federal government, for example, it is not necessary to straighten out the
administrative tangle and the illogical duplications of a century's growth in
order to find a neat place for the intelligence bureaus which Washington so
badly needs. Before election you can promise to rush bravely into the
breach. But when you arrive there all out of breath, you find that each
absurdity is invested with habits, strong interests, and chummy
Congressmen. Attack all along the line and you engage every force of
reaction. You go forth to battle, as the poet said, and you always fall. You
can lop off an antiquated bureau here, a covey of clerks there, you can
combine two bureaus. And by that time you are busy with the tariff and the
railroads, and the era of reform is over. Besides, in order to effect a truly
logical reorganization of the government, such as all candidates always
promise, you would have to disturb more passions than you have time to
quell. And any new scheme, supposing you had one ready, would require
officials to man it. Say what one will about officeholders, even Soviet
Russia was glad to get many of the old ones back; and these old officials, if
they are too ruthlessly treated, will sabotage Utopia itself.
No administrative scheme is workable without good will, and good will
about strange practices is impossible without education. The better way is to
introduce into the existing machinery, wherever you can find an opening,
agencies that will hold up a mirror week by week, month by month. You
can hope, then, to make the machine visible to those who work it, as well as
to the chiefs who are responsible, and to the public outside. When the
office-holders begin to see themselves,—or rather when the outsiders, the
chiefs, and the subordinates all begin to see the same facts, the same
damning facts if you like, the obstruction will diminish. The reformer's
opinion that a certain bureau is inefficient is just his opinion, not so good an
opinion in the eyes of the bureau, as its own. But let the work of that bureau
be analysed and recorded, and then compared with other bureaus and with
private corporations, and the argument moves to another plane.
There are ten departments at Washington represented in the Cabinet.
Suppose, then, there was a permanent intelligence section for each. What
would be some of the conditions of effectiveness? Beyond all others that the
intelligence officials should be independent both of the Congressional
Committees dealing with that department, and of the Secretary at the head
of it; that they should not be entangled either in decision or in action.
Independence, then, would turn mainly on three points on funds, tenure, and
access to the facts. For clearly if a particular Congress or departmental
official can deprive them of money, dismiss them, or close the files, the
staff becomes its creature.

The question of funds is both important and difficult. No agency of research
can be really free if it depends upon annual doles from what may be a
jealous or a parsimonious congress. Yet the ultimate control of funds cannot
be removed from the legislature. The financial arrangement should insure
the staff against left-handed, joker and rider attack, against sly destruction,
and should at the same time provide for growth. The staff should be so well
entrenched that an attack on its existence would have to be made in the
open. It might, perhaps, work behind a federal charter creating a trust fund,
and a sliding scale over a period of years based on the appropriation for the
department to which the intelligence bureau belonged. No great sums of
money are involved anyway. The trust fund might cover the overhead and
capital charges for a certain minimum staff, the sliding scale might cover
the enlargements. At any rate the appropriation should be put beyond
accident, like the payment of any long term obligation. This is a much less
serious way of "tying the hands of Congress" than is the passage of a
Constitutional amendment or the issuance of government bonds. Congress
could repeal the charter. But it would have to repeal it, not throw monkey
wrenches into it.
Tenure should be for life, with provision for retirement on a liberal
pension, with sabbatical years set aside for advanced study and training, and
with dismissal only after a trial by professional colleagues. The conditions
which apply to any non-profit-making intellectual career should apply here.
If the work is to be salient, the men who do it must have dignity, security,
and, in the upper ranks at least, that freedom of mind which you find only
where men are not too immediately concerned in practical decision.
Access to the materials should be established in the organic act. The
bureau should have the right to examine all papers, and to question any
official or any outsider. Continuous investigation of this sort would not at
all resemble the sensational legislative inquiry and the spasmodic fishing
expedition which are now a common feature of our government. The bureau
should have the right to propose accounting methods to the department, and
if the proposal is rejected, or violated after it has been accepted, to appeal
under its charter to Congress.
In the first instance each intelligence bureau would be the connecting
link between Congress and the Department, a better link, in my judgment,
than the appearance of cabinet officers on the floor of both House and
Senate, though the one proposal in no way excludes the other. The bureau
would be the Congressional eye on the execution of its policy. It would be
the departmental answer to Congressional criticism. And then, since
operation of the Department would be permanently visible, perhaps
Congress would cease to feel the need of that minute legislation born of
distrust and a false doctrine of the separation of powers, which does so
much to make efficient administration difficult.

But, of course, each of the ten bureaus could not work in a watertight
compartment. In their relation one to another lies the best chance for that
"coordination" of which so much is heard and so little seen. Clearly the
various staffs would need to adopt, wherever possible, standards of
measurement that were comparable. They would exchange their records.
Then if the War Department and the Post Office both buy lumber, hire
carpenters, or construct brick walls they need not necessarily do them
through the same agency, for that might mean cumbersome over-
centralization; but they would be able to use the same measure for the same
things, be conscious of the comparisons, and be treated as competitors. And
the more competition of this sort the better.
For the value of competition is determined by the value of the standards
used to measure it. Instead, then, of asking ourselves whether we believe in
competition, we should ask ourselves whether we believe in that for which
the competitors compete. No one in his senses expects to "abolish
competition," for when the last vestige of emulation had disappeared, social
effort would consist in mechanical obedience to a routine, tempered in a
minority by native inspiration. Yet no one expects to work out competition
to its logical conclusion in a murderous struggle of each against all. The
problem is to select the goals of competition and the rules of the game.
Almost always the most visible and obvious standard of measurement will
determine the rules of the game: such as money, power, popularity,
applause, or Mr. Veblen's "conspicuous waste." What other standards of
measurement does our civilization normally provide? How does it measure
efficiency, productivity, service, for which we are always clamoring?
By and large there are no measures, and there is, therefore, not so much
competition to achieve these ideals. For the difference between the higher
and the lower motives is not, as men often assert, a difference between
altruism and selfishness.195 It is a difference between acting for easily
understood aims, and for aims that are obscure and vague. Exhort a man to
make more profit than his neighbor, and he knows at what to aim. Exhort
him to render more social service, and how is he to be certain what service
is social? What is the test, what is the measure? A subjective feeling,
somebody's opinion. Tell a man in time of peace that he ought to serve his
country and you have uttered a pious platitude, Tell him in time of war, and
the word service has a meaning; it is a number of concrete acts, enlistment,
or buying bonds, or saving food, or working for a dollar a year, and each
one of these services he sees definitely as part of a concrete purpose to put
at the front an army larger and better armed, than the enemy's.
So the more you are able to analyze administration and work out
elements that can be compared, the more you invent quantitative measures
for the qualities you wish to promote, the more you can turn competition to
ideal ends. If you can contrive the right index numbers196 you can set up a
competition between individual workers in a shop; between shops; between
factories; between schools;197 between government departments; between
regiments; between divisions; between ships; between states; counties;
cities; and the better your index numbers the more useful the competition.

The possibilities that lie in the exchange of material are evident. Each
department of government is all the time asking for information that may
already have been obtained by another department, though perhaps in a
somewhat different form. The State Department needs to know, let us say,
the extent of the Mexican oil reserves, their relation to the rest of the
world's supply, the present ownership of Mexican oil lands, the importance
of oil to warships now under construction or planned, the comparative costs
in different fields. How does it secure such information to-day? The
information is probably scattered through the Departments of Interior,
Justice, Commerce, Labor and Navy. Either a clerk in the State Department
looks up Mexican oil in a book of reference, which may or may not be
accurate, or somebody's private secretary telephones somebody else's
private secretary, asks for a memorandum, and in the course of time a
darkey messenger arrives with an armful of unintelligible reports. The
Department should be able to call on its own intelligence bureau to
assemble the facts in a way suited to the diplomatic problem up for
decision. And these facts the diplomatic intelligence bureau would obtain
from the central clearing house.198
This establishment would pretty soon become a focus of information of
the most extraordinary kind. And the men in it would be made aware of
what the problems of government really are. They would deal with
problems of definition, of terminology, of statistical technic, of logic; they
would traverse concretely the whole gamut of the social sciences. It is
difficult to see why all this material, except a few diplomatic and military
secrets, should not be open to the scholars of the country. It is there that the
political scientist would find the real nuts to crack and the real researches
for his students to make. The work need not all be done in Washington, but
it could be done in reference to Washington. The central agency would,
thus, have in it the makings of a national university. The staff could be
recruited there for the bureaus from among college graduates. They would
be working on theses selected after consultation between the curators of the
national university and teachers scattered over the country. If the
association was as flexible as it ought to be, there would be, as a
supplement to the permanent staff, a steady turnover of temporary and
specialist appointments from the universities, and exchange lecturers called
out from Washington. Thus the training and the recruiting of the staff would
go together. A part of the research itself would be done by students, and
political science in the universities would be associated with politics in
America.

In its main outlines the principle is equally applicable to state governments,
to cities, and to rural counties. The work of comparison and interchange
could take place by federations of state and city and county bureaus. And
within those federations any desirable regional combination could be
organized. So long as the accounting systems were comparable, a great deal
of duplication would be avoided. Regional coordination is especially
desirable. For legal frontiers often do not coincide with the effective
environments. Yet they have a certain basis in custom that it would be
costly to disturb. By coordinating their information several administrative
areas could reconcile autonomy of decision with cooperation. New York
City, for example, is already an unwieldy unit for good government from
the City Hall. Yet for many purposes, such as health and transportation, the
metropolitan district is the true unit of administration. In that district,
however, there are large cities, like Yonkers, Jersey City, Paterson,
Elizabeth, Hoboken, Bayonne. They could not all be managed from one
center, and yet they should act together for many functions. Ultimately
perhaps some such flexible scheme of local government as Sidney and
Beatrice Webb have suggested may be the proper solution.199 But the first
step would be a coordination, not of decision and action, but of information
and research. Let the officials of the various municipalities see their
common problems in the light of the same facts.

It would be idle to deny that such a net work of intelligence bureaus in
politics and industry might become a dead weight and a perpetual irritation.
One can easily imagine its attraction for men in search of soft jobs, for
pedants, for meddlers. One can see red tape, mountains of papers,
questionnaires ad nauseam, seven copies of every document, endorsements,
delays, lost papers, the use of form 136 instead of form 2gb, the return of
the document because pencil was used instead of ink, or black ink instead
of red ink. The work could be done very badly. There are no fool-proof
institutions.
But if one could assume that there was circulation through the whole
system between government departments, factories, offices, and the
universities; a circulation of men, a circulation of data and of criticism, the
risks of dry rot would not be so great. Nor would it be true to say that these
intelligence bureaus will complicate life. They will tend, on the contrary, to
simplify, by revealing a complexity now so great as to be humanly
unmanageable. The present fundamentally invisible system of government
is so intricate that most people have given up trying to follow it, and
because they do not try, they are tempted to think it comparatively simple. It
is, on the contrary, elusive, concealed, opaque. The employment of an
intelligence system would mean a reduction of personnel per unit of result,
because by making available to all the experience of each, it would reduce
the amount of trial and error; and because by making the social process
visible, it would assist the personnel to self-criticism. It does not involve a
great additional band of officials, if you take into account the time now
spent vainly by special investigating committees, grand juries, district
attorneys, reform organizations, and bewildered office holders, in trying to
find their way through a dark muddle.
If the analysis of public opinion and of the democratic theories in
relation to the modern environment is sound in principle, then I do not see
how one can escape the conclusion that such intelligence work is the clue to
betterment. I am not referring to the few suggestions contained in this
chapter. They are merely illustrations. The task of working out the technic is
in the hands of men trained to do it, and not even they can to-day
completely foresee the form, much less the details. The number of social
phenomena which are now recorded is small, the instruments of analysis are
very crude, the concepts often vague and uncriticized. But enough has been
done to demonstrate, I think, that unseen environments can be reported
effectively, that they can be reported to divergent groups of people in a way
which is neutral to their prejudice, and capable of overcoming their
subjectivism.
If that is true, then in working out the intelligence principle men will
find the way to overcome the central difficulty of self-government, the
difficulty of dealing with an unseen reality. Because of that difficulty, it has
been impossible for any self-governing community to reconcile its need for
isolation with the necessity for wide contact, to reconcile the dignity and
individuality of local decision with security and wide coordination, to
secure effective leaders without sacrificing responsibility, to have useful
public opinions without attempting universal public opinions on all
subjects. As long as there was no way of establishing common versions of
unseen events, common measures for separate actions, the only image of
democracy that would work, even in theory, was one based on an isolated
community of people whose political faculties were limited, according to
Aristotle's famous maxim, by the range of their vision.
But now there is a way out, a long one to be sure, but a way. It is
fundamentally the same way as that which has enabled a citizen of Chicago,
with no better eyes or ears than an Athenian, to see and hear over great
distances. It is possible to-day, it will become more possible when more
labor has gone into it, to reduce the discrepancies between the conceived
environment and the effective environment. As that is done, federalism will
work more and more by consent, less and less by coercion. For while
federalism is the only possible method of union among self-governing
groups,200 federalism swings either towards imperial centralization or
towards parochial anarchy wherever the union is not based on correct and
commonly accepted ideas of federal matters. These ideas do not arise
spontaneously. They have to be pieced together by generalization based on
analysis, and the instruments for that analysis have to be invented and tested
by research.
No electoral device, no manipulation of areas, no change in the system
of property, goes to the root of the matter. You cannot take more political
wisdom out of human beings than there is in them. And no reform, however
sensational, is truly radical, which does not consciously provide a way of
overcoming the subjectivism of human opinion based on the limitation of
individual experience. There are systems of government, of voting, and
representation which extract more than others. But in the end knowledge
must come not from the conscience but from the environment with which
that conscience deals. When men act on the principle of intelligence they go
out to find the facts and to make their wisdom. When they ignore it, they go
inside themselves and find only what is there. They elaborate their
prejudice, instead of increasing their knowledge.
195. Cf. Ch. XII
196. I am not using the term index numbers in its purely technical meaning, but to cover any device
for the comparative measurement of social phenomena.
197. See, for example, An Index Number for State School Systems by Leonard P. Ayres, Russell
Sage Foundation, 1920. The principle of the quota was very successfully applied in the Liberty
Loan Campaigns, and under very much more difficult circumstances by the Allied Maritime
Transport Council.
198. There has been a vast development of such services among the trade associations. The
possibilities of a perverted use were revealed by the New York Building Trades investigation of
1921.
199. "The Reorganization of Local Government" (Ch. IV), in A Constitution for the Socialist
Commonwealth of Great Britain.
200. Cf. H. J. Laski, The Foundations of Sovereignty, and other Essays, particularly the Essay of this
name, as well as the Problems of Administrative Areas, The Theory of Popular Sovereignty, and
The Pluralistic State.
Chapter XXVII.
The Appeal to the Public
Table of Contents

In real life no one acts on the theory that he can have a public opinion on
every public question, though this fact is often concealed where a person
thinks there is no public question because he has no public opinion. But in
the theory of our politics we continue to think more literally than Lord
Bryce intended, that "the action of Opinion is continuous,"201 even though
"its action… deals with broad principles only."202 And then because we try
to think of ourselves having continuous opinions, without being altogether
certain what a broad principle is, we quite naturally greet with an anguished
yawn an argument that seems to involve the reading of more government
reports, more statistics, more curves and more graphs. For all these are in
the first instance just as confusing as partisan rhetoric, and much less
entertaining.
The amount of attention available is far too small for any scheme in
which it was assumed that all the citizens of the nation would, after
devoting themselves to the publications of all the intelligence bureaus,
become alert, informed, and eager on the multitude of real questions that
never do fit very well into any broad principle. I am not making that
assumption. Primarily, the intelligence bureau is an instrument of the man
of action, of the representative charged with decision, of the worker at his
work, and if it does not help them, it will help nobody in the end. But in so
far as it helps them to understand the environment in which they are
working, it makes what they do visible. And by that much they become
more responsible to the general public.
The purpose, then, is not to burden every citizen with expert opinions
on all questions, but to push that burden away from him towards the
responsible administrator. An intelligence system has value, of course, as a
source of general information, and as a check on the daily press. But that is
secondary. Its real use is as an aid to representative government and
administration both in politics and industry. The demand for the assistance
of expert reporters in the shape of accountants, statisticians, secretariats,
and the like, comes not from the public, but from men doing public
business, who can no longer do it by rule of thumb. It is in origin and in
ideal an instrument for doing public business better, rather than an
instrument for knowing better how badly public business is done.

As a private citizen, as a sovereign voter, no one could attempt to digest
these documents. But as one party to a dispute, as a committeeman in a
legislature, as an officer in government, business, or a trade union, as a
member of an industrial council, reports on the specific matter at issue will
be increasingly welcome. The private citizen interested in some cause
would belong, as he does now, to voluntary societies which employed a
staff to study the documents, and make reports that served as a check on
officialdom. There would be some study of this material by newspaper men,
and a good deal by experts and by political scientists. But the outsider, and
every one of us is an outsider to all but a few aspects of modern life, has
neither time, nor attention, nor interest, nor the equipment for specific
judgment. It is on the men inside, working under conditions that are sound,
that the daily administrations of society must rest.
The general public outside can arrive at judgments about whether these
conditions are sound only on the result after the event, and on the procedure
before the event. The broad principles on which the action of public opinion
can be continuous are essentially principles of procedure. The outsider can
ask experts to tell him whether the relevant facts were duly considered; he
cannot in most cases decide for himself what is relevant or what is due
consideration. The outsider can perhaps judge whether the groups interested
in the decision were properly heard, whether the ballot, if there was one,
was honestly taken, and perhaps whether the result was honestly accepted.
He can watch the procedure when the news indicates that there is something
to watch. He can raise a question as to whether the procedure itself is right,
if its normal results conflict with his ideal of a good life.203 But if he tries in
every case to substitute himself for the procedure, to bring in Public
Opinion like a providential uncle in the crisis of a play, he will confound his
own confusion. He will not follow any train of thought consecutively.
For the practice of appealing to the public on all sorts of intricate
matters means almost always a desire to escape criticism from those who
know by enlisting a large majority which has had no chance to know. The
verdict is made to depend on who has the loudest or the most entrancing
voice, the most skilful or the most brazen publicity man, the best access to
the most space in the newspapers. For even when the editor is scrupulously
fair to "the other side," fairness is not enough. There may be several other
sides, unmentioned by any of the organized, financed and active partisans.
The private citizen, beset by partisan appeals for the loan of his Public
Opinion, will soon see, perhaps, that these appeals are not a compliment to
his intelligence, but an imposition on his good nature and an insult to his
sense of evidence. As his civic education takes account of the complexity of
his environment, he will concern himself about the equity and the sanity of
procedure, and even this he will in most cases expect his elected
representative to watch for him. He will refuse himself to accept the burden
of these decisions, and will turn down his thumbs in most cases on those
who, in their hurry to win, rush from the conference table with the first
dope for the reporters.
Only by insisting that problems shall not come up to him until they have
passed through a procedure, can the busy citizen of a modern state hope to
deal with them in a form that is intelligible. For issues, as they are stated by
a partisan, almost always consist of an intricate series of facts, as he has
observed them, surrounded by a large fatty mass of stereotyped phrases
charged with his emotion. According to the fashion of the day, he will
emerge from the conference room insisting that what he wants is some
soulfilling idea like Justice, Welfare, Americanism, Socialism. On such
issues the citizen outside can sometimes be provoked to fear or admiration,
but to judgment never. Before he can do anything with the argument, the fat
has to be boiled out of it for him.

That can be done by having the representative inside carry on discussion in
the presence of some one, chairman or mediator, who forces the discussion
to deal with the analyses supplied by experts. This is the essential
organization of any representative body dealing with distant matters. The
partisan voices should be there, but the partisans should find themselves
confronted with men, not personally involved, who control enough facts
and have the dialectical skill to sort out what is real perception from what is
stereotype, pattern and elaboration. It is the Socratic dialogue, with all of
Socrates's energy for breaking through words to meanings, and something
more than that, because the dialectic in modern life must be done by men
who have explored the environment as well as the human mind.
There is, for example, a grave dispute in the steel industry. Each side
issues a manifesto full of the highest ideals. The only public opinion that is
worth respect at this stage is the opinion which insists that a conference be
organized. For the side which says its cause is too just to be contaminated
by conference there can be little sympathy, since there is no such cause
anywhere among mortal men. Perhaps those who object to conference do
not say quite that. Perhaps they say that the other side is too wicked; they
cannot shake hands with traitors. All that public opinion can do then is to
organize a hearing by public officials to hear the proof of wickedness. It
cannot take the partisans' word for it. But suppose a conference is agreed to,
and suppose there is a neutral chairman who has at his beck and call the
consulting experts of the corporation, the union, and, let us say, the
Department of Labor.
Judge Gary states with perfect sincerity that his men are well paid and
not overworked, and then proceeds to sketch the history of Russia from the
time of Peter the Great to the murder of the Czar. Mr. Foster rises, states
with equal sincerity that the men are exploited, and then proceeds to outline
the history of human emancipation from Jesus of Nazareth to Abraham
Lincoln. At this point the chairman calls upon the intelligence men for wage
tables in order to substitute for the words "well paid" and "exploited" a
table showing what the different classes are paid. Does Judge Gary think
they are all well paid? He does. Does Mr. Foster think they are all
exploited? No, he thinks that groups C, M, and X are exploited. What does
he mean by exploited? He means they are not paid a living wage. They are,
says Judge Gary. What can a man buy on that wage, asks the chairman.
Nothing, says Mr. Foster. Everything he needs, says Judge Gary. The
chairman consults the budgets and price statistics of the government.204 He
rules that X can meet an average budget, but that C and M cannot. Judge
Gary serves notice that he does not regard the official statistics as sound.
The budgets are too high, and prices have come down. Mr. Foster also
serves notice of exception. The budget is too low, prices have gone up. The
chairman rules that this point is not within the jurisdiction of the
conference, that the official figures stand, and that Judge Gary's experts and
Mr. Foster's should carry their appeals to the standing committee of the
federated intelligence bureaus.
Nevertheless, says Judge Gary, we shall be ruined if we change these
wage scales. What do you mean by ruined, asks the chairman, produce your
books. I can't, they are private, says Judge Gary. What is private does not
interest us, says the chairman, and, therefore, issues a statement to the
public announcing that the wages of workers in groups C and M are so-and-
so much below the official minimum living wage, and that Judge Gary
declines to increase them for reasons that he refuses to state. After a
procedure of that sort, a public opinion in the eulogistic sense of the term205
can exist.
The value of expert mediation is not that it sets up opinion to coerce the
partisans, but that it disintegrates partisanship. Judge Gary and Mr. Foster
may remain as little convinced as when they started, though even they
would have to talk in a different strain. But almost everyone else who was
not personally entangled would save himself from being entangled. For the
entangling stereotypes and slogans to which his reflexes are so ready to
respond are by this kind of dialectic untangled.

On many subjects of great public importance, and in varying degree among
different people for more personal matters, the threads of memory and
emotion are in a snarl. The same word will connote any number of different
ideas: emotions are displaced from the images to which they belong to
names which resemble the names of these images. In the uncriticized parts
of the mind there is a vast amount of association by mere clang, contact,
and succession. There are stray emotional attachments, there are words that
were names and are masks. In dreams, reveries, and panic, we uncover
some of the disorder, enough to see how the naive mind is composed, and
how it behaves when not disciplined by wakeful effort and external
resistance. We see that there is no more natural order than in a dusty old
attic. There is often the same incongruity between fact, idea, and emotion as
there might be in an opera house, if all the wardrobes were dumped in a
heap and all the scores mixed up, so that Madame Butterfly in a Valkyr's
dress waited lyrically for the return of Faust. "At Christmas-tide" says an
editorial, "old memories soften the heart. Holy teachings are remembered
afresh as thoughts run back to childhood. The world does not seem so bad
when seen through the mist of half-happy, half-sad recollections of loved
ones now with God. No heart is untouched by the mysterious influence….
The country is honeycombed with red propaganda—but there is a good
supply of ropes, muscles and lampposts… while this world moves the spirit
of liberty will burn in the breast of man."
The man who found these phrases in his mind needs help. He needs a
Socrates who will separate the words, cross-examine him until he has
defined them, and made words the names of ideas. Made them mean a
particular object and nothing else. For these tense syllables have got
themselves connected in his mind by primitive association, and are bundled
together by his memories of Christmas, his indignation as a conservative,
and his thrills as the heir to a revolutionary tradition. Sometimes the snarl is
too huge and ancient for quick unravelling. Sometimes, as in modern
psychotherapy, there are layers upon layers of memory reaching back to
infancy, which have to be separated and named.
The effect of naming, the effect, that is, of saying that the labor groups
C and M, but not X, are underpaid, instead of saying that Labor is
Exploited, is incisive. Perceptions recover their identity, and the emotion
they arouse is specific, since it is no longer reinforced by large and
accidental connections with everything from Christmas to Moscow. The
disentangled idea with a name of its own, and an emotion that has been
scrutinized, is ever so much more open to correction by new data in the
problem. It had been imbedded in the whole personality, had affiliations of
some sort with the whole ego: a challenge would reverberate through the
whole soul. After it has been thoroughly criticized, the idea is no longer me
but that. It is objectified, it is at arm's length. Its fate is not bound up with
my fate, but with the fate of the outer world upon which I am acting.

Re-education of this kind will help to bring our public opinions into grip
with the environment. That is the way the enormous censoring,
stereotyping, and dramatizing apparatus can be liquidated. Where there is
no difficulty in knowing what the relevant environment is, the critic, the
teacher, the physician, can unravel the mind. But where the environment is
as obscure to the analyst as to his pupil, no analytic technic is sufficient.
Intelligence work is required. In political and industrial problems the critic
as such can do something, but unless he can count upon receiving from
expert reporters a valid picture of the environment, his dialectic cannot go
far.
Therefore, though here, as in most other matters, "education" is the
supreme remedy, the value of this education will depend upon the evolution
of knowledge. And our knowledge of human institutions is still
extraordinarily meager and impressionistic. The gathering of social
knowledge is, on the whole, still haphazard; not, as it will have to become,
the normal accompaniment of action. And yet the collection of information
will not be made, one may be sure, for the sake of its ultimate use. It will be
made because modern decision requires it to be made. But as it is being
made, there will accumulate a body of data which political science can turn
into generalization, and build up for the schools into a conceptual picture of
the world. When that picture takes form, civic education can become a
preparation for dealing with an unseen environment.
As a working model of the social system becomes available to the
teacher, he can use it to make the pupil acutely aware of how his mind
works on unfamiliar facts. Until he has such a model, the teacher cannot
hope to prepare men fully for the world they will find. What he can do is to
prepare them to deal with that world with a great deal more sophistication
about their own minds. He can, by the use of the case method, teach the
pupil the habit of examining the sources of his information. He can teach
him, for example, to look in his newspaper for the place where the dispatch
was filed, for the name of the correspondent, the name of the press service,
the authority given for the statement, the circumstances under which the
statement was secured. He can teach the pupil to ask himself whether the
reporter saw what he describes, and to remember how that reporter
described other events in the past. He can teach him the character of
censorship, of the idea of privacy, and furnish him with knowledge of past
propaganda. He can, by the proper use of history, make him aware of the
stereotype, and can educate a habit of introspection about the imagery
evoked by printed words. He can, by courses in comparative history and
anthropology, produce a life-long realization of the way codes impose a
special pattern upon the imagination. He can teach men to catch themselves
making allegories, dramatizing relations, and personifying abstractions. He
can show the pupil how he identifies himself with these allegories, how he
becomes interested, and how he selects the attitude, heroic, romantic,
economic which he adopts while holding a particular opinion. The study of
error is not only in the highest degree prophylactic, but it serves as a
stimulating introduction to the study of truth. As our minds become more
deeply aware of their own subjectivism, we find a zest in objective method
that is not otherwise there. We see vividly, as normally we should not, the
enormous mischief and casual cruelty of our prejudices. And the destruction
of a prejudice, though painful at first, because of its connection with our
self-respect, gives an immense relief and a fine pride when it is successfully
done. There is a radical enlargement of the range of attention. As the current
categories dissolve, a hard, simple version of the world breaks up. The
scene turns vivid and full. There follows an emotional incentive to hearty
appreciation of scientific method, which otherwise it is not easy to arouse,
and is impossible to sustain. Prejudices are so much easier and more
interesting. For if you teach the principles of science as if they had always
been accepted, their chief virtue as a discipline, which is objectivity, will
make them dull. But teach them at first as victories over the superstitions of
the mind, and the exhilaration of the chase and of the conquest may carry
the pupil over that hard transition from his own self-bound experience to
the phase where his curiosity has matured, and his reason has acquired
passion.
201. Modern Democracies, Vol. I, p. 159.
202. Id., footnote, p. 158.
203. Cf. Chapter XX.
204. See an article on "The Cost of Living and Wage Cuts," in the New Republic, July 27, 1921, by
Dr. Leo Wolman, for a brilliant discussion of the naive use of such figures and "pseudo-
principles." The warning is of particular importance because it comes from an economist and
statistician who has himself done so much to improve the technic of industrial disputes.
205. As used by Mr. Lowell in his Public Opinion and Popular Government.
Chapter XXVIII.
The Appeal to Reason
Table of Contents

I have written, and then thrown away, several endings to this book. Over all
of them there hung that fatality of last chapters, in which every idea seems
to find its place, and all the mysteries, that the writer has not forgotten, are
unravelled. In politics the hero does not live happily ever after, or end his
life perfectly. There is no concluding chapter, because the hero in politics
has more future before him than there is recorded history behind him. The
last chapter is merely a place where the writer imagines that the polite
reader has begun to look furtively at his watch.

When Plato came to the point where it was fitting that he should sum up,
his assurance turned into stage-fright as he thought how absurd it would
sound to say what was in him about the place of reason in politics. Those
sentences in book five of the Republic were hard even for Plato to speak;
they are so sheer and so stark that men can neither forget them nor live by
them. So he makes Socrates say to Glaucon that he will be broken and
drowned in laughter for telling "what is the least change which will enable a
state to pass into the truer form,"206 because the thought he "would fain
have uttered if it had not seemed too extravagant" was that "until
philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes of this world have the spirit
and power of philosophy, and political greatness and wisdom meet in one…
cities will never cease from ill,—no, nor the human race…"
Hardly had he said these awful words, when he realized they were a
counsel of perfection, and felt embarrassed at the unapproachable grandeur
of his idea. So he hastens to add that, of course, "the true pilot" will be
called "a prater, a star-gazer, a good-for-nothing."207 But this wistful
admission, though it protects him against whatever was the Greek
equivalent for the charge that he lacked a sense of humor, furnished a
humiliating tailpiece to a solemn thought. He becomes defiant and warns
Adeimantus that he must "attribute the uselessness" of philosophers "to the
fault of those who will not use them, and not to themselves. The pilot
should not humbly beg the sailors to be commanded by him—that is not the
order of nature." And with this haughty gesture, he hurriedly picked up the
tools of reason, and disappeared into the Academy, leaving the world to
Machiavelli.
Thus, in the first great encounter between reason and politics, the
strategy of reason was to retire in anger. But meanwhile, as Plato tells us,
the ship is at sea. There have been many ships on the sea, since Plato wrote,
and to-day, whether we are wise or foolish in our belief, we could no longer
call a man a true pilot, simply because he knows how to "pay attention to
the year and seasons and sky and stars and winds, and whatever else
belongs to his art."208 He can dismiss nothing which is necessary to make
that ship sail prosperously. Because there are mutineers aboard, he cannot
say: so much the worse for us all… it is not in the order of nature that I
should handle a mutiny… it is not in the order of philosophy that I should
consider mutiny… I know how to navigate… I do not know how to
navigate a ship full of sailors… and if they do not see that I am the man to
steer, I cannot help it. We shall all go on the rocks, they to be punished for
their sins; I, with the assurance that I knew better….

Whenever we make an appeal to reason in politics, the difficulty in this
parable recurs. For there is an inherent difficulty about using the method of
reason to deal with an unreasoning world. Even if you assume with Plato
that the true pilot knows what is best for the ship, you have to recall that he
is not so easy to recognize, and that this uncertainty leaves a large part of
the crew unconvinced. By definition the crew does not know what he
knows, and the pilot, fascinated by the stars and winds, does not know how
to make the crew realize the importance of what he knows. There is no time
during mutiny at sea to make each sailor an expert judge of experts. There
is no time for the pilot to consult his crew and find out whether he is really
as wise as he thinks he is. For education is a matter of years, the emergency
a matter of hours. It would be altogether academic, then, to tell the pilot that
the true remedy is, for example, an education that will endow sailors with a
better sense of evidence. You can tell that only to shipmasters on dry land.
In the crisis, the only advice is to use a gun, or make a speech, utter a
stirring slogan, offer a compromise, employ any quick means available to
quell the mutiny, the sense of evidence being what it is. It is only on shore
where men plan for many voyages, that they can afford to, and must for
their own salvation, deal with those causes that take a long time to remove.
They will be dealing in years and generations, not in emergencies alone.
And nothing will put a greater strain upon their wisdom than the necessity
of distinguishing false crises from real ones. For when there is panic in the
air, with one crisis tripping over the heels of another, actual dangers mixed
with imaginary scares, there is no chance at all for the constructive use of
reason, and any order soon seems preferable to any disorder.
It is only on the premise of a certain stability over a long run of time
that men can hope to follow the method of reason. This is not because
mankind is inept, or because the appeal to reason is visionary, but because
the evolution of reason on political subjects is only in its beginnings. Our
rational ideas in politics are still large, thin generalities, much too abstract
and unrefined for practical guidance, except where the aggregates are large
enough to cancel out individual peculiarity and exhibit large uniformities.
Reason in politics is especially immature in predicting the behavior of
individual men, because in human conduct the smallest initial variation
often works out into the most elaborate differences. That, perhaps, is why
when we try to insist solely upon an appeal to reason in dealing with sudden
situations, we are broken and drowned in laughter.

For the rate at which reason, as we possess it, can advance itself is slower
than the rate at which action has to be taken. In the present state of political
science there is, therefore, a tendency for one situation to change into
another, before the first is clearly understood, and so to make much political
criticism hindsight and little else. Both in the discovery of what is
unknown, and in the propagation of that which has been proved, there is a
time-differential, which ought to, in a much greater degree than it ever has,
occupy the political philosopher. We have begun, chiefly under the
inspiration of Mr. Graham Wallas, to examine the effect of an invisible
environment upon our opinions. We do not, as yet, understand, except a
little by rule of thumb, the element of time in politics, though it bears most
directly upon the practicability of any constructive proposal.209 We can see,
for example, that somehow the relevancy of any plan depends upon the
length of time the operation requires. Because on the length of time it will
depend whether the data which the plan assumes as given, will in truth
remain the same.210 There is a factor here which realistic and experienced
men do take into account, and it helps to mark them off somehow from the
opportunist, the visionary, the philistine and the pedant.211 But just how the
calculation of time enters into politics we do not know at present in any
systematic way.
Until we understand these matters more clearly, we can at least
remember that there is a problem of the utmost theoretical difficulty and
practical consequence. It will help us to cherish Plato's ideal, without
sharing his hasty conclusion about the perversity of those who do not listen
to reason. It is hard to obey reason in politics, because you are trying to
make two processes march together, which have as yet a different gait and a
different pace. Until reason is subtle and particular, the immediate struggle
of politics will continue to require an amount of native wit, force, and
unprovable faith, that reason can neither provide nor control, because the
facts of life are too undifferentiated for its powers of understanding. The
methods of social science are so little perfected that in many of the serious
decisions and most of the casual ones, there is as yet no choice but to
gamble with fate as intuition prompts.
But we can make a belief in reason one of those intuitions. We can use
our wit and our force to make footholds for reason. Behind our pictures of
the world, we can try to see the vista of a longer duration of events, and
wherever it is possible to escape from the urgent present, allow this longer
time to control our decisions. And yet, even when there is this will to let the
future count, we find again and again that we do not know for certain how
to act according to the dictates of reason. The number of human problems
on which reason is prepared to dictate is small.

There is, however, a noble counterfeit in that charity which comes from
self-knowledge and an unarguable belief that no one of our gregarious
species is alone in his longing for a friendlier world. So many of the
grimaces men make at each other go with a flutter of their pulse, that they
are not all of them important. And where so much is uncertain, where so
many actions have to be carried out on guesses, the demand upon the
reserves of mere decency is enormous, and it is necessary to live as if good
will would work. We cannot prove in every instance that it will, nor why
hatred, intolerance, suspicion, bigotry, secrecy, fear, and lying are the seven
deadly sins against public opinion. We can only insist that they have no
place in the appeal to reason, that in the longer run they are a poison; and
taking our stand upon a view of the world which outlasts our own
predicaments, and our own lives, we can cherish a hearty prejudice against
them.
We can do this all the better if we do not allow frightfulness and
fanaticism to impress us so deeply that we throw up our hands peevishly,
and lose interest in the longer run of time because we have lost faith in the
future of man. There is no ground for this despair, because all the ifs on
which, as James said, our destiny hangs, are as pregnant as they ever were.
What we have seen of brutality, we have seen, and because it was strange, it
was not conclusive. It was only Berlin, Moscow, Versailles in 1914 to 1919,
not Armageddon, as we rhetorically said. The more realistically men have
faced out the brutality and the hysteria, the more they have earned the right
to say that it is not foolish for men to believe, because another great war
took place, that intelligence, courage and effort cannot ever contrive a good
life for all men.
Great as was the horror, it was not universal. There were corrupt, and
there were incorruptible. There was muddle and there were miracles. There
was huge lying. There were men with the will to uncover it. It is no
judgment, but only a mood, when men deny that what some men have been,
more men, and ultimately enough men, might be. You can despair of what
has never been. You can despair of ever having three heads, though Mr.
Shaw has declined to despair even of that. But you cannot despair of the
possibilities that could exist by virtue of any human quality which a human
being has exhibited. And if amidst all the evils of this decade, you have not
seen men and women, known moments that you would like to multiply, the
Lord himself cannot help you.
206. Republic, Bk. V, 473. Jowett transl.
207. 2 Bk. VI, 488-489.
208. Bk. VI, 488-489.
209. Cf. H. G. Wells in the opening chapters of Mankind in the Making.
210. The better the current analysis in the intelligence work of any institution, the less likely, of
course, that men will deal with tomorrow's problems in the light of yesterday's facts.
211. Not all, but some of the differences between reactionaries, conservatives, liberals, and radicals
are due, I think, to a different intuitive estimate of the rate of change in social affairs.
Crowds: A Moving-Picture of Democracy
(Gerald Stanley Lee)
Table of Contents
Gratefully inscribed to a little Mountain,
a great Meadow, and a Woman.
To the Mountain for the sense of time, to
the Meadow for the sense of space, and
to the Woman for the sense of everything.
Table of Contents
Book One. Crowds and Machines
Chapter I. Where are We Going?
Chapter II. The Crowd Scare
Chapter III. The Machine Scare
Chapter IV. The Strike—An Invention for Making Crowds Think
Chapter V. The Crowd-Man—An Invention for Making Crowds See
Chapter VI. The Imagination of Crowds
Chapter VII. Imagination About the Unseen
Chapter VIII. The Crowd's Imagination About the Future
Chapter IX. The Crowd's Imagination About People
Chapter X. A Democratic Theory of Human Nature
Chapter XI. Doing as One Would Wish One Had Done in Twenty
Years
Chapter XII. New Kinds and New Sizes of Men
Book Two. Letting the Crowds Be Good
Chapter I. Speaking as One of the Crowd
Chapter II. Is It Wrong for Good People to be Efficient?
Chapter III. Is It Wrong for Good People to be Interesting?
Chapter IV. Prospects of the Liar
Chapter V. Prospects of the Bully
Chapter VI. Goodness as a Crowd-Process
Chapter VII. Thoughts on Being Improved by Other People
Chapter VIII. Making Goodness Hurry
Chapter IX. Touching the Imagination of Crowds
Chapter X. The Stupendous, the Unusual, the Monotonous, and the
Successful
Chapter XI. The Successful
Chapter XII. The Necks of the Wicked
Chapter XIII. Is It Wrong for Good People to be Successful?
Chapter XIV. Is It Second Rate for Good People to be Successful?
Chapter XV. The Successful Temperament
Chapter XVI. The Men Ahead Pull
Chapter XVII. The Crowds Push
Chapter XVIII. The Man Who Says How, Says How
Chapter XIX. And the Machine Starts
Book Three. Letting the Crowd be Beautiful
Part One. Wistful Millionaires
Chapter I. Mr. Carnegie Speaks Up
Chapter II. Mr. Carnegie Tries to Make People Read
Chapter III. Mr. Nobel Tries to Make People Write
Chapter IV. Paper Books, Marble Pillars, and Wooden Boys
Chapter V. The Humdrum Factory and the Tumpty-tum Theatre
Part Two. Iron Machines
Chapter I. Steeples and Chimneys
Chapter II. Bells and Wheels
Chapter III. Dew and Engines
Chapter IV. Dead as a Door Nail!
Chapter V. An Oxford Man and an Inch of Iron
Chapter VI. The Machines' Machines
Chapter VII. The Men's Machines
Chapter VIII. The Basement of the World
Chapter IX. The Ground Floor Folks
Chapter X. The Machine-Trainers
Chapter XI. Machines, Crowds, and Artists
Part Three. People-Machines
Chapter I. Now!
Chapter II. Committees and Committees
Chapter III. The Inconvenience of Being Human
Chapter IV. Letting the Crowd Have People in It
Book Four. Crowds and Heroes
Chapter I. The Socialist and the Hero
Chapter II. The Crowd and the Hero
Chapter III. The Crowd and the Average Person
Chapter IV. The Crowd and Pierpont Morgan
Chapter V. The Crowd and Tom Mann
Chapter VI. An Opening for the Next Pierpont Morgan
Chapter VII. An Opening for the Next Tom Mann
Chapter VIII. The Men Who Look
Chapter IX. Rules for Telling a Hero—When One Sees One
Chapter X. Who is Afraid?
Chapter XI. The Technique of Courage
Chapter XII. The Men Who Want Things
Chapter XIII. Men Who Get Things
Chapter XIV. Sources of Courage for Others—Toleration
Chapter XV. Conversion
Chapter XVI. Exception
Chapter XVII. Invention
Chapter XVIII. The Man Who Pulls the World Together
Chapter XIX. The Man Who Stands By
Chapter XX. The Strike of the Saviours
Chapter XXI. The League of the Men Who are Not Afraid
Book Five. Good News and Hard Work
Part One. News and Labour
Part Two. News and Money
Part Three. News and Government
Chapter I. Oxford Street and the House of Commons
Chapter II. Oxford Street Hums. The House Hems
Chapter III. President Wilson and Moses
Chapter IV. The President Says Yes and No
Chapter V. The President Says "Look!"
Chapter VI. The People Say "Who are You?"
Chapter VII. The People Say "Who are We?"
Chapter VIII. News About Us to the President
Chapter IX. News-Men
Chapter X. American Temperament and Government
Chapter XI. News-Books
Chapter XII. News-Books II
Chapter XIII. News-Papers
Chapter XIV. News-Machines
Chapter XV. News-Crowds
Chapter XVI. Crowd-Men
Epilogue
Book One.
Crowds and Machines
Table of Contents
TO CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS
"A battered, wrecked old man
Thrown on this savage shore far, far from home,
Pent by the sea and dark rebellious brows twelve dreary months
... The end I know not, it is all in Thee,
Or small or great I know not—haply what broad fields, what lands!...
And these things I see suddenly, what mean they
As if some miracle, some hand divine unsealed my eyes,
Shadowy vast shapes smile through the air and sky,
And on the distant waves sail countless ships,
And anthems in new tongues I hear saluting me."
Chapter I.
Where are We Going?
Table of Contents
The best picture I know of my religion is Ludgate Hill as one sees it going
down the foot of Fleet Street. It would seem to many perhaps like a rather
strange half-heathen altar, but it has in it the three things with which I
worship most my Maker in this present world—the three things which it
would be the breath of religion to me to offer to a God together—
Cathedrals, Crowds, and Machines.
With the railway bridge reaching over, all the little still locomotives in
the din whispering across the street; with the wide black crowd streaming
up and streaming down, and the big, faraway, other-worldly church above, I
am strangely glad. It is like having a picture of one's whole world taken up
deftly, and done in miniature and hung up for one against the sky—the
white steam which is the breath of modern life, the vast hurrying of our
feet, and that Great Finger pointing toward heaven day and night for us
all....
I never tire of walking out a moment from my nook in Clifford's Inn and
stealing a glimpse and coming back to my fireplace. I sit still a moment
before going to work and look in the flames and think. The great roar
outside the Court gathers it all up—that huge, boundless, tiny, summed-up
world out there; flings it faintly against my quiet windows while I sit and
think.
And when one thinks of it a minute, it sends one half-fearfully, half-
triumphantly back to one's work—the very thought of it. The Crowd
hurrying, the Crowd's flurrying Machines, and the Crowd's God, send one
back to one's work!
In the afternoon I go out again, slip my way through the crowds along
the Strand, toward Charing Cross.
I never tire of watching the drays, the horses, the streaming taxis, all
these little, fearful, gliding crowds of men and women, when a little space
of street is left, flowing swiftly, flowing like globules, like mercury,
between the cabs.
But most of all I like looking up at that vast second story of the street,
coming in over one like waves, like seas—all these happy, curious tops of
'buses; these dear, funny, way-up people on benches; these world-
worshippers, sight-worshippers, and Americans—all these little scurrying
congregations, hundreds of them, rolling past.
I sit on the front seat of a horse 'bus elbow to elbow with the driver,
staring down over the brink of the abyss upon ears and necks—that low,
distant space where the horses look so tiny and so ineffectual and so gone-
by below.
The street is the true path of the spirit. To walk through it, or roll or
swing on top of a 'bus through it—the miles of faces, all these tottering,
toddling, swinging miles of legs and stomachs; and on all sides of you, and
in the windows and along the walks, the things they wear, and the things
they eat, and the things they pour down their little throats, and the things
they pray to and curse and worship and swindle in! It is like being out in the
middle of a great ocean of living, or like climbing up some great mountain-
height of people, their abysses and their clouds about them, their precipices
and jungles and heavens, the great high roads of their souls reaching off.... I
can never say why, but so strange is it, so full of awe is it, and of splendour
and pity, that there are times when, rolling and swinging along on top of a
'bus, with all this strange, fearful joy of life about me, within me ... it is as if
on top of my 'bus I had been far away in some infinite place, and had felt
Heaven and Hell sweep past.
One of the first things that strikes an American when he slips over from
New York, and finds himself, almost before he had thought of it—walking
down the Strand, suddenly, instead of Broadway, is the way things—
thousands of things at once; begin happening to him.
Of course, with all the things that are happening to him—the 'buses, the
taxis, the Wren steeples, the great streams of new sights in the streets, the
things that happen to his eyes and to his ears, to his feet and his hands, and
to his body lunging through the ground and swimming up in space on top of
a 'bus through this huge, glorious, yellow mist of people ... there are all the
things besides that begin happening to his mind.
In New York, of course, he rushes along through the city, in a kind of
tunnel of his own thoughts, of his own affairs, and drives on to his point,
and New York does not—at least it does not very often—make things
happen to his mind. He is not in London five minutes before he begins to
notice how London does his thinking for him. The streets of the city set him
to thinking, mile after mile, miles of comparing, miles of expecting.
And above the streets that he walks through and drives through he finds
in London another complete set of streets that interest him: the greater,
silenter streets of England—the streets of people's thoughts. And he reads
the great newspapers, those huge highways on which the English people are
really going somewhere.... "Where are they going?" He goes through the
editorials, he stumbles through the news, "Where are the English people
going?"
An American thinks of the English people in the third person—at first, of
course.
After three days or so, he begins, half-unconsciously, slipping over
every now and then into what seems to be a vague, loose first person plural.
Then the first person plural grows.
He finds at last that his thinking has settled down into a kind of happy,
easy-going, international, editorial "We." New York and London, Chicago
and Sheffield, go drifting together through his thoughts, and even Paris,
glimmering faintly over there, and a dim round world, and he asks, as the
people of a world stream by, "Where are WE going?"
Thus it is that London, looming, teeming, world-suggesting, gets its grip
upon a man, a fresh American, and stretches him, stretches him before his
own eyes, makes him cosmopolitan, does his thinking for him.
There was a great sea to still his soul and lay down upon his spirit that big,
quiet roundness of the earth.
Nothing is quite the same after that wide strip of sea—sleeping out there
alone night by night—the gentle round earth sloping away down from under
one on both sides, in the midst of space.... Then, suddenly, almost before
one knows, that quiet Space still lingering round one, perhaps one finds
oneself thrust up out of the ground in the night into that big yellow roar of
Trafalgar Square.
And here are the swift sudden crowds of people, one's own fellow-men
hurrying past. One looks into the faces of the people hurrying past: "Where
are we going?" One looks at the stars: "WHERE ARE WE GOING?"
That night, when I was thrust up out of the ground and stood dazed in the
Square, I was told in a minute that this London where I was was a besieged
and conquered city. Some men had risen up in a day and said to London:
"No one shall go in. No one shall go out."
I was in the great proud city at last, the capital of the world, her big,
new, self-assured inventions all about her, all around her, and soldiers
camping out with her locomotives!
With her long trains for endless belts of people going in and coming out,
with her air-brakes, electric lights, and motor-cars and aerial mails, it
seemed passing strange to be told that her great stations were all choked up
with a queer, funny, old, gone-by, clanky piece of machinery, an invention
for making people good, like soldiers!
And I stood in the middle of the roar of Trafalgar Square and asked, as
all England was asking that night: "Where are we going?"
And I looked in the faces of the people hurrying past.
And nobody knew.
And the next day I went through the silenter streets of the city, the great
crowded dailies where all the world troops through, and then the more quiet
weeklies, then the monthlies, more dignified and like private parks; and the
quarterlies, too, thoughtful, high-minded, a little absent, now and then a
footfall passing through.
And I found them all full of the same strange questioning: "Where are
we going?"
And nobody knew.
It was the same questioning I had just left in New York, going up all
about me, out of the skyscrapers.
New York did not know.
Now London did not know.
And after I had tried the journals and the magazines, I thought of books.
I could not but look about—how could I do otherwise than look about?
—a lonely American walking at last past all these nobly haunted doorways
and windows—for your idealists or interpreters, your men who bring in the
sea upon your streets and the mountains on your roof-tops; who still see the
wide, still reaches of the souls of men beyond the faint and tiny roar of
London.
I could not but look for your men of imagination, your poets; for the
men who build the dreams and shape the destinies of nations because they
mould their thoughts.
I do not like to say it. How shall an American, coming to you out of his
long, flat, literary desert, dare to say it?... Here, where Shakespeare played
mightily, and like a great boy with the world; where Milton, Keats,
Wordsworth, Browning, Shelley, and even Dickens flooded the lives and
refreshed the hearts of the people; here, in these selfsame streets, going past
these same old, gentle, smoky temples where Charles Lamb walked and
loved a world, and laughed at a world, and even made one—lifted over his
London forever into the hearts of men....
I can only say what I saw those first few fresh days: John Galsworthy
out with his camera—his beautiful, sad, foggy camera; Arnold Bennett
stitching and stitching faithfully twenty-four hours a day—big, curious
tapestries of little things; H.G. Wells, with his retorts, his experiments about
him, his pots and kettles of humanity in a great stew of steam, half-hopeful,
half-dismayed, mixing up his great, new, queer messes of human nature;
and (when I could look up again) G.K. Chesterton, divinely swearing,
chanting, gloriously contradicting, rolled lustily through the wide, sunny
spaces of His Own Mind; and Bernard Shaw (all civilization trooping by),
the eternal boy, on the eternal curbstone of the world, threw stones; and the
Bishop of Birmingham preached a fine, helpless sermon....
When a new American, coming from his own big, hurried, formless,
speechless country, finds himself in what he had always supposed to be this
trim, arranged, grown-up, articulate England, and when, thrust up out of the
ground in Trafalgar Square, he finds himself looking at that vast yellow
mist of people, that vast bewilderment of faces, of the poor, of the rich,
coming and going they cannot say where—he naturally thinks at first it
must be because they cannot speak; and when he looks to those who speak
for them, to their writers or interpreters, and when he finds that they are
bewildered, that they are asking the same question over and over that we in
America are asking too, "Where are we going?" he is brought abruptly up,
front to front with the great broadside of modern life. London, his last
resort, is as bewildered as New York; and so, at last, here it is. It has to be
faced now and here, as if it were some great scare-head or billboard on the
world, "WHERE ARE WE GOING?"
The most stupendous feat for the artist or man of imagination in modern
times is to conceive a picture or vision for our Society—our present
machine-civilization—a common expectation for people which will make
them want to live.
If Leonardo were living now, he would probably slight for the time
being his building bridges, and skimp his work on Mona Lisa, and write a
book—an exultant book about common people. He would focus and
express democracy as only the great and true aristocrat or genius or artist
will ever do it. A great society must be expressed as a vision or expectation
before men can see it together, and go to work on it together, and make it a
fact. What makes a society great is that it is full of people who have
something to live for and who know what it is. It is because nobody knows,
now, that our present society is not great. The different kinds of people in it
have not made up their minds what they are for, and some kinds have
particularly failed to make up their minds what the other kinds are for.
We are all making our particular contribution to the common vision, and
some of us are able to say in one way and some in another what this vision
is; but it is going to take a supreme catholic, summing-up individualist, a
great man or artist—a man who is all of us in one—to express for Crowds,
and for all of us together, where we want to go, what we think we are for,
and what kind of a world we want.
This will have to be done first in a book. The modern world is collecting
its thoughts. It is trying to write its bible.
The Bible of the Hebrews (which had to be borrowed by the rest of the
world if they were to have one) is the one great outstanding fact and result
of the Hebrew genius. They did not produce a civilization, but they
produced a book for the rest of the world to make civilizations out of, a
book which has made all other nations the moral passengers of the Hebrews
for two thousand years.
And the whole spirit and aim of this book, the thing about it that made it
great, was that it was the sublimest, most persistent, most colossal,
masterful attempt ever made by men to look forth upon the earth, to see all
the men in it, like spirits hurrying past, and to answer the question, "WHERE
ARE WE GOING?"
I would not have any one suppose that in these present tracings and
outlines of thought I am making an attempt to look upon the world and say
where the people are going, and where they think they are going, and where
they want to go. I have attempted to find out, and put down what might
seem at first sight (at least it did to me) the answer to a very small and
unimportant question—"Where is it that I really want to go myself?" "What
kind of a world is it, all the facts about me being duly considered, I really
want to be in?"
No man living in a world as interesting as this ever writes a book if he
can help it. If Mr. Bernard Shaw or Mr. Chesterton or Mr. Wells had been so
good as to write a book for me in which they had given the answer to my
question, in which they had said more or less authoritatively for me what
kind of a world it is that I want to be in, this book would never have been
written. The book is not put forward as an attempt to arrange a world, or as
a system or a chart, or as a nation-machine, or even as an argument. The
one thing that any one can fairly claim for this book is that one man's life
has been saved with it. It is the record of one man fighting up through story
after story of crowds and of crowds' machines to the great steel and iron
floor on the top of the world, until he had found the manhole in it, and
broken through and caught a breath of air and looked at the light. The book
is merely a life-preserver—that is all; and one man's life-preserver. Perhaps
the man is representative, and perhaps he is not. At all events, here it is.
Anybody else who can use it is welcome to it.
The first and most practical step in getting what one wants in this world is
wanting it. One would think that the next step would be expressing what
one wants. But it almost never is. It generally consists in wanting it still
harder and still harder until one can express it.
This is particularly true when the thing one wants is a new world. Here
are all these other people who have to be asked. And until one wants it hard
enough to say it, to get it outside one's self, possibly make it catching,
nothing happens.
If one were to point out one trait rather than another that makes Bernard
Shaw, for so brilliant a man, so ineffective as a leader, or literary statesman,
or social reformer, it would be his modesty. He has never wanted anything.
If I could have found a book by Bernard Shaw in which Mr. Shaw had
merely said what he wanted himself, it is quite possible this book would not
have been written. Even if Mr. Shaw, without saying what he wanted, had
ever shown in any corner of any book that one man's wanting something in
this world amounted to anything, or could make any one else want it, or
could make any difference in him, or in the world around him, perhaps I
would not have written this book.
Everywhere, as I have looked about me among the bookmen in
America, in England, I have found, not the things that they wanted in their
books, but always these same deadly lists or bleak inventories—these
prairies of things that they did not want.
Now, as a matter of fact, I knew already, with an almost despairing
distinctness, nearly all these things I did not want and it has not helped me
(with all due courtesy and admiration) having John Galsworthy out
photographing them day after day, so that I merely did not want them
harder. And Mr. Wells's measles and children's diseases, too. I knew already
that I did not want them. And Mr. Shaw's entire, heroic, almost noble
collection of things he does not want does not supply me—nor could it
supply any other man with furniture to make a world with—even if it were
not this real, big world, with rain and sunshine and wind and people in it,
and were only that little, wonderful world a man lives within his own heart.
There have been times, and there will be more of them, when I could not
otherwise than speak as the champion of Bernard Shaw; but, after all, what
single piece of furniture is there that George Bernard Shaw, living with his
great attic of not-things all around him, is able to offer to furnish me for me
single, little, warm, lighted room to keep my thoughts in? Nor has he
furnished me with one thing with which I would care to sit down in my
little room and think—looking into the cold, perfect hygienic ashes he has
left upon my hearth. Even if I were a revolutionist, and not a mere, plain
human being, loving life and wanting to live more abundantly, I am bound
to say I do not see what there is in Mr. Galsworthy's photographs, or in Mr.
Wells's rich, bottomless murk of humanity to make a revolution for. And
Mr. Bernard Shaw, with all his bottles of disinfectants and shelves of
sterilized truths, his hard well-being and his glittering comforts, has
presented the vision of a world in which at the very best—even if it all
comes out as he says it will—a man would merely have things without
wanting them, and without wanting anything.
And so it has seemed to me that even if he is quite unimportant, any man to-
day who, in some public place, like a book, shall paint the picture of his
heart's desire, who shall throw up, as upon a screen, where all men may see
them, his most immediate and most pressing ideals, would perform an
important service. If a man's sole interest were to find out what all men in
the world want, the best way to do it would be for him to say quite
definitely, so that we could all compare notes, what he wanted himself.
Speaking for a planet has gone by, but possibly, if a few of us but speak for
ourselves, the planet will talk back, and we shall find out at last what it
really is that it wants.
The thing that many of us want most in the present grayness and din of
the world is some one to play with, or if the word "play" is not quite the
right word, some one with whom we can work with freedom and self-
expressiveness and joy. Nine men out of ten one meets to-day talk with one
as it were with their watches in their hands. The people who are rich one
sees everywhere, being run away with by their motor-cars; and the people
who are poor one sees struggling pitifully and for their very souls, under
great wheels and beneath machines.
Of course, I can only speak for myself. I do not deny that a little while
at a time I can sit by a brook in the woods and be happy; but if, as it
happens, I would rather have other people about me—people who do not
spoil things, I find that the machines about me everywhere have made most
people very strange and pathetic in the woods. They cannot sit by brooks,
many of them; and when they come out to the sky, it looks to them like
some mere, big, blue lead roof up over their lives. Perhaps I am selfish
about it, but I cannot bear to see people looking at the sky in this way....
So, as I have watched my fellow human beings, what I have come to want
most of all in this world is the inspired employer—or what I have called the
inspired millionaire or organizer; the man who can take the machines off
the backs of the people and take the machines out of their wits, and make
the machines free their bodies and serve their souls.
If we ever have the inspired employer, he will have to be made by the
social imagination of the people, by creating the spirit of expectation and
challenge toward the rich among the masses of the people.
I believe that the time has come when the world is to make its last stand
for idealism, great men, and crowds.
I believe that great men can be really great, that they can represent
crowds. I believe that crowds can be really great, that they can know great
men.
The most natural kind of great man for crowds to know first will
probably be a kind of everyday great man or business statesman, the man
who represents all classes, and who proves it in the way he conducts his
business.
I have called this man the Crowdman.
I do not say that I have met precisely the type of inspired millionaire I
have in mind, but I have known scores of men who have reminded me of
him and of what he is going to be, and I am prepared to say that in spirit, or
latent at least, he is all about me in the world to-day. If it is proved to me
that no such man exists, I am here to say there will be one. If it is proved to
me that there cannot be one, I will make one. If it is proved to me that by
lifting up Desire in the faces of young men and of boys, and in the faces of
true fathers and young mothers, and by ringing up my challenge on the
great doors of the schools, I cannot make one, then I will invoke the men
that shall write the books, that shall sing the songs that shall make one! I
say this with all reverence for other men's desires and with all respect for
natural prejudgments. As I have conceived it, the one business of the world
to-day is to find out what we are for and to find out what men in the world
—on the whole—really want. When men know what they want they get it.
Every wrong thing we have to face in modern industrial life is due to men
who know what they want, and who therefore get it, due to the passions and
the dreams of men; and the one single way in which these wrong things will
ever be overcome is with more passions and with more and mightier dreams
of men.
Nothing is more visionary than trying to run a world without dreams,
especially an economic world. It is because even bad dreams are better in
this world than having no dreams at all that bad people so called are so
largely allowed to run it.
In the final and practical sense, the one factor in economics to be
reckoned with is Desire.
The next move in economics is going to be the statement of a shrewd,
dogged, realizable ideal. It is only ideals that have aroused the wrong
passions, and it is only ideals that will arouse the right ones.
It will have to be, I imagine, when it comes, not a mere statement of
principles, an analysis, or a criticism, but a moving-picture, a portrait of the
human race, that shall reveal man's heart to himself. What we want is a vast
white canvas, spread, as it were, over the end of the world, before which we
shall all sit together, the audience of the nations, of the poor, of the rich, as
in some still, thoughtful place—all of us together; and then we will throw
up before us on the vast white screen in the dark the vivid picture of our
vast desires, flame up upon it the hopes, the passions of human lives, and
the grim, silent wills of men. "What do we want?" "Where are we going?"
In place of the literature of criticism we have come now to the literature
of Desire.
This literature will have to come slowly, and I have come to believe that
the first book, when it comes, will be perhaps a book that does not prove
anything, a book that is a mere cry, a prayer, or challenge; the story of what
one man with these streetfuls of the faces of men and the faces of women
pouring their dullness and pouring their weariness over him, has desired,
and of what, God helping him, he will have.
There is a certain sense in which merely praying to God has gone by. In
the present desperate crisis of a world plunging on in the dark to a
catastrophe or a glory that we cannot guess, it is a time for men to pray a
prayer, a standing-up prayer, to one another.
I believe that it is going to be this huge gathering-in of public desire,
this imperious challenge of what men want, this standing-up prayer of men
to one another, which alone shall make men go forth with faith and singing
once more into the battle of life. Sometimes it has seemed to me I have
already heard it—this song of men's desires about me—faintly. But I have
seen that the time is at hand when it shall come as a vast chorus of cities, of
fields, of men's voices, filling the dome of the world—a chorus in the glory
and the shame of which no millionaire who merely wants to make money,
no artist who is not expressing the souls and freeing the bodies of men, no
statesman who is not gathering up the desires of crowds, and going daily
through the world hewing out the will of the people, shall dare to live.
But while this is the vision of my belief, I would not have any one suppose
that I am the bearer of easy and gracious tidings.
It is rather of a great daily adventure one has with the world.
There have been times when it seemed as if it had to begin all over
again every morning.
Day by day I walk down Fleet Street toward Ludgate Hill.
I look once more every morning at that great picture of any religion; I
look at the quiet, soaring, hopeful dome—that little touch of singing or
praying that men have lifted up against heaven. "Will the Dome bring the
Man to me?"
I look up at the machines, strange and eager, hurrying across the bridge.
"Will the Machines bring the Man to me?"
I look in the faces of the crowd hurrying past. "Will the Crowd bring the
Man to me?"
With the picture of my religion—or perhaps three religions or three
stories of religion—I walk on and on through the crowd, past the railway,
past the Cathedral, past the Mansion House, and over the Tower Bridge. I
walk fast and eagerly and blindly, as though a man would walk away from
the world.
Suddenly I find myself, throngs of voices all about me, standing half-
unconsciously by a high iron fence in Bermondsey watching that smooth
asphalt playground where one sees the very dead (for once) crowded by the
living—pushed over to the edges—their gravestones tilted calmly up
against the walls. I stand and look through the pickets and watch the
children run and shout—the little funny, mockingly dressed, frowzily
frumpily happy children, the stored-up sunshine of a thousand years all
shining faintly out through the dirt, out through the generations in their little
faces—"Will the Man come to me out of these?"
The tombstones lean against the wall and the children run and shout. As
I watch them with my hopes and fears and the tombstones tilted against the
walls—as I peer through the railings at the children, I face my three
religions. What will the three religions do with the children? What will the
children do with the three religions?
And now I will tell the truth. I will not cheat nor run away as sometimes
I seem to have tried to do for years. I will no longer let myself be tricked by
the mere glamour and bigness of our modern life nor swooned into good-
will by the roll and liturgy of revolution, "of the people," "for the people,"
"by the people," nor will I be longer awed by those huge phrase-idols,
constitutions, routines, that have roared around me "Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity"—those imperious, thoughtless, stupid tra-la-las of the People.
Do the People see truth? Can the People see truth? Can all the crowd, and
can all the machines, and all the cathedrals piled up together produce the
Man, the Crowd-man or great man who sees truth?
And so with my three religions, I have three fears, one for each of them.
There is the Machine fear, lest the crowd should be overswept by its
machines and become like them; and the Crowd fear, lest the crowd should
overlook its mighty innumerable and personal need of great men; and there
is also the daily fear for the Church, lest the Church should not understand
crowds and machines and grapple with crowds and machines, interpret
them and glory in them and appropriate them for her own use and for God's
—lest the Church should turn away from the crowds and the machines and
graciously and idly bow down to Herself.
And now I am going to try to express these three fears that go with the
three religions as well as I can, so that I can turn on them and face them
and, God helping me, look them out of countenance.
Chapter II.
The Crowd Scare
Table of Contents
Time was when a man was born upon this planet in a somewhat lonely
fashion. A few human beings out of all infinity stood by to care for him. He
was brought up with hills and stars and a neighbour or so, until he grew to
man's estate. He climbed at last over the farthest hill, and there, on the rim
of things, standing on the boundary line of sky and earth that had always
been the edge of life to him before, he looked forth upon the freedom of the
world, and said in his soul, "What shall I be in this world I see, and whither
shall I go in it?" And the sky and the earth and the rivers and the seas and
the nights and the days beckoned to him, and the voices of life rose around
him, and they all said, "Come!"
On a corner in New York, around a Street Department wagon, not so
very long ago, five thousand men were fighting for shovels, fifty men to a
shovel—a tool for living a little longer.
The problem of living in this modern world is the problem of finding
room in it. The crowd principle is so universally at work through modern
life that the geography of the world has been changed to conform to it. We
live in crowds. We get our living in crowds. We are amused in herds.
Civilization is a list of cities. Cities are the huge central dynamos of all
being. The power of a man can be measured to-day by the mile, the number
of miles between him and the city; that is, between him and what the city
stands for—the centre of mass.
The crowd principle is the first principle of production. The producer
who can get the most men together and the most dollars together controls
the market; and when he once controls the market, instead of merely getting
the most men and the most dollars, he can get all the men and all the
dollars. Hence the corporation in production.
The crowd principle is the first principle of distribution. The man who
can get the most men to buy a particular thing from him can buy the most of
it, and therefore buy it the cheapest, and therefore get more men to buy
from him; and having bought this particular thing cheaper than all men
could buy it, it is only a step to selling it to all men; and then, having all the
men on one thing and all the dollars on one thing, he is able to buy other
things for nothing, for everybody, and sell them for a little more than
nothing to everybody. Hence the department store—the syndicate of
department stores—the crowd principle in commerce.
The value of a piece of land is the number of footsteps passing by it in
twenty-four hours. The value of a railroad is the number of people near it
who cannot keep still. If there are a great many of these people, the railroad
runs its trains for them. If there are only a few, though they be heroes and
prophets, Dantes, Savonarolas, and George Washingtons, trains shall not be
run for them. The railroad is the characteristic property and symbol of
property in this modern age, and the entire value of a railroad depends upon
its getting control of a crowd—either a crowd that wants to be where some
other crowd is, or a crowd that wants a great many tons of something that
some other crowd has.
When we turn from commerce to philosophy, we find the same
principle running through them both. The main thing in the philosophy of
to-day is the extraordinary emphasis of environment and heredity. A man's
destiny is the way the crowd of his ancestors ballot for his life. His soul—if
he has a soul—is an atom acted upon by a majority of other atoms.
When we turn to religion in its different phases, we find the same
emphasis upon them all—the emphasis of mass, of majority. Not that the
church exists for the masses—no one claims this—but that, such as it is, it
is a mass church. While the promise of Scripture, as a last resort, is often
heard in the church about two or three gathered together in God's name, the
Church is run on the working conviction that unless the minister and the
elders can gather two or three hundred in God's name, He will not pay any
particular attention to them, or, if He does, He will not pay the bills. The
church of our forefathers, founded on personality, is exchanged for the
church of democracy, founded on crowds; and the church of the moment is
the institutional church, in which the standing of the clergyman is
exchanged for the standing of the congregation. The inevitable result, the
crowd clergyman, is seen on every hand amongst us—the agent of an
audience, who, instead of telling an audience what they ought to do, runs
errands for them morning and noon and night. With coddling for majorities
and tact for whims, he carefully picks his way. He does his people as much
good as they will let him, tells them as much truth as they will hear, until he
dies at last, and goes to take his place with Puritan parsons who mastered
majorities, with martyrs who would not live and be mastered by majorities,
and with apostles who managed to make a new world without the help of
majorities at all.
Theology reveals the same tendency. The measuring by numbers is
found in all belief, the same cringing before masses of little facts instead of
conceiving the few immeasurable ones. Helpless individuals mastered by
crowds are bound to believe in a kind of infinitely helpless God. He stands
in the midst of the crowds of His laws and the systems of His worlds: to
those who are not religious, a pale First Cause; and to those who are, a
Great Sentimentality far away in the heavens, who, in a kind of vast weak-
mindedness (a Puritan would say), seems to want everybody to be good and
hopes they will, but does not quite know what to do about it if they are not.
Every age has its typical idea of heaven and its typical idea of hell (in
some of them it would be hard to tell which is which), and every
civilization, has its typical idea of God. A civilization with sovereign men in
it has a sovereign God; and a crowd civilization, reflecting its mood on the
heavens, is inclined to a pleasant, large-minded God, eternally considering
everybody and considering everything, but inefficient withal, a kind of
legislature of Deity, typical of representative institutions at their best and at
their worst.
If we pass from our theology to our social science we come to the most
characteristic result of the crowd principle that the times afford. We are
brought face to face with Socialism, the millennium machine, the Corliss
engine of progress. It were idle to deny to the Socialist that he is right—and
more right, indeed, than most of us, in seeing that there is a great wrong
somewhere; but it would be impossible beyond this point to make any claim
for him, except that he is honestly trying to create in the world a wrong we
do not have as yet, that shall be large enough to swallow the wrong we
have. The term "Socialism" stands for many things, in its present state; but
so far as the average Socialist is concerned, he may be defined as an idealist
who turns to materialism, that is, to mass, to carry his idealism out. The
world having discovered two great ideals in the New Testament, the service
of all men by all other men, and the infinite value of the individual, the
Socialist expects to carry out one of these ideals by destroying the other.
The principle that an infinitely helpful society can be produced by
setting up a row of infinitely helpless individuals is Socialism, as the
average Socialist practises it. The average Socialist is the type of the eager
but effeminate reformer of all ages, because he seeks to gain by machinery
things nine tenths of the value of which to men is in gaining them for
themselves. Socialism is the attempt to invent conveniences for heroes, to
pass a law that will make being a man unnecessary, to do away with sin by
framing a world in which it would be worthless to do right because it would
be impossible to do wrong. It is a philosophy of helplessness, which, even if
it succeeds in helplessly carrying its helplessness out—in doing away with
suffering, for instance—can only do it by bringing to pass a man not alive
enough to be capable of suffering, and putting him in a world where
suffering and joy alike would be a bore to him.
But the main importance of Socialism in this connection lies in the fact
that it does not confine itself to sociology. It has become a complete
philosophy of life, and can be seen penetrating with its subtle satire on
human nature almost everything about us. We have the cash register to
educate our clerks into pure and honest character, and the souls of
conductors can be seen being nurtured, mile after mile, by fare-recorders.
Corporations buy consciences by the gross. They are hung over the door of
every street car. Consciences are worked by pulling a strap. Liverymen have
cyclometres to help customers to tell the truth, and the Australian ballot is
invented to help men to be manly enough to vote the way they think. And
when, in the course of human events, we came to the essentially moral and
spiritual reform of a woman's right to dress in good taste—that is,
appropriately for what she is doing, what did we proceed to do to bring it
about? Conventions were held year after year, and over and over, to get
women to dress as they wanted to; dress reform associations were founded,
syndicates of courage were established all over the land—all in vain; and
finally,—Heaven help us!—how was this great moral and spiritual reform
accomplished? By an invention of two wheels, one in front of the other. It
was brought about by the Pope Manufacturing Company of Hartford,
Connecticut in two short years.
Everything is brought about by manufacturing companies. It is the
socialist spirit; the idea that, if we can only find it, there is some machine
that can surely be invented that will take the place of men: not only of
hands and feet, but of all the old-fashioned and lumbering virtues, courage,
patience, vision, common sense, and religion itself, out of which they are
made.
But we depend upon machinery not only for the things that we want, but
for the brains with which we decide what we want. If a man wants to know
what he thinks, he starts a club; and if he wants to be very sure, he calls a
convention. From the National Undertakers' Association and the
Launderers' League to the Christian Endeavour Tournament and the World's
Congress—the Midway Pleasance of Piety—the Convention strides the
world with vociferousness. The silence that descends from the hills is filled
with its ceaseless din. The smallest hamlet in the land has learned to listen
reverent from afar to the vast insistent roar of It, as the Voice of the Spirit of
the Times.
Every idea we have is run into a constitution. We cannot think without a
chairman. Our whims have secretaries; our fads have by-laws. Literature is
a club. Philosophy is a society. Our reforms are mass meetings. Our culture
is a summer school. We cannot mourn our mighty dead without Carnegie
hall and forty vice-presidents. We remember our poets with trustees, and the
immortality of a genius is watched by a standing committee. Charity is an
Association. Theology is a set of resolutions. Religion is an endeavour to be
numerous and communicative. We awe the impenitent with crowds, convert
the world with boards, and save the lost with delegates; and how Jesus of
Nazareth could have done so great a work without being on a committee is
beyond our ken. What Socrates and Solomon would have come to if they
had only had the advantage of conventions it would be hard to say; but in
these days, when the excursion train is applied to wisdom; when, having
little enough, we try to make it more by pulling it about; when secretaries
urge us, treasurers dun us, programs unfold out of every mail—where is the
man who, guileless-eyed, can look in his brother's face; can declare upon
his honour that he has never been a delegate, never belonged to anything,
never been nominated, elected, imposed on, in his life?
Everything convenes, revolves, petitions, adjourns. Nothing stays
adjourned. We have reports that think for us, committees that do right for
us, and platforms that spread their wooden lengths over all the things we
love, until there is hardly an inch of the dear old earth to stand on, where,
fresh and sweet and from day to day, we can live our lives ourselves, pick
the flowers, look at the stars, guess at God, garner our grain, and die. Every
new and fresh human being that comes upon the earth is manufactured into
a coward or crowded into a machine as soon as we get at him. We have
already come to the point where we do not expect to interest anybody in
anything without a constitution. And the Eugenic Society is busy now on
by-laws for falling in love.
What this means with regard to the typical modern man is, not that he
does not think, but that it takes ten thousand men to make him think. He has
a crowd soul, a crowd creed. Charged with convictions, galvanized from
one convention to another, he contrives to live, and with a sense of
multitude, applause, and cheers he warms his thoughts. When they have
been warmed enough he exhorts, dictates, goes hither and thither on the
crutch of the crowd, and places his crutch on the world, and pries on it, if
perchance it may be stirred to something. To the bigotry of the man who
knows because he speaks for himself has been added a new bigotry on the
earth—the bigotry of the man who speaks for the nation; who, with a more
colossal prejudice than he had before, returns from a mass meeting of
himself, and, with the effrontery that only a crowd can give, backs his
opinions with forty states, and walks the streets of his native town in the
uniform of all humanity. This is a kind of fool that has never been possible
until these latter days. Only a very great many people, all of them working
on him at once, and all of them watching every one else working at once,
can produce this kind.
Indeed, the crowd habit has become so strong upon us, has so mastered
the mood of the hour, that even you and I, gentle reader, have found
ourselves for one brief moment, perhaps, in a certain sheepish feeling at
being caught in a small audience. Being caught in a small audience at a
lecture is no insignificant experience. You will see people looking furtively
about, counting one another. You will make comparisons. You will recall
the self-congratulatory air of the last large audience you had the honour to
belong to, sitting in the same seats, buzzing confidently to itself before the
lecture began. The hush of disappointment in a small audience all alone
with itself, the mutual shame of it, the chill in it, that spreads softly through
the room, every identical shiver of which the lecturer is hired to warm
through—all these are signs of the times. People look at the empty chairs as
if every modest, unassuming chair there were some great personality saying
to each and all of us: "Why are you here? Did you not make a mistake? Are
you not ashamed to be a party to—to—as small a crowd as this?" Thus do
we sit, poor mortals, doing obeisance to Empty Chairs—we who are to be
lectured to—until the poor lecturer who is to lecture to us comes in, and the
struggle with the Chairs begins.
When we turn to education as it stands to-day, the same self-satisfied,
inflexible smile of the crowd is upon it all. We see little but the massing of
machinery, the crowding together of numbers of teachers and numbers of
courses and numbers of students, and the practical total submergence of
personality, except by accident, in all educated life.
The infinite value of the individual, the innumerable consequences of
one single great teaching man, penetrating every pupil who knows him,
becoming a part of the universe, a part of the fibre of thought and existence
to every pupil who knows him—this is a thing that belongs to the past and
to the inevitable future. With all our great institutions, the crowds of men
who teach in them, the crowds of men who learn in them, we are still
unable to produce out of all the men they graduate enough college
presidents to go around. The fact that at almost any given time there may be
seen, in this American land of ours, half a score of colleges standing and
waiting, wondering if they will ever find a president again, is the climax of
what the universities have failed to do. The university will be justified only
when a man with a university in him, a whole campus in his soul, comes out
of it, to preside over it, and the soul that has room for more than one chair
in it comes out of it to teach in it.
When we turn from education to journalism, the pressure of the crowd
is still more in evidence. To have the largest circulation is to have the most
advertising, and to have the most advertising means to have the most
money, and to have the most money means to be able to buy the most
ability, and to have the most ability means to keep all that one gains and get
more. The degradation of many of our great journals in the last twenty years
is but the inevitable carrying out of the syndicate method in letters—a mass
of contributors, a mass of subscribers, and a mass of advertisers. So long as
it gives itself over to the circulation idea, the worse a newspaper is, the
more logical it is. There may be a certain point where it is bound to stop
some time, because there will not be enough bad people who are bad
enough to go around; but we have not come to it yet, and in the meantime
about everything that can be thought of is being printed to make bad people.
If it be asserted that there are not enough bad people to go around even
now, it may be added that there are plenty of good people to take their
places as fast as they fail to be bad enough, and that the good people who
take the bad papers to find fault with them are the ones who make such
papers possible.
The result of the crowd principle is the inevitable result. Our journals
have fallen off as a matter of course, not only in moral ideals (which
everybody realizes), but in brain force, power of expression, imagination,
and foresight—the things that give distinction and results to utterance and
that make a journal worth while. The editorial page has been practically
abandoned by most journals, because most journals have been abandoned
by their editors: they have become printed counting-rooms. With all their
greatness, their crowds of writers, and masses of readers, and piles of
cablegrams, they are not able to produce the kind of man who is able to say
a thing the kind of way that will make everybody stop and listen to him,
cablegrams and all. Horace Greeley and Samuel Bowles and Charles A.
Dana have passed from the press, and the march of the crowd through the
miles of their columns every day is trampling on their graves. The
newspaper is the mass machine, the crowd thinker. To and fro, from week to
week and from year to year, its flaming headlines sway, now hither and now
thither, where the greatest numbers go, or the best guess of where they are
going to go; and Personality, creative, triumphant, masterful, imperious
Personality—is it not at an end? It were a dazzling sight, perhaps, to gaze at
night upon a huge building, thinking with telegraph under the wide sky
around the world, the hurrying of its hundred pens upon the desks, and the
trembling of its floors with the mighty coming of a Day out of the grip of
the press; but even this huge bewildering pile of power, this aggregation,
this corporation of forces, machines of souls, glittering down the Night—
does any one suppose It stands by Itself, that It is its own master, that It can
do its own will in the world? In all its splendour It stands, weaving the
thoughts of the world in the dark; but that very night, that very moment, It
lies in the power of a little ticking-thing behind its doors. It belongs to that
legislature of information and telegraph, that owner of what happens in a
day, called the Associated Press.
If the One who called Himself a man and a God had not been born in a
crowd, if he had not loved and grappled with it, and been crucified and
worshipped by it, He might have been a Redeemer for the silent, stately,
ancient world that was before He came, but He would have failed to be a
Redeemer for this modern world—a world where the main inspiration and
the main discouragement is the crowd, where every great problem and
every great hope is one that deals with crowds. It is a world where, from the
first day a man looks forth to move, he finds his feet and hands held by
crowds. The sun rises over crowds for him, and sets over crowds; and
having presumed to be born, when he presumes to die at last, in a crowd of
graves he is left not even alone with God. Ten human lives deep they have
them—the graves in Paris; and whether men live their lives piled upon
other men's lives, in blocks in cities or in the apparent loneliness of town or
country what they shall do or shall not do, or shall have or shall not have—
is it not determined by crowds, by the movement of crowds? The farmer is
lonely enough, one would say, as he rests by his fire in the plains, his barns
bursting with wheat; but the murmur of the telegraph almost any moment is
the voice of the crowd to him, thousands of miles away, shouting in the
Stock Exchange: "You shall not sell your wheat! Let it lie! Let it rot in your
barns!"
And yet, if a man were to go around the earth with a surveyor's chain,
there would seem to be plenty of room for all who are born upon it. The fact
that there are enough square miles of the planet for every human being on it
to have several square miles to himself does not prove that a man can avoid
the crowd—that it is not a crowded world. If what a man could be were
determined by the square mile, it would indeed be a gentle and graceful
earth to live on. But an acre of Nowhere satisfies no one; and how many
square miles does a man want to be a nobody in? He can do it better in a
crowd, where every one else is doing it.
In the ancient world, when a human being found something in the
wrong place and wanted to put it where it belonged, he found himself face
to face with a few men. He found he had to deal with these few men. To-
day, if he wants anything put where it belongs, he finds himself face to face
with a crowd. He finds that he has to deal with a crowd. The world has
telephones and newspapers now, and it has railroads; and if a man proposes
to do a certain thing in it, the telephones tell the few, and the newspapers
tell the crowd, and the crowd gets on to the railroad; and before he rises
from his sleep, behold the crowd in his front yard; and if he can get as far as
his own front gate in the thing he is going for, he must be—either a
statesman? a hero? or a great genius? None of these. Let him be a
corporation—of ideas or of dollars; let him be some complex, solid,
crowded thing, would he do anything for himself, or for anybody else, or
for everybody else, in a world too crowded to tell the truth without breaking
something, or to find room for it, when it is told, without breaking
something.
This is the Crowd's World.
What I have written I have written.
I have been sitting and reading it. It is a mood. But there is an
implacable truth in it, I believe, that must be gotten out and used.
As I have been reading I have looked up. I see the quiet little mountain
through my window standing out there in the sun. It looks around the world
as if nothing had happened; and the bobolinks out in the great meadow are
all flying and singing in the same breath and rowing through the air,
thousands of them, miles of them. They do not stop a minute.
A moment ago while I was writing I heard the Child outside on the
piazza, four years old, going by my window back and forth, listening to the
crunch of her new shoes as if it were the music of the spheres. Why should
not I do as well? I thought. The Child is merely seeing her shoes as they are
with as many senses and as many thoughts and desires at once as she can
muster, and with all her might.
What if I were to see the world like the Child?
Yesterday I went to Robert's Meadow. I saw three small city boys, with
their splendid shining rubber boots and their beautiful bamboo poles. They
were on their way home. They had only the one trout between them, and
that had been fondled, examined, and poked over and bragged about until it
was fairly stiff and brown with those boys—looked as if it had been stolen
out of a dried-herring box. They put it reverently back, when I saw it, into
their big basket. I smiled a little as I walked on and thought how they felt
about it.
Then suddenly it was as if I had forgotten something. I turned and
looked back; saw those three boys—a little retinue to that solitary fish—
trudging down the road in the yellow sun. And I stood there and wanted to
be in it! Then I saw them going round the bend in the road thirty years
away.
I still want to be one of those boys.
And I am going to try. Perhaps, Heaven helping me, I will yet grow up
to them!
I know that the way those three boys felt about the fish—the way they
folded it around with something, the way they made the most of it, is the
way to feel about the world.
I side with the three boys. I am ready to admit that as regards technical
and comparatively unimportant details or as regards perspective on the fish
the boys may not have been right. It is possible that they had not taken a
point of view, measured in inches or volts or foot-pounds, that was right and
could last forever; but I know that the spirit of their point of view was right
—the spirit that hovered around the three boys and around the fish that day
was right and could last forever.
It is the spirit in which the world was made, and the spirit in which new
worlds in all ages, and even before our eyes by Boys and Girls and—God,
are being made.
It is only the boys and the girls (all sizes) who know about worlds. And
it is only boys and girls who are right.
I heard a robin in the apple tree this morning out in the rain singing, "I
believe! I believe!"
At the same time, I am glad that I have known and faced, and that I shall
have to know and face, the Crowd Fear.
I know in some dogged, submerged, and speechless way that it is not a
true fear. And yet I want to move along the sheer edge of it all my life. I
want it. I want all men to have it, and to keep having it, and to keep
conquering it. I have seen that no man who has not felt it, who does not
know this huge numbing, numberless fear before the crowd, and who may
not know it again almost any moment, will ever be able to lead the crowd,
glory in it, die for it, or help it. Nor will any man who has not defied it, and
lifted his soul up naked and alone before it and cried to God, ever interpret
the crowd or express the will of the crowd, or hew out of earth and heaven
what the crowd wants.
We want to help to express and fulfil a crowd civilization, we want to
share the crowd life, to express what people in crowds feel—the great
crowd sensations, excitements, the inspirations and depressions of those
who live and struggle with crowds.
We want to face, and face grimly, implacably, the main facts, the main
emotions men are having to-day. And the main emotion men are having to-
day about our modern world is that it is a crowded world, that in the nature
of the case its civilization is a crowd civilization. Every other important
thing for this present age to know must be worked out from this one. It is
the main thing with which our religion has to deal, the thing our literature is
about, and the thing our arts will be obliged to express. Any man who
makes the attempt to consider or interpret anything either in art or life
without a true understanding of the crowd principle as it is working to-day,
without a due sense of its central place in all that goes on around us, is a
spectator in the blur and bewilderment of this modern world, as helpless in
it, and as childish and superficial in it, as a Greek god at the World's Fair,
gazing out of his still Olympian eyes at the Midway Pleasance.
After the Crowd Fear there comes to most of us the machine fear. Machines
are the huge limbs or tentacles of crowds. As the crowds grow the machines
grow; grasping at the little strip of sky over us, at the little patch of ground
beneath our feet, they swing out before us and beckon daily to us new hells
and new heavens in our eyes.
Chapter III.
The Machine Scare
Table of Contents
I have had occasion nearly every day for the past two weeks to pass by an
ancient churchyard on a great hillside not far from London. Most of the
stones are very old, and seem to have been thoughtfully and reverently,
flake by flake, wrought into their final form by long-vanished hands. As I
stand and watch them, with the yews and cypresses flocking round them, it
is as if in some sort of way they had been surely wrought by the hand of
love, so full are they of grief and of joy, of devotion, of the very singing of
the dead and of those who loved them.
When I walk on a little farther, and come to a small and new addition to
the churchyard, and look about me at the stones, I find myself suddenly in
quite a new company. So far as one could observe, looking at the
gravestones in the new churchyard, the people who died there died rather
thoughtlessly and mechanically, and as if nobody cared very much. Of
course, when one thinks a little further, one knows that this cannot be true,
and that the men and the women who gathered by these glib, trim, capable-
looking modern tombstones were as full of love and tenderness and
reverence before their dead as the others were—but the lines on the stones
give no sign. One never stops to read an epitaph on one of them; one knows
it would not be interesting, or really whisper to one the strange, happy,
human things of another world—even of this world, that make the old
tombstones such good company and so friendly to us. One gives a glance at
the stone and passes on. It was made by machinery, apparently; a machine
might have designed it, a machine might have died and been buried under
it. One looks beyond it at all the others like it—all the glib, competent-
looking white stones. Were the silenced people all machines under them, all
mechanical, all made to a pattern like their stones, like these strangely hard,
brief tombstones standing here at their heads, summing up their lives before
us curtly, heartlessly, on this gentle old hillside?
I wondered.
I looked back to the old eloquent cemetery that almost seemed to be
breathing things, and looked once more at the new.
And as I stood and thought, they seemed to me to be two worlds—one
the world the people all about me are always saying sadly is going by, and
the other—well, the one we will have to have.
As I look off from the hilltop at the great sloping countryside about me,
which stretches miles and miles, with its green fields, and bushy treetops,
its red roofs, its banners of steam from twenty railways, its huge, grim,
furious chimneys, its still, sleepy steeples, I also see two worlds, the same
two worlds over again that I saw in the churchyard, except that they are all
jumbled together—the complacent, capable, cut-out, homeless-looking
houses, the little snuggled-down old ones with their happy trees about them
and trails of cooking smoke. I see the same two worlds standing and facing
each other before me whichever way I turn.
And when I slip out of the churchyard from those two little separate
worlds of the dead, and move slowly down the long bustling village street,
and look into the faces of the living, the same two worlds that were in the
churchyard and on the hills seem to look at me out of the faces of the living
too.
The faces go hurrying past me, worlds apart. Most people, I imagine,
who read these pages must have noticed the people's faces in the streets
nowadays—how they seem to have come out of separate worlds into the
street a moment, and hurry past, and seem to be going back in a moment
more to separate worlds.
There is hardly even a village footway left anywhere to-day where one
cannot see these two worlds, or the spirit of these two worlds, flitting past
one through the streets in people's faces, and nightly before our eyes,
struggling with each other to possess, to swallow away into itself human
souls, to master the fate of man upon the earth.
One of these is the World of the Hand-made; the other is the Machine-
made World.
As day by day I watch these two worlds with all their people in them
flocking past me, I have come to have certain momentary but recurrent
resentments and attractions, unaccountable strong emotions; and when I try
afterward to rationalize my emotions, as a man should, and give an account
of them to myself, and get them ready to use and face my age with, and
make myself strong and fit to live in an age, I find myself with a great task
before me. And yet one must do it; one cannot live in an age strongly and
fitly if one would rather be living in some other age, or if it is an age with
two worlds in it and one cannot make up one's mind which is the world one
wants and settle down quietly and live in it. Then a strange thing happens,
and always happens the moment I begin to try to decide which of the two—
the Hand-made World or the Machine-made World—I will choose. I find
that in an odd, confused, groping, obstinate way I am bound to choose them
both. In spite of all its ugly ways—a kind of vast indifference it has to me,
to everybody, its magnificent heartlessness—I find I have come to take in
the Machine-made World a kind of boundless, half-secret pride and joy, for
a terrible and strange beauty there is in it. And then, too, even if I wanted to
give it up, I could not: neither I nor any man, nor all the world combined,
could unthink to-day a hundred years, fold up a hundred thousand miles of
railway, tuck modern life all neatly up again in a little, old, snug, safe,
lovable Hand-made World. There must be some way out, some connecting
link between the Hand-made and the Machine-made. We have merely lost it
for a moment.
Which way shall we turn? And so at last to the little Thing through
which the whole world whispers to me on my desk, to the mighty railways
that beckon past my door, to the airships that cannot be stilled, and to the
rolling mills that will not be silenced, I turn at last! I turn to the Machines
Themselves. Half-singing and half-cursing, I have faced them. There is
some way in which they can answer and can be made to answer—can be
made to give me and the men about me the kind of world we want. I try to
analyze it and think it out. What is the thing, the real thing in the Hand-
made World, that fills me with pride and joy, and that I cannot and will not
give up? Is not the real thing that is in it something that can be or might be
freed from it, exhaled from it, something that might be in some new form
saved, made an atmosphere or a spirit and passed on? And what is it in the
new Machine-made World which, in spite of the splendid joy, a rough new,
wild religion there is in it, keeps daily filling me as I go past machines with
this contradictory obstinate dread of them? After a time I have made a little
cleared space in my mind, a little breathing room. It has come to me from
thinking that what is beautiful in the Hand-made World perhaps is not these
particular Hand-made things themselves at which I so delight, but the
Hand-made spirit of the men who made them which the men put into the
things. And perhaps what is full of death and fear in the Machine-made
World is not the machines themselves, but the Machine-made spirit in
which the men who run the machines have made the machines work.
Perhaps the Hand-made spirit is pervasive, eternal. Perhaps it can escape
like a spirit, and can live where it will live, and do what it will do, like a
spirit, and possess the body that it wills to possess. Perhaps the Hand-made
spirit is still living around me to-day, and is not only living, but is living in
a more unspeakable, unbounded body than any spirit has ever lived in
before, and is to-day before our eyes, laying its huge iron fingers around our
little earth, and holding the oceans in its hand, and brushing away
mountains with a breath, until we have Man at last playing all night through
the sky, with visions and airships and telescopes. His very words walk on
the air with soft and unseen feet.
It is the Hand-made spirit that creates machines. The machines
themselves are still the mighty children of the men who move and work in
the Hand-made spirit; and the men who glory in them, the men who bring
them forth, who think them out, and who create them, and who do the great
and mighty things with them, are still the Hand-made men.
This leads us up to the question we are all asking ourselves every day.
"How can a machine-made world be run in the spirit of a hand-made
world?" The particular form in which the question has been put, which is
taken from "Inspired Millionaires" is as follows:
"The idea that there is something in a machine simply as a machine
which makes it inherently unspiritual is based upon the experience of
the world; but it is, after all, a rather amateur and juvenile world with
machines as yet. Its ideas are in their first stages, and are based for the
most part upon the world's experience with second-rate men, working
in second-rate factories—men who have been bullied, and could be
bullied, by the machines they worked with into being machines
themselves. No one would think of denying that men who let machines
get the better of them, either in their minds or their bodies, in any walk
of life, grow unspiritual and mechanical. But it does not take a
machine to make a machine out of a man. Anything will do it if the
man will let it. Even the farmer who is out under the great free dome
of heaven, and working in wonder every day of his life, grows like a
clod if he buries his soul alive in the soil. But farming has been tried
many thousands of years, and the other kind of farmer is known by
everybody—the farmer who is master over the soil; who, instead of
becoming an expression of the soil himself, makes the soil express
him. The next thing that is going to happen is that every one is going to
know the other kind of mechanic. It is cheerfully admitted that the kind
of mechanic we largely have now, who allows himself to be a watcher
of a machine, a turner-of-something for forty years, can hardly be
classed as vegetable life. He is not even organic matter except in a very
small part of himself.
"But it is not the mechanical machine which makes the man
unspiritual. It is the mechanical man beside the machine. A master at a
piano (which is a machine) makes it a spiritual thing; and a master at a
printing-press, like William Morris, makes it a free and artistic and
self-expressive thing."
I spent a day a little while ago in walking through a factory. I went past
miles of machines—great glass roofs of sunshine over them—and looked in
the faces of thousands of men. As I went through the machines I kept
looking to and fro between the machines and the men who stood beside
them, and sometimes I came back and looked again at the machines and the
men beside them; and every machine, or nearly every machine, I saw (any
one could see it in that factory) was making a man of somebody. One could
see the spirit of the man who invented the machine, and the spirit of the
man who worked with it, and the spirit of the man who owned it and who
placed it there with the man, all softly, powerfully running together. There
were exceptions, and every now and then one came, of course, upon the
man who seemed to be simply another and somewhat different contrivance
or attachment to his machine—some part that had been left over and
thought of last, and had not been done as well as the others; but the factory,
taken as a whole, from the manager's offices and the great counting-room,
and from the tall chimneys to the dump, seemed to me to have something
fresh and human and unwonted about it. It seemed to be a factory that had a
look, a look of its own. It was like a vast countenance. It had features, an
expression. It had an air—well, one must say it, of course, if one is driven
to it: the factory had a soul, and was humming it. Any one could have seen
why by going into his office and talking a little while with the owner, or by
even not talking to him—by seeing him look up from his desk. After
walking through several miles of his personality, and up and down and
down and up the corridors of his mind, one did not really need to meet him
except as a matter of form and as a finishing touch. One had been visiting
with him all along: to look in his face was merely to sum it up, to see it all,
the whole place, over again in one look. One did not need to be surprised;
one might have known what such a man would be like—that such a factory
could only be conceived and wrought by a man of genius, a kind of lighted-
up man. A man who had put not only skylights in his buildings, but
skylights in his men, would have to have a skylight in himself (a skylight
with a motor attachment, of course).
If one were to try to think in nature or in art of something that would be
like him—well, some kind of transcendental engine, I should say, running
softly, smoothly outdoors in a great sunshine, would have given one a good
idea of him. But, however this may be, it certainly would have been quite
impossible to go through his factory and ever say again that machines do
not and could not have souls, or at least over-souls, and that men who
worked with machines did not and could not have souls as fast as they were
allowed to.
A few days later I went through another factory, and I came out weary
and spent at night, feeling as unreasonable and almost as hateful about
machines, and as discouraged about the people who had to work with them
as John Ruskin did in those first early days when the Factory Chimney first
lifted its long black flag upon our earth, and bullied great cities into
cowards and slaves, and all the great, quiet-hearted nations, and began
making for us—all around us, before our eyes, as though in a kind of jeer at
us, and at our queer, pretty, helpless little religions—the hell we had ceased
to believe in.
The hell is here, and is going to be here apparently as long as may be
necessary for us to see it and believe in it once more. If a hell on our own
premises, shut down hard over our lives here and now, is what is necessary
to make us religious and human once more, if we are reduced to it, and if
having a hard, literal hell—one of our own—is our only way of seeing
things, of fighting our way through to the truth, and of getting once more
decisive, manful, commanding ideas of good and evil, I for one can only be
glad we have Pittsburgs and Sheffields to hurry us along and soon have it
over with.
But while, like Ruskin, any one can look about the machines and see
hell, he can see hell to-day, unlike Ruskin, with heaven lined up close
beside it. The machines have come to have souls. The machines we can see
all about us have taken sides. We can all of us see the machines about us to-
day like vast looms, weaving in and weaving out the fate of the world, the
fate of the churches, the fate of the women and the little children, and the
very fate of God; and everything about us we can see turning at last on what
we are doing with the machines that are about us, and what we are letting
our machines do with us.
It has cleared my mind, and at least helped me to live side by side with
machines better from day to day, to consider what these two souls or spirits
in the machines are, and what they are doing and likely to do. If one knows
them and one sees them, and sees how they are working, it is easier to take
sides and join in and help.
It would seem to me that there are two spirits in machinery—the spirit
of weariness, weakness, of inventing ways of getting out of work; and there
is the spirit in the machines, too, of moving mountains, conquering the sea
and air, of working harder and lifting one's work over to more heroic, to
more splendid and difficult, and almost impossible things. It is these two
spirits that are fighting for the possession and control of our machine
civilization. I watch the machines and the men beside them and see which
side they are on. The labourer who is doing as little work as he dares for his
wages and the capitalist who is giving as little service as he dares for his
money are on the one side (the vast, lazy, mean majority of employers and
employees), and there may be seen standing on the other side against them,
battling for our world, another small but mighty group made up of the
labourer who loves his work more than his wages, and the capitalist who
loves the thing he makes more than the profit. In other words, the fate of
our modern civilization, with all its marvellous machines on it, its art
galleries and its churches, is all hanging to-day on the battle between the
spirit of achievement, the spirit of creating things, and the spirit of
weariness or the spirit of thinking of ways of getting out of things.
It does not take very long to see which one prefers when one considers
the problem of living in one world or the other. If we are to take our choice
between living in a world run by tired men and a world run by inspired
ones, most of us will have little difficulty in deciding which we would
prefer, and which one we are bound to have. I have been moved to come
forward with the idea of inspired employers—or, as I have called it,
"Inspired Millionaires"—because it would seem to me inspired employers
are the very least we can ask for; for certainly if even our employers cannot
be inspired or rested and strong, we cannot expect their overworked
workmen to be. There is no hope for us but to write our books and to live
our lives in such a way as to help put the world in the hands of the Strong,
and to help keep its institutions and customs out of the hands of the
overworked. Overworked mechanical employers and overworked labourers
are the last men to solve the problem of the overworked, except in a small,
tired, mean, resentful, temporary way.
And so, as I look about me and watch the machines and the men who
are working with the machines, or owning them, it is on this principle that I
find myself taking sides. I will not live, if I can help it, in a world that is
conceived and arranged and managed by tired and overworked and
mechanical men. Have I not seen tired, mechanical men, whole generations
of them, vast mobs of them, the men who have let the machines mow down
their souls? The first thing I have come to ask of a man, if he is to be at the
head of a machine—whether it is a machine called a factory, or a machine
called a Government or a city, or a machine called a nation—is, Is he tired?
I have cast my lot once for all—and as it seems to me, too, the lot of the
world—with those men who are rested, with the surplus men, the men who
want to work more not less, who are still and gentle and strong in their
hearts, steady in their imaginations, great men—men who are not driven to
being self-centred or driven to being class-centred, who can be world-
centred and inspired.
When one has made this decision, that one will work for a world in control
of men who are strong, one suddenly is brought face to face with a fact in
our machine civilization which probably is quite new, and which the spirit
of man has never had to face in any age before.
For the first time in the history of the world, machinery has made it
possible for the world to get into the hands of the weak.
The Gun began it—the gun in a coward's hands may side with the weak,
and the machine in the hands of the weak may temporarily give the world a
list or a trend, and leave it leaning on the wrong side.
The Trust, for instance, which is really an extremely valuable invention,
and perhaps, on the whole, the most important machine of modern times
when it is used to defend the rights of the people, is a very different thing
when it is pointed at them. We have to-day, not unnaturally, the spectacle of
perhaps nine people out of ten getting up and saying in chorus all through
the world that Trusts ought to be abolished; and yet it cannot honestly be
said that there is really anything about the trust-machine—any more than
any other machine—that is inherently wicked, or mechanical and heartless.
Our real objection to the trust-machines is not to the machines themselves,
but to the fact that they are, or happen to be (judging each Trust by itself),
in the hands of the weak and of the tired—of men, that is, who have no
spirit, no imagination about people; mechanical-minded men, who, at least
in the past, have taken the easiest and laziest course in business—that of
making all the money they can.
The moment we see the Trusts in the hands of the strong men, the men
who are unwilling to slump back into mere money-making, and who face
daily with hardihood and with joy the feat of weaving into business several
strands of value at once, making things and making money and making men
together, the Trust will become a vast machine of human happiness, lifting
up and pulling on the world for all of us day and night.
If our labouring men to-day are to be got out from under the machines,
we can only bring it to pass by doing everything we can in directors'
meetings or in labor unions or as buyers or as journalists—whatever we
may be—to keep the trust-machines in this world out of the hands of the
tired, weak, and mechanical-minded men.
And the things that have been happening to the trust-machines, or are
about to happen to them, have happened and are beginning to happen before
our eyes to the machines themselves. The machines of flame and iron
wheels and men in monstrous factories which the philosophers and the
poets and the very preachers have doomed our world with are passing
through the same evolution as the trust-machines, and shall be seen at last
through the dim struggle yielding themselves, bending their iron wills to the
same indomitable human spirit, the same slow, stern, implacable will of the
soul of man. They shall be inspired machines.
Now for a long time we have seen (for the most part) the weak and
mechanical-minded employer, the man who takes the line of least resistance
in business, on every hand about us, making his employees mechanical-
minded. The men have not been able to work without machines to work
with, and as they have been obliged to come to him to get the machines, he
has adopted the policy of letting himself fall into the weakest and easiest
way of keeping his men under his own control. He takes the machines the
men have come to him to get, and turns them back against them, points
them at their lives, stops their minds with them, their intelligence and
manhood, the very hope and religion with which they live; and of course,
when men have had machines pointed at them long enough, one sees them
on every hand being mowed down in rows into machines themselves—as
deadly and as hopeless to make a civilization out of, or a nation out of, or to
give votes to, or to have for fathers as machines would be, as iron or leather
or wood.
In the meantime, however, we seem to have been developing—partly by
competition and partly by combination and by experience—employers who
are not mechanical-minded, who have spirit themselves, and who believe in
it and can use it in others; who find ways of adjusting the hours, the wages,
and the conditions of work for the men, so that what is most valuable in
them, their spirit, their imaginations, their hourly good-will, can all be
turned into the business, can all daily be used as the most important part of
the working equipment of the factory. These employers have found (by
believing it long enough to try it) that live men can do better and more
marketable work than dead ones. If the great slow-moving majority of our
modern machine employers were not mechanical-minded, it would not be
necessary to prove to them categorically the little platitude (which even
people who have observed cab-horses know) that the living is more
valuable than the half-dead, and that live men can do better and more
marketable work than half-dead ones.
But, of course, if they are not convinced by imagination or by
arguments or by figures, they may have to be convinced by losing their
business; for the most spirited employers, those who take the more difficult
and creative course of making money and men together, are sure to be the
employers who will get and keep the most spirited men, and are sure to
crowd out of the market in their own special line employers who can only
get and keep mechanical-minded ones.
It would be hard to overstate the importance of the battle now going on
among the trades unions between the spirited labourers and the tired ones,
and among the manufacturers between the inspired employers and the
mechanical-minded ones.
For the time being, at least, it is the inspired employers who have most
power to change the conditions of labour and to free the mechanical-minded
slaves. It is they who are standing to-day on the great strategical ground of
our time. They hold the pass of human life. People cannot expect to be
inspired in crowds. Crowds are too unwieldy and too inconvenient to act
quickly. The people can only concentrate their energies on getting and
demanding inspired employers, on insisting that the men who for eight or
nine hours a day are pouring in with their wages their thoughts, and their
motives, the very hope with which they live, into their lives, shall be the
champions of the people, shall represent them and act for them, as they are
not placed to act for themselves, and with more imagination than they can
yet expect to have for themselves. If our labouring men of to-day are going
to struggle out from under the machines, they can only do it by doing all
that they can in labour unions and in the press and at the polls to keep the
machines in this world out of the hands of tired and mechanical-minded
owners.
But probably the more immediate rescue from the evil or
mechanicalness in machines is not going to come from the employers on
the one hand or the employees on the other, but from having the employees
in the Trades Unions and the employers in the directors' meetings
combining together to keep in subordinate places where they cannot hurt
others all men, whether directors or employees, who do not work harder
than they have to, and who have not the brains to do their work for
something besides money. The men who are like this will of course be
pitied and duly considered, but they will be kept where they will not have
power to control other men, or where by force of position or by mere
majority they will be able to bully other men to work as mechanically as
they do. Workmen who do not want to become machines can only better
conditions by combination with so-called inspired employers—employers
who work harder than they have to, who dote on the great human
difficulties of work, who choose not the easiest but the most perfect way of
doing things, who are never mechanical themselves, and will not let their
men be if they can help it. I have liked to call these employers inspired
millionaires. I would rather have the machine owner or employer a
millionaire, because the more machines an inspired employer can own, the
more he can buy and get away from the uninspired ones, the sooner will the
right of labour and the will of the people be accomplished. When the
machines are in the hands of inspired and strong and spirited men—men of
real competence or genius for business, the machines will be seen on every
hand around us as the engines of war against evil, against slavery, the
whirling weapons of the Spirit.
Even now, in dreams have I stood and watched them—the will of the
people like a flail in their mighty hands—this vast army of machines—go
thundering past, driving the uninspired and mechanical off the face of the
earth.
Chapter IV.
The Strike—An Invention for Making Crowds
Think
Table of Contents
When I was arranging to slip over from New York and get something I very
much wanted in England last spring, I found myself held up suddenly in all
my plans because some men on the docks had decided that there was
something that they wanted too. They decided that I and thousands of other
people in New York would have to wait over on the shores of America until
they got it.
After postponing my plans until things had settled down, I took passage,
and in due time found myself standing on English soil, only to be informed
that, while I might be allowed perhaps at least to stand on English soil, that
was really as much as I could expect. I could not go anywhere because a
number of men on the railways had decided that there was something they
wanted and that I would have to wait till they got it.
I could go down and look at the silent, cold locomotives on the rails,
and I could be as wistful and hopeful as I liked about getting up to London,
but these men had decided that there was something that they wanted and I
must wait.
I could not think of anything I had ever done to these men, and what
had Liverpool and London done to them?
After I was duly settled in London, and had begun to get into its little
ways, and was busily driving about and attending to my business as I had
planned, 6,000 more men suddenly wanted something, brought me up to a
full stop one rainy day, and said that they had decided that if I wanted to
ride I would have to walk, or that I would have to poke dismally about in a
'bus, or worm my way through under the ground. As I understood it, there
was something that they wanted and something that they were going to get;
and while of course in a way, they recognized that there might be something
that I wanted too, I would have to wait till they got theirs.
I could not think of anything I had ever done to them, nor could I see
what the thousands of other good people in London that I saw walking and
puddling about, or watched waiting twenty minutes or so with long,
hopeful, dogged whistles for cabs, had done to them.
A few days more, and my morning paper tells me suddenly of some
more men who wanted something—this time up in Lancashire. They had
decided that they wouldn't let some two or three hundred thousand other
men go to their work until they got it. They hushed cities to have their own
way. Day by day I watched them throwing the silence of the cities in their
employers' faces, closing shops, closing up railroads, telling the world it
must pay more for the clothes on its back, and all because—a certain Mr.
and Mrs. Riley of Accrington, North Lancashire did not like or did not think
that they liked, the North Lancashire Trades Union. (The general idea
seemed to be to have all the others join in, everywhere—fifty-four million
spindles, and four hundred and forty thousand looms—and wait and keep
perfectly still until Mr. and Mrs. Riley could make up their minds.)
And now this present week, morning after morning I take up my paper
and read that 500,000 miners want something. I look in my fire dubiously
day by day. I may have to go home to America in a few weeks to get warm.
Of course it is only fair to say at the outset that this little series of
impressions, or sketches, as one may say, of Civilization as I have seen it
since arriving in England are of such a nature that I need not have come
over to England to observe them. I would be the last to deny that the same
conveniences for being disagreeable and for getting in the way and for
making a general muss of Life can be offered almost any time in my own
hopeful and blundering country.
What more immediately concerns me in these things is that, having
happened, there can be no doubt that they have some valuable and worthy
meaning for me and for other people that I ought to get out of them.
One cannot stand by and see a great civilization like our English-
speaking civilization, with its ocean liners, cathedrals, and aeroplanes,
being undignified and inefficient before one's eyes and even a little
ridiculous, without trying to see if it does not serve some purpose. There
must be something beyond, something further and deeper, something
newborn about it, which shall be worth our while. Strikes seem to be
common people's way of thinking things out. If they had more imagination,
they would know what they were going to think beforehand, without so
much trouble perhaps; but so long as they have not, and so long as it is
really true perhaps that all these millions of levers and wheels and engines
will have to be stopped, so that the rich mechanical-minded people who
own them and the poor mechanical-minded people who work with them can
think better, we will have to be glad at least that they are thinking, and we
will have to hope that they are thinking fast, and will soon have it over with.
In the meantime, while they are thinking, we can think too.
It is never fair to lump people together, and there are always exceptions
and special reasons to consider; but, speaking roughly, it is fair to lay it
down as a general principle that it is apt to be the more common kind of
employers and employees who find it difficult to think, and who need
strikes to think with. When we see 175,000 weavers striking in Lancashire,
and the Trades Unions insisting on the discharge of Non-Union men, and
employers being willing to recognize the Unions but being unwilling to be
controlled by them, most of us find ourselves taking sides very quickly. We
are often amazed to see how quickly we take sides, and what amazes some
of us most is our apparent inconsistency. We find ourselves now on the
Union side and now on the employer side in the dispute between Capital
and Labour. We never know when we take up the morning paper, some of
us, which side will be our next; and very often, if we were suddenly asked
why, on reading quietly about a new dispute in the morning paper, we had
taken promptly one side rather than the other, almost unconsciously, before
we knew it we would not perhaps be able to say at once. The other day I
became a little alarmed at myself at what looked at first like a kind of moral
weakness, and inability to stand still on one side or the other in the contest
between Labour and Capital; and I tried to think my way sternly through,
and decide why it was my mind seemed to waver from one side to the other,
and seemed so inconsistent and inefficient.
It seems to me I have just discovered a certain thread of consistency, as
I look back over many disputes.
As near as I can remember, I find the side that uses force, or that uses
the most force, invariably turns me against it. If, as I read, I find that both
sides are using force, I find myself against both sides. I find myself
wishing, in spite of my dislike of Socialism, that the nation had the power,
when a quarrelsome industry turns to the people in the street and stops them
in what they are doing, and tells the people in the street that they cannot
ride, or that they shall not sleep, or that they cannot eat—when a
quarrelsome industry insists on keeping the whole world up all night
because it has a Stomach Ache, I feel suddenly that the people ought to be
able to take the industry away and put it into such hands that the people in
the streets will be protected; into hands that will make the industry behave
so that it won't have a stomach ache. An industry with a stomach ache
always has it because somebody in it has been over-eating and getting more
than their share, and is incompetent and unfit; and obviously it should have
its freedom, its privilege of selecting its food, taken away from it until it
behaves.
Always allowing for exceptions, we may put it down as a general truth
that, when we find a cause using force or mere advantage of position, it is
because there is incompetence or lack of brains in those who conduct it, and
the cure lies, not in more force, but in more brains. One cannot help being
angered by force, because one knows that it is not only not a remedy, but is
itself the cause of all incompetence and blindness in business. Force merely
heaps the incompetence and blindness up, postpones coöperation, defeats
the mutual interest which is the very substance of business efficiency in a
nation. Force is itself the injury mounting up more and more, which it seeks
to cure.
The most likely way to prevent industrial trouble would seem to be to
have employers and managers and foremen who have a genius for getting
men to trust and believe in them. We are getting smoke-consumers,
computing machines, and the next contrivance is going to be the employer
who has the understanding spirit, and who sees the cash value of human
genius, the value in the market of genius for being fair and getting on with
people. Arbitration boards are at best (as they themselves would say) stupid
and negative things, and though better than nothing, as a rule merely
postpone evil or change symptoms. No one can ever really arbitrate for any
one else either in industry or marriage except for a moment. The trouble lies
deep down inside the people who keep needing arbitration. As long as these
people are still there, and as long as incompetent employers or employees
are there, there is bound to be trouble.
Turning out incompetent employers and incompetent labourers is the
only way. We are getting rid of them as rapidly as possible. All business in
the last resort turns on brains for being human and understanding people.
Business, as people say, is partly business and business is partly economics,
but more than anything else, in modern times, business is psychology.
Success is the science of being believed in. Incompetent employers and
incompetent labourers are already being turned out, and are bound to be
turned out implacably more and more, by the competitive nature of modern
business. Under present conditions, if we have in each industry one single
competent employing firm, with brains for being fair and brains for being
far-sighted, and for being thoughtful of others—in short, with brains for
being believed in—the control of that industry soon falls into their hands.
People who use force instead of brains are second-rate, are out of the spirit
of the times, and are going by. And this seems to be the spirit, too, which is
to govern the more efficient Labour Unions as well as the more efficient
Trusts.
If it were possible to collect the names in England and America of the
men in each industry where brains were being personally believed in, we
would have a list of the leaders of England and America for the next fifty
years. Having a soul in business pays, not because it affords a fine motive
power, but because it affords a practical and conclusive method of driving
the devil out of business. He is being driven out of industry, one industry at
a time, by men who get on better without him; and this is going to go on
until the ability to do this—to crowd out the devil, to get the devil out of
machines and factories, out of the machinery of organization—the power to
keep the devil out of things and out of people, is recognized by everybody
as the greatest, most subtle, most victorious and universal market-value in
the world. The men who can be believed in most will get the most business,
and, what is still more important, the men who can make men believe in
them most will be able to hire the employees who can be believed in most,
and will get a monopoly of the efficiency of the world; and though the men
who can be believed in less may be able to continue for a time to do their
work and go through all their old motions as well as they can, with all their
old lumbering, pathetic machinery of watching each other and suspecting
each other and fighting each other humped up on their backs, they can
never hope to compete with free-moving, honest men, who deal directly and
openly and in a few words for their employees, jobbers, consumers, and the
public, without any vast machinery of suspicion to bother with. It is a most
curious, local, temporary, back-county idea, the idea that, for sheer
industrial economy, for simple cheap conclusive finance, there is anything
on earth in business that will take the place of old-fashioned human
personal prestige—the prestige of the man who has a genius for being
believed in.
In a way, perhaps the recent strike among the London cabmen is an
instance of what is really the essential issue in every strike. The bottom fact
about the taxi chauffeurs, stated simply, was that they did not believe in
their employers. They believed that, if the precise figures were known, their
employers were getting more than their share. On the other hand, the
bottom fact about the employers was that they did not and could not believe
that, if the precise figures were known, the cabmen were not getting more
than their share. They insisted that the cabmen should publish, or make
known, the precise figures of their extras. The cabmen declined to do it, and
it made them look for the moment perhaps as if they were wrong. But were
they necessarily wrong? Was it really true that they had any more reason to
trust their employers than their employers had to trust them? The cabmen
might quite honestly and justly have said to the owners: "What we want is
an honest, impeccable little dividend-recorder fastened on the back of every
owner, as well as on our machines and on us. Then we will publish our
extras."
The determining and important fact of economics in the last analysis
always turns out to be some human fact, some fact about people. It is really
true that just now, in the present half-stage of machine-industry, employers
should nearly all be compelled to go about in this world with fare-recorders
on their backs. Employees too. This would be the logical thing to do; and as
it is impracticable, and as every business must have certain elements of
secrecy in it in order to be competent, the only alternative is to have in
charge men with enough genius for being believed in and for taking
measures to be believed in—to keep employees believing in them, in spite
of secrecy. Under these conditions, it cannot be long before we will see in
every business the men being put forward on both sides who have a genius
for being believed in. Managers and superintendents will be put in office
everywhere who see the cash value, the economy, of the simple, old-
fashioned power in a man of a genius for being believed in; employers with
the power of inspiring more and better work from their workmen; Labour
men with the power of inspiring employers to believe in them, of inspiring
their employers to put up money, stock, or profits on their belief—on the
belief that workmen are capable of the highest qualities of manhood: hard
work, loyalty, persistence, and faith toward a common end. I have preferred
to have this inspired employer a millionaire, because the more capital he
has the more men he can employ, and the more rapidly the other kind of
millionaire, the blind, old-fashioned butter of Labour, will be driven out of
business.
Little can be done with one book, but at this special juncture, this
psychological moment for copartnership and the spirit of copartnership,
when all the world is touched to the quick by great strikes—at a time when
one can sit still and almost hear the nations think—there are some of us
who hope that the case we are trying to make out for copartnership between
Capital and Labour will be of use to those who are trying to do things, and
who for the moment find themselves foiled at every point by men who have
given up believing in human nature. We wish to put ourselves on record,
and to say that we do believe in human nature, and that we believe not only
that the inspired employer is going to be evolved by the Crowd, but that the
Crowd is going to recognize him and is going to take sides with him, and
that the Crowd is going to justify him, make him succeed, is going to make
his success its own success. In other words, we believe in heroes, crowds,
and goodness; in men of heroic gifts—who are fit and meet to interpret the
wills and desires of crowds—who are great men or Crowd-Men, crowds in
spirit themselves.
I would like to try to express the type of modern man who, as it seems
to me, is about to prove himself the real ruler of our modern world, the
silent master of what the crowds shall think. It has seemed to me that it is
going to be a man of a marked type, and of a particular temperament, to
whom we will have to look in our new and crowded world for the crowd-
interpreter, or man who touches the imagination of crowds.
As our whole labour problem to-day turns on our being able to touch the
imagination of Crowds, it may not be uninteresting in the next chapter to
consider what a man who can do this will probably be like and the spirit in
which he will do it.
Chapter V.
The Crowd-Man—An Invention for Making
Crowds See
Table of Contents
When Wilbur Wright flew around the Statue of Liberty in New York the
other day, his doing it was a big event; but a still bigger event, as it seems to
some of us, was the way he felt about New York when he did it. All New
York could not make him show off. Hundreds of thousands of people on
roofs could look up at the sky over New York, for him to go by, all that they
liked. He slipped down to Washington without saying anything, on the 3:25
train, to attend to flying as part of the serious business of the world.
Why fly around a little town like New York, or show your bright wings
in the light, or circle the Statue of Liberty for fun, when you are
reconstructing civilization, and binding a whole planet together, and
wrapping the heavens close down around the earth, and making railroads
everywhere out of the air? New York is always a little superficial and funny
about itself. All it needs to do, it seems to think, is to snap its fingers at a
man of genius anywhere on this broad world, whisper to him pleasantly,
and he will trot promptly up, of course, and do his little turn for it.
But not Wilbur Wright. Wilbur Wright would not give two million
people an encore, or even come back to bow. As one looked over from
Mount Tom one could see all New York black and solid on the tops of its
roofs and houses looking up into a great hole of air for him, and Wilbur
Wright slipping quietly off down to Washington and leaving them there, a
whole great city under the sky, with its heads up!
A little experience like this has been what New York has needed for a
long time. It takes a scientist to do these things. I wish there were some poet
who would do as well. Even a prophet up above New York—or seer of men
and of years—glinting his wings in the light, the New York Sun and the
World and the Times down below, all their opera-glasses trained on him, and
all those little funny reporters running helplessly about, all the people
pouring out from Doctor Parkhurst's church to look up.... It would be
something.
Probably there are very few capitals in the world—Paris, Berlin, or
London—that would not be profoundly stirred and possibly much improved
by having some man suddenly appear up over them, who would be so
interested in what he was doing that he would forget to notice whether
anybody was looking—who would be capable of slipping off quietly and
leaving an entire city with its heads up, and going on and attending to
business.
There have been times when we would have been relieved, some of us,
if the North Pole could have been discovered in this way and without large
audiences tagging. There are some of us who will never cease to regret as
long as we live that the North Pole could not have waited a little. We would
rather have had Wilbur Wright discover it. One can imagine how he would
do it: fly gracefully up to it all by himself, and discover it some pleasant
evening, and have it over with, and slip back on his soft wings in the night,
and not say anything about it. It is this Wilbur Wright spirit that I would like
to dwell on in these pages. It seems to me it is a true modern spirit, the spirit
which alone could make our civilization great, and the spirit which alone
could make crowds great. It was the crowd that spoiled the way the Pole
was discovered—all the millions of people, vast, thoughtless audiences
piling in and making a show of it. Many people in America, all the vast
crowds reading about it, seemed to feel that they were more important than
the Pole; and when Captain Peary came back, vast crowds of these same
people paid as much as five dollars apiece for the privilege of being in the
same room with him. It was quite impossible not to contrast Captain Peary
in his attitude toward the crowd and Wilbur Wright. There seemed to be,
and there will always remain, a certain vulgarity in the way the North Pole
was discovered, and the way the whole world behaved in regard to it, and
the secret seems to have been in Captain Peary's failure to be a Wilbur
Wright. He allowed the Pole to be a Crowd affair. All the while as he went
about the country holding his little exhibits of the tip of the planet we could
not help wishing, many of us who were in the Audience, that this man who
sat there before us, the man who had the Thing in his hand, who had
collected the North Pole, would not notice us, would snub us if need be a
little, and would leave these people, these millions of people, with their
heads up and go quietly on to the South Pole and collect that. It is because
there are thousands of men who understand just how Wilbur Wright felt
when he slipped away the other day in New York and left the entire city
with its heads up that we have every reason to expect that the crowd is to
produce great leaders, and is to become a great crowd, great and humble in
spirit before God, before the stars, and the atoms, and the microbes, and
before Itself. In the meantime, however, we see all about us in the world
countless would-be leaders of the crowd, who would perhaps not quite
understand the way Wilbur Wright felt that day when he slipped away from
New York and left the entire city with its heads up. Most newspaper men—
men who are in the habit of writing for a crowd and regarding a crowd quite
respectfully—will have wondered a little why Wilbur Wright could have let
such a crowd go by. Most actors and theatrical people would have stayed
over a train or so and given one more little performance with all those
wistful people on the roof-tops. There are only a very few clergymen in
England or America to-day who, with a great audience like that and so
many men in it, would ever have thought of slipping off on the 3:25 train in
the way Wilbur Wright did. The ministers and the politicians of all countries
are still wondering a little—if they ever thought of it—how Wright did it.
Most of the other people in the world wonder a little, too, but I imagine that
the great inventors of the world who read about it the next morning did not
wonder. The true scientists, in this country and in Germany and in France,
all understood just how Wilbur Wright felt when he left New York with its
heads up. The great artists of the world, in literature, in painting, and
architecture; the great railroad builders, the city builders, the nation
builders, the great statesmen, the great biologists, and chemists, understood.
James J. Hill, with his face toward the Pacific, understood. Alexander
Graham Bell, out abroad doing the listening and talking and thinking the
thoughts of eighty million people, understood. Marconi, making the ships
whisper across the sea, and William G. McAdoo, shooting a hundred and
seventy thousand people a day through a hole under the Hudson—
understood.
And God, when He made the world. And Columbus when he discovered
America. And Jesus Christ when He was so happy and so preoccupied over
His vision of a new world, over inventing Christianity, that it seemed a very
small and incidental thing to die on the Cross—He understood.
Wilbur Wright's secret was that he had a vision. His vision was that a
human being could be greater and more powerful than the world had ever
believed before.
Just to be there was a great thought, to be allowed to be one of those
admitted, to be present at the first faint beginning, the first still alighting of
the human spirit from the earth upon the sky. Wilbur Wright made the most
ordinary man a genius a minute. He made him wonder softly who he was—
and the people all about him—who were they? and what would they think,
and what would they do next? The first flash of light on the wings was a
thousand years. It was as if almost for a moment he saw at last the whole
earth about him. History, churches, factories on it, slipping out of its cocoon
at last—its little, old, faded, tied-down cocoon, and sailing upon the air—
sailing with him, sailing with the churches, with the factories, and with the
schools, with History, through the Invisible, through the Intangible—out to
the Sun....
Perhaps the reason that New York was a great city a few minutes the other
day when Wilbur Wright was there was that Wilbur Wright had a new
vision in the presence of all those men of something that they could do. He
touched the imagination of men about themselves. They were profoundly
moved because they saw him in their presence inventing a new kind and
new size of human being. He raised the standard of impossibility, and built
an annex on to the planet while they looked; took a great strip off of space
three miles wide and folded it softly on to the planet all the way round
before their eyes. For three miles more—three miles farther up above the
ground—there was a space where human beings would have to stop saying,
"I can't," and "You can't," and "We can't." If people want to say "I can't,"
and "You can't," they will have to say it farther and farther away from this
planet now. Let them try Mars. The modern imagination takes to
impossibilities naturally with Wilbur Wright against the horizon. The thing
we next cannot believe is the next thing to expect.
Nobody would have believed ten years ago that an architect could be
invented who would tell a man that his house would cost him thirty
thousand dollars, and then hand him back two thousand dollars when he had
finished it. But the man had been invented—he invented himself.
He represents the owner, and does as the owner would be done by if he
did it himself—if he had the technical knowledge and the time to do it.
Nobody would have believed a few years ago that a railway president,
when he had occasion to reduce the wages of several thousand employees
10 per cent., would begin by reducing his own salary 30 per cent., and the
salary of all the officials all the way down 15 per cent., or 20 per cent.
Nobody would have believed some time ago that an organizing inventor
would be evolved who would meet his directors and tell them that, if they
would have their work done in their mills in three shifts instead of two, the
men would work so much better that it would not cost the Company more
than 10 per cent. more to offer the better conditions. But such an organizing
inventor has been invented, and has proved his case.
Luther Burbank has made a chestnut tree eighteen months old bear
chestnuts; and it has always taken from ten to twenty-five years to make a
tree furnish its first chestnut before. About the same time that Luther
Burbank had succeeded in doing this with chestnuts a similar type of man,
who was not particularly interested in chestnuts and wanted to do
something with human nature, who believed that human nature could really
be made to work, found a certain staple article that everybody needs every
day in a state of anarchy in the market. The producers were not making
anything on it. The wholesalers dealt in it without a profit, and the retailers
sold it without a profit, and merely because the other things they sold were
worthless without it.
——, who was the leading wholesale dealer and in the best position to
act, pointed out that, if the business was organized and everybody in it
would combine with everybody else and make it a monopoly, the price
could be made lower, and everybody would make money.
Of course this was a platitude.
It was also a platitude that human nature was not good enough, and
could not be trusted to work properly in a monopoly.
—— then proceeded to invent a monopoly—a kind of monopoly in
which human nature could be trusted.
He used a very simple device.
He began by being trusted himself.
Having personally and directly proved that human nature in a monopoly
could be trusted by being trusted himself, all he had to do was to capitalize
his knowledge of human nature, use the enormous market value of the trust
people had in him to gather people about him in the business who had a
good practical business genius for being trusted too and for keeping trusted:
everybody else was shut out.
The letter with which the monopoly was started (after dealing duly with
the technical details of the business) ended like this:
"... the soundest lines of business—viz., fair prices, fair
profits, fair division of profits, fair recognition of service, do
as you would be done by, money back where it is
practicable, one's profit so small as to make competition not
worth while, open dealing, and open books."
He had invented a monopoly which shared its profits with the people,
and which the people trusted. He was a Luther Burbank in money and
people instead of chestnuts. He raised the standard of impossibility in
people, and invented a new way for human nature to work.
Chapter VI.
The Imagination of Crowds
Table of Contents
The modern imagination takes, speaking roughly, three characteristic forms:
1. Imagination about the unseen or intangible—the spiritual—as
especially typified in electricity, in the wireless telegraph, the
aeroplane: a new and extraordinary sense of the invisible and the
unproved as an energy to be used and reckoned with.
2. Imagination about the future—a new and extraordinary sense of what
is going to happen next in the world.
3. Imagination about people. We are not only inventing new machines,
but our new machines have turned upon us and are creating new men.
The telephone changes the structure of the brain. Men live in wider
distances, and think in larger figures, and become eligible to nobler
and wider motives.
Imagination about the unseen is going to give us in an incredible degree
the mastery of the spirit over matter.
Imagination about the future is going to make the next few hundred
years an organic part of every man's life to-day.
The imagination of men about themselves and other people is going to
give us a race of men with new motives; or, to put it differently, it is going
to give us not only new sizes but new kinds of men. People are going to
achieve impossibilities in goodness, and our inventions in human nature are
going to keep up with our other inventions.
Chapter VII.
Imagination About the Unseen
Table of Contents
The most distinctively modern thing that ever happened was when
Benjamin Franklin went out one day and called down lightning from
heaven. Before that, power had always been dug up, or scraped off the
ground. The more power you wanted the more you had to get hold of the
ground and dig for it; and the more solid you were, the more heavy, solid
things you could get, the more you could pull solid, heavy things round in
this world where you wanted them. Franklin turned to the sky, and turned
power on from above, and decided that the real and the solid and the
substantial in this world was to be pulled about by the Invisible.
Copernicus had the same idea, of course, when he fared forth into space,
and discovered the centre of all power to be in the sun. It grieved people a
good deal to find how much more important the sky was than they were,
and their whole little planet with all of them on it. The idea that that big
blue field up there, empty by day and with such crowds of little faint dots in
it all night, was the real thing—the big, final, and important thing—and that
they and their churches and popes and pyramids and nations should just
dance about it for millions of years like a mote in a sunbeam, hurt their
feelings at first. But it did them good. It started them looking Up, and
looking the other way for power.
Very soon afterward Columbus enlarged upon the same idea by starting
the world toward very far things, on the ground; and he bored through the
skylines, a thousand skylines, and spread the nations upon the sea.
Columbus was the typical modern man led by the invisible, the intangible;
and on the great waters somewhere between Spain and New York, between
the old and the new, Columbus discovered the Future Tense, the centrifugal
tense, the tense that sweeps in the unknown, and gathers in, out of space,
out of hope, out of faith, the lives of men. The mere fastened-down stable
things, the mere actual facts, stopped being the world with Columbus, and
the air and the sky began to be swung in, and to be swept through the
thoughts and acts of men and of women.... Then miners, mariners,
explorers, inventors—the impossible steamship, the railway, the impossible
cotton-gin and sewing-machine and reaper, Hoosac tunnels and Atlantic
cables. The impossible became one of the habits of modern life.
Of course the sky and the air and the unknown and the future had been
recognized before, but only a little and in a rather patronizing way. But
when a world has made a great, solid continent by following a horizon line,
it begins to take things just beyond very seriously. And so our Time has
been fulfilled. We have had the stone age; we have had the iron age; and
now we have the sky age, and the sky telegraph, and sky men, and sky
cities. Mountains of stone are built out of men's visions, towers and
skyscrapers swing up out of their wills and up out of their hearts.
Not long ago, as I was coming away from New York in the Springfield
Express, which was running at fifty-five miles an hour, I saw suddenly
some smoke coming up apparently out of a satchel on the floor, belonging
to the man in the chair in front of me. I moved the satchel away, and the
smoke came up through the carpet. I spoke to the Pullman conductor who
was passing through, and in a second the train had stopped, and the great
wild roaring Thing had ceased, and we stood in a long, wide, white silence
in the fields. We got off the car—some of us—to see what had happened,
and to see if there was a hot box on the wheels. We found that the entire
underside of the floor of the car was on fire, and what had happened?
Nothing except a new impossibility; nothing except that a human being had
invented an electrical locomotive so powerful that it was pulling that train
fifty-five miles an hour while the brakes on the car were set—twelve brakes
all grinding twenty miles on those twelve wheels; and the locomotive paid
no more attention to the brakes of that heavy Pullman than it would to a
feather or to a small boy, all the way from New York to Stamford, hanging
on behind. As I came in I looked again at the train—the long dull train that
had been pulled along by the Invisible, by the kingdom of the air and the
sky—the long, dull, heavy Train! And the spirit of the far-off sun was in it!
In Count Zeppelin's new airship the new social spirit has a symbol, and
in the gyroscopic train the inspired millionaire is on a firm foundation. The
power of the new kind and new size of capitalist is his power of keeping an
equilibrium with the people, and the men of real genius in modern affairs
are men who have motor genius and light genius over other men's wills.
They are allied to the X-ray and the airship, and gain their pre-eminence by
their power of forecast and invention—their power of riding upon the
unseen, upon the thoughts of men and the spirit of the time. Even the
painters have caught this spirit. The plein air painters are painting the light,
and the sculptors are carving shadows and haloes, and we have not an art
left which does not lean out into the Invisible. And religion is full of this
spirit and theosophy and Christian Science. The playwrights are touched by
it; and the action, instead of being all on the stage, is thrown out into the
spirit of the audience. The play in a modern theatre is not on the stage but in
the stalls. Maeterlinck, Ibsen, Shaw, merely use the stage as a kind of
magic-lantern or suggestion-centre for the real things that, out behind us in
the dark, are happening in the audience.
Chapter VIII.
The Crowd's Imagination About the Future
Table of Contents
I remember looking over with H.G. Wells one night some time ago a set of
pictures or photographs of the future in America, which he had brought
home with him. They were largely skyscrapers, big bridges, Niagaras, and
things; and I could not help thinking, as I came home that night, how much
more Mr. Wells had of the future of America in his own mind than he could
possibly buy in his photographs. What funny little films they were after all,
how faint and pathetic, how almost tragically dull, those pictures of the
future of my country were! H.G. Wells himself, standing in his own
doorway, was more like America, and more like the future of America, than
the pictures were.
The future in America cannot be pictured. The only place it can be seen
is in people's faces. Go out into the street, in New York, in Chicago, in San
Francisco, in Seattle; look eagerly as you go into the faces of the men who
pass, and you feel hundreds of years—the next hundred years—like a
breath, swept past. America, with all its forty-story buildings, its little Play
Niagaras, its great dumb Rockies, is the unseen country. It can only as yet
be seen in people's eyes. Some days, flowing sublime and silent through our
noisy streets, and through the vast panorama of our towers, I have heard the
footfalls of the unborn, like sunshine around me.
This feeling America gives one in the streets is the real America. The
solidity, the finality, the substantial fact in America, is the daily sense in the
streets of the future. And it has seemed to me that this fact—whether one
observes it in Americans in America, in Americans in England and in other
nations—is what one might call, for lack of a better name, the American
temperament in all peoples is the most outstanding typical and important
fact with which our modern world and our philosophy about the world have
now to reckon. Nothing can be seen as it really is if this amazing pervasive
hourly sense of the future is left out of it.
All power is rapidly coming to be based on news—news about human
nature, and about what is soon to be done by people. This news travels by
express in boxes, by newspapers, by telephone, by word of mouth, and by
wireless telegraph. Most of the wireless news is not only wireless, but it is
in cipher—hence prophets, or men who have great sensitiveness; men
whose souls and bodies are films for the future, platinum plates for the
lights and shadows of events; men who are world-poets, sensitive to the air-
waves and the light-waves of truth, to the faintest vibrations from To-
morrow, or from the next hundred years hovering just ahead. As a matter of
course, it is already coming to be true that the most practical man to-day is
the prophet. In the older days, men used to look back for wisdom, and the
practical man was the man who spoke from experience, and they crucified
the prophet. But to-day, the practical man is the man who can make the best
guess on to-morrow. The cross has gone by; at least, the cross is being
pushed farther along. A prophet in business or politics gets a large salary
now; he is a recognized force. Being a prophet is getting to be almost smug
and respectable.
We live so in the future in our modern life, and our rewards are so great
for men who can live in the future, that a man who can be a ten-year
prophet, or a twenty-five-year prophet, like James J. Hill, is put on a
pedestal, or rather is not wasted on a pedestal, and is made President of a
railroad. He swings the country as if it were his hat. We see great cities
tagging Wilbur Wright, and emperors clinging to the skirts of Count
Zeppelin. We only crucify a prophet now if he is a hundred, or two hundred
or five hundred years ahead. Even then, we would not be apt to crucify; we
would merely not use him much, except the first twenty-five years of him.
The theory is no longer tenable that prophets must be necessarily
crucified. As a matter of history, most prophets have been crucified by
people; but it was not so much because of their prophecy as because their
prophecy did not have any first twenty-five years in it. They were crucified
because of a blank place or hiatus, not necessarily in their own minds, but at
least in other people's. People would have been very glad to have their first
twenty-five years' worth if they could have got it. It is this first twenty-five
years, or joining-on part, which is most important in prophecy, and which
has become our specialty in the Western World. One might say, in a general
way, that the idea of having a first twenty-five years' section in truth for a
prophet is a modern, an almost American, invention. We are
temperamentally a country of the future, and think instinctively in futures;
and perhaps it is not too much to say (considering all the faults that go with
it for which we are criticized) that we have led the way in futures as a
specialty, as a national habit of mind; and though with terrific blunders
perhaps have been really the first people en masse to put being a prophet on
a practical basis—that is, to supply the first twenty-five years' section, or
the next-thing-to-do section to Truth, to put in a kind of coupling between
this world and the next. This is what America is for, perhaps—to put in the
coupling between this world and the next.
In the former days, the strength of a man, or of an estate, or a business,
was its stability. In the new world, instead of stability, we have the idea of
persistence, and power lies not so much in solid brittle foundation quality as
in conductivity. Socially, men can be divided into conductors—men who
connect powers—and non-conductors—men who do not; and power lies in
persistence, in dogged flexibility, adaptableness, and impressionableness.
The set conservative class of people, in three hundred years, are going to be
the dreamers, inventors—those who demonstrate their capacity to dream
true, and who hit shrewdly upon probabilities and trends and futures; and
the power of a man is coming to be the power of observing atmospheres, of
being sensitive to the intangible and the unknown. People are more likely to
be crucified two thousand years from now for wanting to stay as they are.
There used to be the inertia of rest; and now in its place, working
reciprocally in a new astonishing equilibrium, we step up calmly on our
vast moving sidewalk of civilization and swing into the inertia of motion.
The inertia of men, instead of being that of foundations, conventions,
customs, facts, sogginess, and heaviness, is getting to be an inertia now
toward the future, or the next-thing-to-do. Most of us can prove this by
simply looking inward and taking a glimpse of our own consciousness. Let
a man draw up before his own mind the contents of his own consciousness
(if he has a motor consciousness), and we find that the future in his life
looms up, both in its motives and its character, and takes about three
quarters of the room of his consciousness; and when it is not looming up, it
is woven into everything he does. Even if all the future were for was to help
one understand the present and act this immediate moment as one should,
nine tenths of the power of seeing a thing as it is, turns out to be one's
power of seeing it as it is going to be. In any normal man's life, it is really
the future and his sense of the future that make his present what it is.
History is losing its monopoly. It is only absorbed in men's minds—in
the minds of those who are making more of it—in parts or rather in
elements of all its parts.
The trouble with history seems to have been, thus far, that people have
been under the illusion that history should be taken as a solid. They seem to
think it should be taken in bulk. They take it, some of them, a solid hundred
years of it or so, and gulp it down. The advantage of prophecy is that it
cannot be taken as a solid by people who would take everything so if they
could. Prophecy is protected. People have to breathe it, assimilate it, and get
it into their circulation and make a solid out of it personally, and do it all
themselves. It is this process which is making our modern men spiritual,
interpretative, and powerful toward the present and toward the past, and
which is giving a body and soul to knowledge, and is making knowledge
lively and human, the kind of knowledge (when men get it) that makes
things happen.
Chapter IX.
The Crowd's Imagination About People
Table of Contents
I would like to propose, as a basis for the judgment of men and events, and
as a basis for forecasting the next men and next events, and arriving at a
vision of action, a Theory of the World.
Every man has one.
Every man one knows can be seen doing his work in this world on a
great background, a kind of panorama or stage setting in his mind, made up
of history and books, newspapers, people, and experiences, which might be
called his Theory of the World.
It is his theory of the world which makes him what he is—his personal
judgment or personal interpretation of what the world is like, and what
works in it, and what does not work.
A man's theory as to why people do or do not do wrong is not a theory
he might in some brief disinterested moment, possibly at luncheon, take
time to discuss. His theory of what is wrong and of what is right, and of
how they work, touches the efficiency with which he works intimately and
permanently at every point every minute of his business day.
If he does not know, in the middle of his business day, what his theory
of the world—of human nature—is, let him stop and find out.
A man's theory of the world is the skylight or manhole over his work. It
becomes his hell or heaven—his day and night. He breathes his theory of
the world and breathes his idea of the people in it; and everything he does
may be made or may be marred by what, for instance, he thinks in the long-
run about what I am saying now on this next page. Whether he is writing for
people, or doing business with them over a counter, or launching books at
them, everything he does will be steeped in what he believes about what I
am saying now—it shall be the colour of the world to him, the sound or
timbre of his voice—what he thinks or can make up his mind to think, of
what I am saying—on this next page.
Chapter X.
A Democratic Theory of Human Nature
Table of Contents
If the men who were crucifying Jesus could have been suddenly stopped at
the last moment, and if they could have been kept perfectly still for ten
minutes and could have thought about it, some of them would have refused
to go on with the crucifixion when the ten minutes were over. If they could
have been stopped for twenty minutes, there would have been still more of
them who would have refused to have gone on with it. They would have
stolen away and wondered about The Man in their hearts. There were others
who were there who would have needed twenty days of being still and of
thinking. There were some who would have had to have twenty years to see
what they really wanted, in all the circumstances, to do.
People crucified Christ because they were in a hurry.
They did what they wanted to do at the moment. So far as we know,
there were only two men who did what they would have wished they had
done in twenty years: there was the thief on the other cross, who showed
The Man he knew who He was; and there was the disciple John, who kept
as close as he could. John perhaps was thinking of the past—of all the
things that Christ had said to him; and the man on the other cross was
thinking what was going to happen next. The other people who had to do
with the crucifixion were all thinking about the thing they were doing at the
moment and the way they felt about it. But the Man was Thinking, not of
His suffering, but of the men in front of Him, and of what they could be
thinking about, and what they would be thinking about afterward—in ten
minutes, in twenty minutes, in twenty days, or in twenty years; and
suddenly His heart was flooded with pity at what they would be thinking
about afterward, and in the midst of the pain in His arms and the pain in His
feet He made that great cry to Heaven: "Father, forgive them; they know not
what they do!"
It is because Christians have never quite believed that The Man really
meant this when He said it that they have persecuted the Jews for two
thousand years. It is because they do not believe it now that they blame Mr.
Rockefeller for doing what most of them twenty years ago would have done
themselves. It was one of the hardest things to do and say that any one ever
said in the world, and it was said at the hardest possible time to say it. It
was strange that one almost swooning with pain should have said the
gentlest-hearted and truest thing about human nature that has ever been said
since the world began. It has seemed to me the most literal, and perhaps the
most practical, truth that has been said since the world began.
It goes straight to the point about people. It gives one one's definition of
goodness both for one's self and for others. It gives one a program for
action.
Except in our more joyous and free moments, we assume that when
people do us a wrong, they know what they are about. They look at the right
thing to do and they look at the wrong one, and they choose the wrong one
because they like it better. Nine people out of ten one meets in the streets
coming out of church on Sunday morning, if one asked them the question
plainly, "Do you ever do wrong when you know it is wrong?" would say
that they did. If you ask them what a sin is, they will tell you that it is
something you do when you know you ought not to do it.
But The Man Himself, in speaking of the most colossal sin that has ever
been committed, seemed to think that when men committed a sin, it was
because they did not really see what it was that they were doing. They did
what they wanted to do at the moment. They did not do what they would
have wished they had done in twenty years.
I would define goodness as doing what one would wish one had done in
twenty years—twenty years, twenty days, twenty minutes, or twenty
seconds, according to the time the action takes to get ripe.
It would be far more true and more to the point instead of scolding or
admiring Mr. Rockefeller's skilled labour at getting too rich, to point out
mildly that he has done something that in the long-run he would not have
wanted to do; that he has lacked the social imagination for a great
permanently successful business. His sin has consisted in his not taking
pains to act accurately and permanently, in his not concentrating his mind
and finding out what he really wanted to do. It would seem to be better and
truer and more accurate in the tremendous crisis of our modern life to judge
Mr. Rockefeller, not as monster of wickedness, but merely as an inefficient,
morally underwitted man. There are things that he has not thought of that
every one else has.
We see that in all those qualities that really go to make a great business
house in a great nation John D. Rockefeller stands as the most colossal
failure as yet that our American business life has produced. To point his
incompetence out quietly and calmly and without scolding would seem to
be the only fair way to deal with Mr. Rockefeller. He merely has not done
what he would have wished he had done in twenty, well, possibly two
hundred years, or as long a time as it would be necessary to allow for Mr.
Rockefeller to see. The one thing that the world could accept gracefully
from Mr. Rockefeller now would be the establishment of a great
endowment of research and education to help other people to see in time
how they can keep from being like him. If Mr. Rockefeller leads in this
great work and sees it soon enough, perhaps he will stop suddenly being the
world's most lonely man.
Many men have been lonely before in the presence of a few fellow
human beings; but to be lonely with a whole nation—eighty million people;
to feel a whole human race standing there outside of your life and softly
wondering about you, staring at you in the showcase of your money,
peering in as out of a thousand newspapers upon you as a kind of moral
curiosity under glass, studying you as the man who has performed the most
athletic feat of not seeing what he was really doing and how he really
looked in all the world—this has been Mr. Rockefeller's experience. He has
not done what he would wish he had done in twenty years.
Goodness may be defined as getting one's own attention, as boning
down to find the best and most efficient way of finding out what one wants
to do. Any man who will make adequate arrangements with himself at
suitable times for getting his own attention will be good. Any one else from
outside who can make such arrangements for him, such arrangements of
expression or—of advertising goodness as to get his attention, will make
him good.
Chapter XI.
Doing as One Would Wish One Had Done in
Twenty Years
Table of Contents
If two great shops could stand side by side on the Main Street of the World,
and all the vices could be put in the show window of one of them and all the
virtues in the show windows the other, and all the people could go by all
day, all night, and see the windowful of virtues as they were, and the
windowful of vices as they were, all the world would be good in the
morning.
It would stay good as long as people remembered how the windows
looked. Or if they could not remember, all they would need to do, most
people, when a vice tempted them would be to step out, look at it in its
window a minute—possibly take a look too at the other window—and they
would be good.
If a man were to take a fancy to any particular vice, and would take a
step up to The Window, and take one firm look at it in The Window—see it
lying there, its twenty years' evil, its twenty days', its twenty minutes' evil,
all branching up out of it—he would be good.
When we see the wrong on one side and the right on the other and really
see the right as vividly as we do the wrong, we do right automatically. Wild
horses cannot drag a man away from doing right if he sees what the right is.
A little while ago in a New England city where the grade crossings had
just been abolished, and where the railroad wound its way on a huge yellow
sandbank through the most beautiful part of the town, a prominent, public-
spirited citizen wrote a letter to the President of the Company suggesting
that the railroad (for a comparatively small sum, which he mentioned) plant
its sandbanks with trees and shrubs. A letter came the next day saying that
the railroad was unwilling to do it. He might quite justifiably have been
indignant and flung himself into print and made a little scene in the papers,
which would have been the regular and conventional thing to do under the
circumstances. But it occurred to him instead, being a man of a curious and
practical mind, that possibly he did not know how to express himself to
railroad presidents, and that his letter had not said what he meant. He
thought he would try again, and see what would happen if he expressed
himself more fully and adequately. He took for it this second time a box
seven feet long. The box contained two long rolls of paper, one a picture by
a landscape gardener of the embankment as it would look when planted
with trees and with shrubs, and the other a photograph—a long panorama of
the same embankment as it then stood with its two great broadsides of
yellowness trailing through the city. The box containing the rolls was sent
without comment and with photographs and estimates of cost on the bottom
of the pictures.
A letter from the railroad came next day thanking him for his
suggestion, and promising to have the embankment made into a park at
once.
If God had arranged from the beginning, slides of the virtues, and had
furnished every man with a stereopticon inside, and if all a man had to do at
any particular time of temptation was to take out just the right slide or
possibly try three or four up there on his canvas a second, no one would
ever have any trouble in doing right.
It is not too much to say that this way of looking at evil and good—at the
latent capacities of evil and good in men, if a man once believes it, and if a
man once practises it as a part of his daily practical interpretation and
mastery of men, will soon put a new face for him on nearly every great
human problem with which he finds his time confronted. We shall watch the
men in the world about us—each for their little day—trying their funny,
pathetic, curious little moral experiments, and we shall see the men—all of
the men and all of the good and the evil in the men this moment—daily
before our eyes working out with an implacable hopefulness the fate of the
world. We know that, in spite of self-deceived syndicalism and self-
deceived trusts, in spite of coal strikes and all the vain, comic little troops of
warships around the earth, peace and righteousness in a vast overtone are
singing toward us.
We are not only going to have new and better motives in our modern
men, but the new and better motives are going to be thrust upon us. Every
man who reads these pages is having, at the present moment, motives in his
life which he would not have been capable of at first. Why should not a
human race have motives which it was not capable of at first? If one takes
up two or three motives of one's own—the small motives and the large ones
—and holds them up in one's hand and looks at them quietly from the point
of view of what one would wish one had done in twenty years, there is
scarcely one of us who would choose the small ones. People who are really
modern, that is, who look beyond themselves in what they do to others, who
live their lives as one might say six people away, or sixty people farther out
from themselves, or sixty million people farther, are becoming more
common everywhere; and people who look beyond the moment in what
they do to another day, who are getting more and more to live their lives
twenty years ahead, and to have motives that will last twenty years, are
driven to better and more permanent motives.
Thinking of more people when we act for ourselves means ethical
consciousness or goodness, and better and more permanent motives.
In the last analysis, the men who permanently succeed in business will
have to see farther than the other people do.
Men like John D. Rockefeller, who have made failures of their lives,
and have not been able to conduct a business so as to keep it out of the
courts, have failed because they have had imagination about Things but not
imagination about people.
The man who is just at hand will not do over again what Mr.
Rockefeller has done. He will at least have made some advance in
imagination over Rockefeller.
Mr. Rockefeller became rich by coöperating with other rich men to
exploit the public. The man of the immediate future is going to get rich, as
rich as he cares to be, by coöperating not merely with his competitors—
which is as far as Rockefeller got—but by coöperating with the people.
It is a mere matter of social imagination, of seeing what succeeds most
permanently, and honourably, of putting what has been called "goodness"
and what is going to be called "Business" together. In other words, social
imagination is going to make a man gravitate toward mutual interest or
coöperation, which is the new and inevitable level of efficiency and success
in business. Success is being transferred from men of millionaire genius to
men of social and human genius. The men who are going to compete most
successfully in modern competitive business are competing by knowing
how to coöperate better than their competitors do. Employers, employees,
consumers, partners, become irresistible by coöperation; only employers,
employees, consumers, and partners who coöperate better than they do can
hope to compete with them. The Trusts have already crowded out many
small rivals because, while their coöperation has been one-sided, they have
coöperated with more people than their rivals could; and the good Trusts, in
the same way are going to crowd out the bad Trusts, because the good ones
will know how to coöperate with more people than the bad ones do. They
will have the human genius to see how they can coöperate with the people
instead of against them.
They are going to invent ways of winning and keeping the confidence
of the people, of taking to this end a smaller and more just share of profits.
And they are going to gain their leadership through the wisdom and power
that goes with their money, and not through the money itself. It is the
spiritual power of their money that is going to count; and wealth, instead of
being a millionaire disease, is going to become a great social energy in
democracy. We are going to let men be rich because they represent us, not
because they hold us up, and because the hold-up has gone by, that is:
getting all one can, and service—getting what we have earned—has come
in.
The new kind and new size of politician will win his power by his faith,
like U. Ren of Oregon; the new kind and new size of editor is going to hire
with brains a millionaire to help him run his paper; and the new kind and
new size of author, instead of tagging a publisher, will be paid royalties for
supplying him with new ideas and creating for him new publics. Power in
modern life is to be light and heat and motion, and not a gift of being heavy
and solid. Even Money shall lose its inertia.
We are in this way being driven into having new kinds and new sizes of
men; and some of them will be rich ones, and some of them will be poor,
and no one will care. We will simply look at the man and at what size he is.
If our preachers are not saving us, our business men will. Sometimes
one suspects that the reason goodness is not more popular in modern life is
that it has been taken hold of the wrong way. Perhaps when we stop teasing
people, and take goodness seriously and calmly, and see that goodness is
essentially imagination, that it is brains, that it is thinking down through to
what one really wants, goodness will begin to be more coveted. Except
among people with almost no brains or imagination at all, it will be popular.
Perhaps it is unnecessary to say that these things that I have been
saying, or trying to say, about the flexibility and the potentiality of the
human race in its present crisis, in its present struggle to maintain and add
to its glory on the earth, are all beyond the range of possibility, and the
present strength of manhood. But I can only hope that these objections that
people make will turn out like mine. I have been making objections all my
life, as all idealists must—only to watch with dismay and joy the old-time,
happy obdurate way objections have of going by.
People began by saying they would never use automobiles because they
were so noisy and ill-odoured and ugly. Presto! The automobile becomes
silent and shapes itself in lines of beauty.
Some of us had decided against balloons. "Even if the balloon
succeeds," we said, "there will be no way of going just where and when you
want to." And then, presto! regular channels of wind are discovered, and the
balloon goes on.
"Aeroplanes," we said, "may be successful, but the more successful they
are, the more dangerous, and the more danger there will be of collisions—
collisions in the dark and up in the great sky at night." And, presto! man
invents the wireless telegraph, and the entire sky can be full of whispers
telling every airship where all the other airships are.
Some of us have decided that we will never have anything to do with
monopoly. Presto! there is suddenly evolved an entirely new type of
monopolist—the man who can be rich and good; the millionaire who has
invented a monopoly that serves the owners, the producers and employees,
the distributors and the consumers alike. An American railway President has
been saying lately that America would not have enough to eat in 2050, but it
would not do to try to prove this just yet. Some one, almost any day, will
invent a food that is as highly concentrated as dynamite, and the whole food
supply of New York—who knows?—shall be carried around in one railway
President's vest pocket.
Chapter XII.
New Kinds and New Sizes of Men
Table of Contents
It would be hard to overestimate the weariness and cynicism and despair
that have been caused in the world by its more recklessly hopeful men—the
men who plump down happily anywhere and hope, the optimists who are
merely slovenly in their minds about evil. But the optimism that consists in
putting evil facts up into a kind of outdoors in our minds and in giving them
room to exercise in our thoughts and feelings, the optimism that consists in
having one's brain move vigorously through disagreeable facts—organize
them into the other facts with which they belong and with which they work
—is worthy of consideration. Many of us, who have tried optimism and
pessimism both, have noticed certain things.
When one is being pessimistic, one almost always has the feeling of
being rather clever. It is forced upon one a little, of course, having all those
other people about one stodgily standing up for people and not really seeing
through them!
So, though one ought not to, one does feel a little superior—even with
the best intentions—when one is being discouraged.
But the trouble with pessimism is that it is only at the moment when one
is having it that one really enjoys it, or feels in this way about it.
Perhaps I should not undertake to speak for others, and should only
speak for myself; but I can only bear witness, for one, that every time in my
life that I have broken through the surface a little, and seen through to the
evil, and found myself suddenly and astutely discouraged, I have found
afterward that all I had to do was to see the same thing a little farther over,
set it in the light beyond it, and look at it in larger or more full relations, and
I was no longer astutely discouraged.
So I have come to believe slowly and grimly that feeling discouraged
about the world is not quite clever. I have noticed it, too, in watching other
people—men I know. If I could take all the men I know who are living and
acting as if they believed big things about people to-day, men who are daily
taking for granted great things in human nature, and put them in one group
by themselves all together, and if I could then take all the men I know who
are taking little things for granted in one another and in human nature, I do
not believe very many people would find it hard to tell which group would
be more clever. Possibly the reason more of us do not spend more time in
being hopeful about the world is that it takes more brains usually than we
happen to have at the moment. Hope may be said to be an act of the brain in
which it sees facts in relations large enough to see what they are for, an act
in which it insists in a given case upon giving the facts room enough to turn
around and to relate themselves to one another, and settle down where they
belong in one's mind, the way they would in real time.
So now, at last, Gentle Reader, having looked back and having looked
forward, I know the way I am going.
I am going to hope.
It is the only way to see through things. The only way to dare to see
through ones' self; the only way to see through other people and to see past
them, and to see with them and for them—is to hope.
So I am putting the challenge to the reader, in this book, as I have put it
to myself.
There are four questions with which day by day we stand face to face:
1. Does human nature change?
2. Does it change toward a larger and longer vision?
3. Will not a larger and longer vision mean new kinds and new sizes of
men?
4. Will not new sizes of men make new-sized ethics practical
and make a new world?
Everything depends for every man upon this planet, at this moment, on
how he decides these questions. If he says Yes, he will live one kind of life,
he will live up to his world. If he says No, he will have a mean world,
smaller-minded than he is himself, and he will live down to it.
This is what the common run of men about us—the men of less creative
type in literature, in business, and in politics—are doing. They do not
believe human nature is changing. They are living down to a world that is
going by. They are living down to a world that is smaller than they are
themselves. They are trying to make others do it. They answer the question
"Does human nature change?" by "No!" Wilbur Wright, when he flew
around over the heads of the people in New York a few years ago, a black
speck above a whole city with its heads up, answered "Yes!"
But the real importance of the flying machine has not stopped short with
a little delicate, graceful thing like walking on the air instead of the ground.
The big and really revolutionary thing about Wilbur Wright's flying was
that he changed the minds of the whole human race in a few minutes about
one thing. There was one particular thing that for forty thousand years they
knew they could not do. And now they knew they could.
It naturally follows—and it lies in the mind of every man who lives—
that there must be other particular things. And as nine men out of ten are in
business, most of these particular things are going to be done in business.
The Wilbur Wright spirit is catching.
It is as if a Lid had been lifted off the world.
One sees everywhere business men going about the street expecting
new things of themselves. They expect things of the very ground, and of the
air, and of one another they had not dared expect before.
The other day in a New England city I saw a man, who had been the
president of an Electric Light Company for twenty years, who had invented
a public service corporation that worked. Since he took office and dictated
the policy of the Company, every single overture for more expensive
equipment in the electric lighting of the city has come from the Company,
and every single overture for reducing the rate to consumers has come from
the company.
The consumption of electricity in the city is the largest per capita in the
world, and the rate is the cheapest in the country; and, incidentally, the
Company so trusts the people that they let them have electricity without
metres, and the people so trust the Company that they save its electricity as
they would their own.
Even the man without a conscience, who would be mean if he could, is
brought to terms, and knows that if he refrains from leaving his lights
burning all night when he goes to bed he is not merely saving the
Company's electricity but his own. He knows that he is reducing his own
and everybody's price for electricity, and not merely increasing the profits
of the Company.
It makes another kind of man slowly out of thousands of men every day,
every night, turning on and turning off their lights.
The Electric Light Company has come to have a daily, an almost hourly,
influence on the way men do business and go about their work in that city
—the motives and assumptions with which they bargain with one another—
that might be envied by twenty churches.
All that had happened was that a man with a powerful, quietly wilful
personality—the kind that went on crusades and took cities in other ages—
had appeared at last, and proposed to do the same sort of thing in business.
He proposed to express his soul, just as it was, in business the way other
people had expressed theirs for a few hundred years in poetry or more easy
and conventional ways.
If he could not have made the electric light business say the things about
people and about himself that he liked and that he believed, he would have
had to make some other business say them.
One of the things he had most wanted to say and prove in business was
the economic value of being human, the enormous business saving that
could be effected by being believed in.
He preferred being believed in himself, in business, and he knew other
people would prefer it; and he was sure that if, as people said, "being
believed in did not pay," it must be because ways of inventing faith in
people, the technique of trust, had not been invented.
He found himself invited to take charge of the Electric Light Company
at a time when it was insolvent and in disgrace with the people, and he took
the Corporation in hand on the specific understanding that he should be
allowed to put his soul into it, that he should be allowed his own way for
three years—in believing in people, and in inventing ways of getting
believed in as much as he liked.
The last time I saw him, though he is old and nearly blind, and while as
he talked there lay a darkness on his eyes, there was a great light in his face.
He had besieged a city with the shrewdness of his faith, and conquered
a hundred thousand men by believing in them more than they could.
By believing in them shrewdly, and by thinking out ways of expressing
that belief, he had invented a Corporation—a Public Service Corporation—
that had a soul, and consequently worked.
Book Two.
Letting the Crowds Be Good
Table of Contents
TO ABRAHAM LINCOLN
 
They stay not in their hold
These stokers,
Stooping to hell
To feed a ship.
Below the ocean floors.
Before their awful doors
Bathed in flame,
I hear their human lives
Drip—drip.
Through the lolling aisles of comrades
In and out of sleep,
Troops of faces
To and fro of happy feet,
They haunt my eyes.
Their murky faces beckon me
From the spaces of the coolness of the sea
Their fitful bodies away against the skies.
Chapter I.
Speaking as One of the Crowd
Table of Contents
It is a little awkward to say what I am going to say now.
Probably it will be still more awkward afterward.
But I find as I go up and down the world and look in the faces of the
crowds in it, that it is true, and I can only tell as it is.
I want to be good.
And I do not want to go up on a mountain to do it, or to slink off and
live all alone on an island in the sea.
I go a step further.
I believe that the crowds want to be good.
But I cannot prove that people want to be good in crowds, and so for the
sake of the argument, and to make the case as simple as possible, I am
going to give up speaking for crowds, and speak for myself as one member
of the crowd and for Lim. Lim and I (and Lim is a business man and not a
mere author) have had long talks in which we have confided to each other
what we think this world, in spite of appearances, is really like, and we have
come to a kind of provisional program and to a definite agreement on our
two main points.
1. We want to be good.
2. We want other people to be good, partly as a matter of convenience
for us, partly for morally aesthetic reasons, and partly because we want to
be in a kind of world where what is good in us works.
The next point in our confession follows from this. It is an awkward and
exposed thing to say out loud to people in general, but
3. Lim and I want to make over the earth.
4. Sitting down grimly by ourselves, all alone, and believing in a world
hard, with our eyes shut, does not interest us. It is this particular planet just
as it is that interests us, in its present hopeful, squirming state.
It does not seem to us to the point just now to conceive some brand new,
clean, slick planet up in space, with crowds of perfect and convenient
people on it, and then expect to lay it down in the night like a great, soft,
beautiful dew or ideal on this one. We want to take this heavy, inconvenient,
cumbersome, real planet that we have, and see what can be done with it,
and by the people on it, what can be done by these same people, whose
signs one goes by down the street, with Smith & Smith, Gowns, with Clapp
& Clapp, Butchers, with W.H. Riley & Co., Plumbers and Gas Fitters, and
with things that real people are really doing.
The things that real people are really doing, when one thinks of it, are
Soap, Tooth-brushes, Subsoil Pipes, Wall Papers, Razors, Mattresses,
Suspenders, Tiles, Shoes, Pots, and Kettles. Of course the first thing that
happened to us, to Lim and to me (as any one might guess, in a little quiet
job like making over the earth), was that we found we had to begin with
ourselves.
We did.
We are obliged to admit that, as a matter of fact, we began, owing to
circumstances, in a kind of rudimentary way with the idea of getting people
to take up goodness by talking about it.
But we are reformed preachers now. We seldom backslide into talking
to people about goodness.
We have made up our minds to lie low and keep still and show them
some.
Of course one ought to have some of one's own to show. But the trouble
always is, if it is really good, one is sure not to know it, or at least one does
not know which it is. The best we can do with goodness, some of us, if we
want it to show more quickly or to hurry people along in goodness more, is
to show them other people's.
I sometimes think that if everybody in the world could know my
plumber or pay a bill to him, the world would soon begin slowly but surely
to be a very different place.
My plumber is a genius.
Chapter II.
Is It Wrong for Good People to be Efficient?
Table of Contents
Perhaps it will seem a pity to spoil a book—one that might have been really
rather interesting—by putting the word "goodness" down flatly in this way
in the middle of it.
And in a book which deals with crowds, too, and with business.
I would not yield first place to any one in being tired of the word. I
think, for one, that unless there is something we can do to it, and something
we can do to it now, it had better be dropped.
But I have sometimes discovered when I had thought I was tired of a
word, that what I was really tired of was somebody who was using it.
I do not mind it when my plumber uses it. I have heard him use it (and
swearing softly, I regret to say) when it affected me like a Hymn Tune.
And there is Non, too.
I first made Non's acquaintance as our train pulled out of New York, and
we found ourselves going down together on Friday afternoon to spend
Sunday with M—— in North Carolina. The first thing he said was, when
we were seated in the Pullman comfortably watching that big, still world
under glass roll by outside, that he had broken an engagement with his wife
to come. She was giving a Tea, he said, that afternoon, and he had faithfully
promised to be there. But a weekend in North Carolina appealed to him, and
afternoon tea—well, he explained to me, crossing his legs and beaming at
me all over as if he were a whole genial, successful afternoon tea all by
himself—afternoon tea did not appeal to him.
He thought probably he was a Non-Gregarious Person.
As he was the gusto of our little party and fairly reeked with sociability,
and was in a kind of orgy of gregariousness every minute all the way to
Wilmington (even when he was asleep we heard from him), we called him
the Non-Gregarious Person, and every time he piled on one more story, we
reminded him how non-gregarious he was. We called him Non-Gregarious
all the way after that—Non for short.
This is the way I became acquainted with Non. It has been Non ever
since.
I found in the course of the next three days that when Non was not being
the life of the party or the party did not need any more life for a while, and
we had gone off by ourselves, he became, like most people who let
themselves go, a very serious person. When he talked about his business, he
was even religious. Not that he had any particular vocabulary for being
religious, but there was something about him when he spoke of business—
his own business—that almost startled me at first. He always seemed to be
regarding his business when he spoke of it as being, for all practical
purposes, a kind of little religion by itself.
Now Non is a builder or contractor.
For many years now the best way to make a pessimist or a confirmed
infidel out of anybody has been to get him to build a house. No better
arrangement for not believing in more people, and for not believing in more
kinds of people at once and for life, has ever been invented probably than
building a house. No man has been educated, or has been really tested in
this world, until he has built a house. I submit this proposition to anybody
who has tried it, or to any one who is going to try it. There is not a single
kind or type of man who sooner or later will not build himself, and nearly
everything that is the matter with him, into your house. The house becomes
a kind of miniature model (such as they have in expositions) of what is the
matter with people. You enter the door, you walk inside and brood over
them. Everything you come upon, from the white cellar floor to the timbers
you bump your head on in the roof, reminds you of something or of rows of
people and of what is the matter with them. It is the new houses that are
haunted now. Any man who is sensitive to houses and to people and who
would sit down in his house when it is finished and look about in it
seriously, and think of all the people that have been built, in solid wood and
stone, into it, would get up softly and steal out of it, out of the front door of
it, and never enter that house again.
This is what Non saw. He saw how people felt about their houses, and
how they lived in them helplessly and angrily year after year, and felt
hateful about the world.
I gradually drew out of him the way he felt about it. I found he was not
as good as some people are at talking about himself, but the subject was
interesting. He began his career building houses for people, as nearly every
one does. The general idea is that everybody is expected to exact
commissions from everybody else, and the owner is expected to pay each
man his own commission and then pay all the commissions that each man
has charged the other man. Every house that got built in this way seemed to
be a kind of network or conspiracy of not doing as you would be done by.
Non did not see any way out at first, just for one man. He merely noticed
how things were going, and he noticed that nearly every person that he had
dealings with, from the bottom to the top of the house, seemed to make him
feel that he either was, or would be, or ought to be, a grafter. He could not
so much as look at a house he had built, through the trees when he was
going by, without wishing he could be a better man, and studying on how it
could be managed. His own first houses made him see things. They proved
to be the making of him, and if similar houses have not made similar men, it
is their fault. It might not be reassuring to the men who are now living in
these first houses to dwell too much on this (and I might say he did not
build them alone), but it seems to be necessary to bring out the most
striking thing about Non in his first stage as a business man, viz.: He hated
his business. He made up his mind he either would make the business the
kind of business he liked or get out of it. I did not gather from the way he
talked about it that he had any idea of being an uplifter. He merely had,
apparently, an obstinate, doggedly comfortable idea about himself, and
about what a thing would have to be, in this world, if he was connected with
it. He proposed to enjoy his business. He was spending most of his time at
it.
Other people have had this same happy thought, but they seem to
manage to keep on being patient. Non could not fall back on being patient,
and it made him think harder.
The first thing he thought of was that doing his business as he thought
he ought to, if he once worked his idea out, and worked it down through
and organized it, might pay. He almost had the belief that people might pay
a man a little extra, perhaps, for enjoying his business. It cannot be said that
he believed this immediately. He merely wanted to, and worked toward it,
and merely contrived new shrewd ways at first of being able to afford it.
Gradually he began to notice that the more he enjoyed his business, the
more he enjoyed it with his whole soul and body, enjoyed it down to the
very toes of his conscience, the more people there were who stepped into
his office and wanted him to enjoy his business on their houses. It was what
they had been looking for for years—for some builder who was really
enjoying his business. And the more he enjoyed his business in his own
particular way—that of building a house for a man in less time than he said
he would, and for less money, not infrequently sending him a check at the
end of it—the more his business grew.
I do not know that there would be any special harm in speaking of Non's
idea—of just doing as you would be done by—in more moral or religious
language, but it is not necessary. And I find I take an almost religious joy in
looking at the Golden Rule at last as a plain business proposition. All that
happened was that Non was original, saw something that everybody thought
they knew, and acted as if it were so. Theoretically one would not have said
that it would be original to take an old platitudinous law like the law of
supply and demand, and act as if it were so; but it was. At the time Non was
beginning his career there was nothing in the building-market people found
harder to hire than honesty. Here was something, he saw at last, that
thousands of busy and important men who did not have time to be
detectives, wanted. There did not seem to be any one very actively
supplying the demand. A big market, a small supply, and almost no
competition. Non stepped in and proposed to represent a man's interest who
is building a house as literally as the man would represent his interests
himself, if he knew all about houses. Everything has followed from this.
What Non's business is now, when a man is building a house, is to step
quietly into the man's shoes, let him put on another pair, and go about his
business. It is not necessary to go into the details. Any reader who has ever
built a house knows the details. Just take them and turn them around.
What those of us who know Non best like about him is that he is a plain
business man, and that he has acted in this particular matter without any
fine moral frills or remarks. He has done the thing because he liked it and
believed in it.
But the most efficient thing to me about Non is not the way he is
making money out of saving money for other people, but the way the fact
that he can do it makes people feel about the world. Whenever I have a little
space of discouragement or of impatience about the world because it does
not hurry more, I fall to thinking of Non. "Perhaps next week"—I say to
myself cheerfully—"I can go down to New York and slip into Non's office
and get the latest news as to how religion is getting on. Or he will take me
out with him to lunch, and I will stop scolding or idealizing, and we will get
down to business, and I will take a good long look into that steady-lighted,
unsentimental face of his while he tells me across the little corner table at
Delmonico's for three hours how shrewd the Golden Rule is, and how it
works." Sometimes when I have just been in New York, and have come
home and am sitting in my still study, with the big idle mountain just
outside, and the great meadow and all the world, like some great, calm
gentle spirit or picture of itself, lying out there about me, and I fall to
thinking of Non, and of how he is working in wood and stone inside of
people's houses, and inside of their lives day after day, and of how he is
touching people at a thousand points all the weeks, being a writer, making
lights and shadows and little visions of words fall together just so, seems,
suddenly a very trivial occupation—like amusing one's self with a pretty
little safe kaleidoscope, holding it up, aiming it and shaking softly one's
coloured bits of phrases at a world! Of course, it need not be so. But there
are moments when I think of Non when it seems so.
In our regular Sunday religion we do not seem to be quite at our best
just now.
At least (perhaps I should speak for one) I know I am not.
Being a saint of late is getting to be a kind of homely, modest, informal,
almost menial everyday thing. It makes one more hopeful about religion.
Perhaps people who once get the habit, and who are being good all the
week, can even be good on Sunday.
There are many ways of resting or leaning back upon one's instincts and
getting over to one's religion or perspective about the world. Mount Tom
(which is in my front yard, in Massachusetts) helps sometimes—with a
single look.
When I go down to New York, I look at the Metropolitan Tower, the
Pennsylvania Station, the McAdoo Tunnels, and at Non.
If I wanted to make anybody religious, I would try to get him to work in
Non's office, or work with anybody who ever worked with him, or who ever
saw him; or I would have him live in a house built by him, or pay a bill
made out by him.
It has seemed to me that his succeeding and making himself succeed in
this way is a great spiritual adventure, a pure religion, a difficult, fresh, and
stupendous religion.
Now these many days have I watched him going up and down through
all the empty reputations, the unmeaning noises of the world, living his life
like some low, old-fashioned, modest Hymn Tune he keeps whistling—and
I have seen him in fear, and in danger, and in gladness being shrewder and
shrewder for God, now grimly, now radiantly, hour by hour, day by day
getting rich with the Holy Ghost!
Chapter III.
Is It Wrong for Good People to be Interesting?
Table of Contents
People are acquiring automobiles, Oriental rugs, five-hundred-dollar
gowns, more rapidly just now than they are goodness, because
advertisements in this present generation are more readable than sermons,
and because the shop windows on Fifth Avenue can attract more attention
than the churches. The shop windows make people covetous.
If the goodness that one sees, hears about, or goes by does not make
other people covetous, does not make them wish they had it or some just
like it, it must be because there is something the matter with it, or
something the matter with the way it is displayed.
If the church shop windows, for instance, were to make displays of
goodness up and down the great Moral Fifth Avenue of the world—well,
one does not know; but there are some of us who would rather expect to see
the Goodness Display in the windows consisting largely of Things People
Ought Not to Want.
There would be rows and tiers of Not-Things piled up—Things for
People Not to Be, and Things for People Not to Do.
Goodness displayed in this way is not interesting. Perhaps this is one of
the reasons why the word Goodness spoils a thing for people—so many
people—when it is allowed in it.
Possibly it is because we are apt to think of the good people, and of the
people who are being good, as largely keeping from doing something, or as
keeping other people from doing something—as negative. Their goodness
seems to consist in being morally accurate, and in being very particular just
in time, and in a kind of general holding in.
We do not naturally or off-hand—any of us—think of goodness as
having much of a lunge to it. It is tired-looking and discouraged, and pulls
back kindly and gently. Or it teases and says, "Please"—God knows how
helpless it is, and I for one am frank to say that, as far as I have observed,
He has not been paying very much attention to good people of late.
I do not believe I am alone in this. There must be thousands of others
who have this same half-guilty, half-defiant feeling of suspiciousness
toward what people seem to think should be called goodness. Not that we
say anything. We merely keep wondering—we cannot see what it is,
exactly, about goodness that should make it so depressing.
In the meantime we hold on. We do not propose to give up believing in
it. Perhaps, after all, all that is the matter with goodness in the United States
is the people who have taken hold of it.
They do not seem to be the kind of people who can make it interesting.
We cannot help thinking, if these same bad people about us, or people who
are called bad, would only take up goodness awhile, how they would make
it hum!
I can only speak for one, but I do not deny that when I have been sitting
(in some churches), or associating, owing to circumstances, with very good
people a little longer than usual, and come out into the street, I feel like
stepping up sometimes to the first fine, brisk, businesslike man I see going
by, and saying, "My dear sir, I do wish that you would take up goodness
awhile and see if, after all, something cannot really be done. I keep on
trying to be hopeful, but these dear good people in here, it seems to me, are
making a terrible mess of it!"
And, to make a long story short, Lim happened to be going by one day,
and this practically is what I did. I had done it before with other business
men in spirit or in a general way, but with him I was more particular. I went
straight to the point. "Here are at least sixteen valuable efficient brands of
goodness in America," I said, "all worth their weight in gold for a big
business career, that no one is really using, that no one quite believes in or
can get on the market, and yet I believe with my whole soul in them all, and
I believe thousands of other men do, or are ready to, the moment some one
makes a start."
I pulled out a little list of items which I had made out and put down on a
piece of paper, and handed them over to him, and said I wished he would
take a few of them—the first five or six or so—and make them work.
He already had, I found, made two or three of the harder ones work.
I would not have any one suppose for a moment that I am presenting
Lim as a kind of business angel.
No one who knows Lim thinks of him, or would let anybody else think
of him, as being a Select Person, as being particularly or egregiously what
he ought to be. This is one reason I have picked him out. Being good in a
small private way, just as a small private end in itself, may be practicable
perhaps without dragging in people who are not quite what they ought to
be. But the moment one tries to make goodness work, one comes to the fact
that it must be made to work with what we have. We have a great crowd of
unselected people, people both good and bad, and the first principle in
making goodness work (instead of being merely good) seems to be to
believe that goodness is not too good for anybody. Anybody who can make
it work can have it, and what goodness seems to need, especially in
America and England just now, is people who do not feel that they must at
all hazards look good. Whatever happens, whatever else we do in any
general investment or movement we may be making with goodness, we
must let these people in. If there is one thing rather than another that those
of us who know Lim all rely on and like, it is that nothing can ever make
him slump down into looking good. We often find him hard to make out—
everything is left open and loose and unlabelled in Lim's moral nature. The
only really sure way any one can tell when Lim is being good is, that
whenever he is being good he becomes suddenly and unexpectedly
interesting. His goodness is daring, unexpected, and original. One has the
feeling that it may break out anywhere. It is always doing things that
everybody said could not be done before. It is true that some people are
dazed, and no one can ever seem to feel sure he knows what it is that is
going on in Lim when he is being good, or that it is goodness. He merely
keeps watching it. There is a certain element of news, of freshness, of gentle
sensation, in his goodness. It leads to consequences. And there always
seems to be something about Lim's goodness which attracts the attention of
people, and makes people who see it want it. So when I speak of goodness
in this book, and put it down as the basis of the power of getting men to do
as one likes, I do not deny that I am taking the word away and moving it
over from its usual associations. I do not mean by a good act, a good-
looking act, but an act so constituted that it makes good. For the purpose of
this book I would define goodness as efficiency. Goodness is the quality in
a thing that makes the thing go, and that makes it go so that it will not run
down, and that nothing can stop it.
There is the inefficiency of lying, for instance, and the inefficiency of
force, or bullying.
Chapter IV.
Prospects of the Liar
Table of Contents
My theory about the Liar is that it is of no use to scold him or blame him. It
merely makes him feel superior. He should be looked upon quietly and
without saying anything as a case of arrested development. What has
happened to him is that he merely is not quite bright about himself, and has
failed to see how bright (in the long run) other people are.
When a man lies or does any other wrong thing, his real failure consists
not in the wrongdoing itself, but in his failure to take pains to focus his
mind on the facts in himself, and in the people about him, and see what it
really is that he would wish he had done, say in twenty years. It seems to be
possible, after a clumsy fashion, to find out by a study of ourselves, and of
our own lives and of other men's lives, what we would wish we had done
afterward. Everything we have learned so far we have learned by guessing
wrong on what we have thought we would want afterward. We have
gradually guessed what we wanted better. We began our lives as children
with all sorts of interesting sins or moral guesses and experiments. We find
there are certain sins or moral experiments we almost never use any more
because we found that they never worked. We had been deceived about
them. Most of us have tried lying. Since we were very small we have tried
in every possible fashion—now in one way, now in another—to see if lying
could not be made to work. By far the majority of us, and all of us who are
the most intelligent, are not deceived now by our desire to tell lies. Perhaps
we have not learned that all lies do not pay. A child tells a lie at first as if a
lie had never been thought of before. It is as if lying had just been invented,
and he had just thought what a great convenience it was, and how many
things there were that he could do in that way. He discovers that the
particular thing he wants at the moment, he gets very often by lying. But the
next time he lies, he cannot get anything. If he keeps on lying for a long
time, he learns that while, after a fashion, he is getting things, he is losing
people. Finally, he finds he cannot even get things. Nobody believes in him
or trusts him. He cannot be efficient. He then decides that being trusted, and
having people who feel safe to associate with him and to do business with
him, is the thing he really wants most; and that he must have first, even if it
is only a way to get the other things he wants. It need not be wondered that
the Trusts, those huge raw youngsters of the modern spirit, have had to go
through with most of the things other boys have. The Trusts have had to go
through, one after the other, all their children's diseases, and try their funny
little moral experiments on the world. They thought they could lie at first.
They thought it would be cunning, and that it would work. They did not
realize at once that the bigger a boy you were, even if you were anonymous,
the more your lie showed and the more people there were who suffered
from it who would be bound sooner or later to call you to account for it.
The Trusts have been guessing wrong on what they would wish they
had done in twenty years, and the best of them now are trying to guess
better. They are trying to acquire prestige by being far-sighted for
themselves and far-sighted for the people who deal with them, and are
resting their policy on winning confidence and on keeping faith with the
people.
They not only tried lying, like all young children, but they tried stealing.
For years the big corporations could be seen going around from one big
innocent city in this country to another, and standing by quietly and without
saying a word, putting the streets in their pockets.
But no big corporation of the first class to-day would begin its
connection with a city in this fashion. Beginning a permanent business
relation with a customer by making him sorry afterward he has had any
dealings with you, has gone by as a method of getting business in England
and America.
One of our big American magazines not long ago, which had gained
especially high rates from its advertisers because they believed in it, lied
about its circulation. The man who was responsible was not precisely sure,
gave nominal figures in round numbers, and did what magazines very
commonly did under the circumstances; but when the magazine owner
looked up details afterward and learned precisely what the circulation was
for the particular issue concerned, he sent out announcements to every firm
in the country that had anything in the columns of that issue, saying that the
firm had lied, and enclosing a check for the difference in value represented.
Of course it was a good stroke of business, eating national humble pie so,
and it was a cheap stroke of business too, doing some one, sudden, striking
thing that no one would forget. Not an advertisement could be inserted and
paid for in the magazine for years without having that action, and the
prestige of that action, back of it. Every shred of virtue there was in the
action could have been set one side, and was set one side by many people,
because it paid so well. Every one saw suddenly, and with a faint breath of
astonishment, how honesty worked. But the main point about the magazine
in distinction from its competitors seems to have been that it not merely saw
how honesty worked, but it saw it first and it had the originality, the moral
shrewdness and courage, to put up money on it. It believed in honesty so
hard that suddenly one morning, before all the world, it risked its entire
fortune on it. Now that it has been done once, the new level or standard of
candour may be said to have been established which others will have to
follow. But it does not seem to me that the kind of man who has the moral
originality to dare do a thing like this first need ever have any serious
trouble with competitors. In the last analysis, in the competition of modern
business to get the crowd, the big success is bound to come to men in the
one region of competition where competition still has some give in it—the
region of moral originality. Other things in competition nowadays have all
been thought of except being good. Any man who can and will to-day think
out new and unlooked-for ways of being good can get ahead, in the United
States of practically everybody.
Chapter V.
Prospects of the Bully
Table of Contents
The stage properties that go with a bully change as we grow older. When
one thinks of a bully, one usually sees a picture at once in one's mind. It is a
big boy lording it over a little one, or getting him down and sitting on him.
Everybody recognizes what is going on immediately, pitches in nobly
and beautifully, and licks the big boy.
The trouble with the bully in business has been that he is not so simple
and easy to recognize. He is apt to be more or less anonymous and
impersonal, and it is harder to hit him in the right place.
But when one thinks of it perhaps this pleasant and inspiring duty is not
so impracticable as it looks, and is presently to be attended to.
Any man who relies, in getting what he wants, on being big instead of
being right, is a bully.
Modern business is done over a wide area, with thousands of persons
looking on, and for a long time and with thousands of people coming back.
The man who relies on being big instead of being right, and who takes
advantage of his position instead of his inherent superiority, is soon seen
through. His customers go over to the enemy. A show of force or a hold-up
works very well at the moment. Being bigger may be more showy than
being right, and it may down the Little Boy, but the Little Boy wins the
crowd.
Business to-day consists in persuading crowds.
The Little Boy can prove he is right. All the bully can prove is that he is
bigger.
The Liar in Business is already going by.
Now it is the turn of the bully.
Not long ago a few advertisers in a big American city wanted unfairly
low rates for advertisements and tried to use force with the newspapers.
Three or four of the biggest shops combined and gave notice that they
would take their advertising away unless the rates came down. After a little,
they drew in a few other lines of business with them, and suddenly one
morning five or six full pages of advertisements were withdrawn from
every newspaper in the city. The newspapers went on publishing all the
news of the city except news as to what people could buy in department
stores, and waited. They made no counter-move of any kind, and said
nothing and seven days slipped past. They held to the claim that the service
they performed in connecting the great stores with the people of the city
was a real service, that it represented market value which could be proved
and paid for. They kept on for another week publishing for the people all
the news of the city except the news as to how they could spend their
money. They wondered how long it would take the great shops with acres of
things to sell to see how it would work not to let anybody know what the
things were.
The great shops tried other ways of letting people know. They tried
handbills, a huge helpless patter of them over all the city. They used
billboards, and posted huge lists of items for people to stop and read in the
streets, if they wanted to, while they rushed by. For three whole weeks they
held on tight to the idea that the newspapers were striking employees of
department stores. One would have thought that they would have seen that
the newspapers were the representatives of the people—almost the homes
of the people—and that it would pay to treat them respectfully. One would
have thought they would have seen that if they wanted space in the homes
of the people—places at their very breakfast tables—space that the
newspapers had earned and acquired there, they would have to pay their
share of what it had cost the newspapers to get it.
One would have thought that the department shops would have seen that
the more they could make the newspapers prosper, the more influence the
newspapers would have in the homes of the people, and the more business
they could get through them. But it was not until the shopowners had come
down and gazed day after day on the big, white, lonely floors of their shops
that they saw the truth. Crowds stayed away, and proved it to them.
Namely: a store, if it uses a great newspaper, instead of having a few feet of
show windows on a street for people to walk by, gets practically miles of
show windows for people—in their own houses—sells its goods almost any
morning to the people—to a whole city—before anybody gets up from
breakfast—has its duties as well as its rights.
Of course, when the shopkeepers really saw that this was what the
newspapers had been doing for them, they wanted to do what was right, and
wanted to pay for it. One would have thought, looking at it theoretically,
that the department stores in any city would have imagination enough to
see, without practically having to shut their stores up for three weeks, what
advertising was worth. But if great department stores do not have
imagination to see what they would wish they had done in twenty years, in
one year, or three weeks, and have to spell out the experience morning by
morning and see what works, word by word, they do learn in the end that
being right works, and that bullying does not. Gradually the level or
standard of right in business is bound to rise, until people have generally
come to take the Golden Rule with the literalness and seriousness that the
best and biggest men are already taking it. Department stores that have the
moral originality and imagination to guess what people would wish they
had bought of them and what they would wish they had sold to them
afterward are going to win. Department stores that deal with their customers
three or four years ahead are the ones that win first.
Chapter VI.
Goodness as a Crowd-Process
Table of Contents
The basis of successful business is imagination about other people. The best
way to train one's imagination about other people is to try different ways of
being of service to them. Trying different ways of merely getting money out
of them does not train the imagination. It is too easy.
Business is going to be before long among the noblest of the
professions, because it takes the highest order of imagination to succeed in
it. Goodness is no longer a Sunday school. The whole world, in a rough
way, is its own Sunday school.
To have the most brains render the most service—render services people
had never dreamed of before.
Why bother to tell people to be good? It bores us. It bores them.
Presently we will tell them over our shoulders, as we go by, to use their
brains. Goodness is a by-product of efficiency.
Being good every day in business stands in no need of being stood up
for, or apologized for, or even helped. All of these things may be expedient
and human and natural, because one cannot help being interested in
particular people and in a particular generation; but they are not really
necessary to goodness. It is only when we are tired, or when we only half
believe in it, that we feel to-day that goodness needs to be stood up for. In a
day when men make vast crowds of things, so that the things are seen
everywhere, and when the things are made to stand the test of crowds—
crowds of days, or crowds of years—and when they make them for crowds
of people, goodness does not need scared and helpful people defending it. I
have seen that goodness is a thing to be sung about like a sunset. I have
seen that goodness is organic, and grounded in the nature of things and in
the nature of man. I have seen that being good is the one great adventure of
the world, the huge daily passionate moral experiment of the human heart—
that all men are at work on it, that goodness is an implacable crowd process,
and that nothing can stop it.
Chapter VII.
Thoughts on Being Improved by Other People
Table of Contents
But Fate has so arranged our lives that we all have to live cooped up in one
particular generation. Living in all of them, especially the ages just ahead,
and seeing as one looks out upon them how goodness wins, may be well
enough when one is tired or discouraged and is driven to it, but in the
meantime all the while we are living in this one. The faces of the people we
know flit past us; the gaunt, grim face of the crowd haunts us—the crowd
that will slip softly off the earth very soon and drop into the Darkness—a
whole generation of it, without seeing how things are coming out; and there
is something about the streets, about the look of women as they go by,
something about the faces of the little children, that makes one wish
goodness would hurry. One cannot think with any real pleasure of goodness
as a huge, slow, implacable moral glacier, a kind of human force of gravity,
grinding out truths and grinding under people, generation after generation,
down toward some vast, beautiful, happy valley with flowers and children
in it and majestic old men thousands of years away. One wishes goodness
would hurry. We are not content, some of us, with having the good people
climb over the so-called evil ones and gain the supremacy of the world, and
all because the evil people do not see what they really want to do or would
have wished they had done afterward. We want the evil ones, so called, to
see what they really want now. We cannot help believing that there is some
way of attracting their attention to what they really want now.
I have seen, or seemed to see, in my time that there is almost no limit to
what people can do if they can get their own attention, or if some person or
some event will happen by that can get their attention for them.
Paralytics jumped from their beds at the time of the San Francisco
earthquake and ran for blocks. The whole earth had to shake them in order
to get their attention; but it did it, and they saw what it was they wanted,
and they ran for it at once, whether they were paralytics or not. In the fire
that followed the earthquake, people that had been sick in bed for weeks
were seen, scores of them, dragging their trunks through the streets.
I have seen, too, in my time scores of people doing great feats of
goodness in this way, things that they knew they could not do, dragging
huge moral trunks after them, or swinging them up on their shoulders. I
have seen men who thought they were old in their hearts, and who thought
they were wicked, running like boys, with shouts and cheers, to do right. It
was all a matter of attention. The question with most of us would seem to
be: How can one get one's attention to what one would wish one had done
in twenty years, and how can one get other people's—all the people with
whom we are living and working—to do with us what they would wish they
had done, in twenty minutes, twenty days, or twenty years?
Letting the Crowd be Good, all turns in the long run upon touching the
imagination of Crowds.
In the last analysis, the coming of the kingdom of heaven, as it has been
called, is going to be the coming slowly, and from unsuspected quarters, of
a new piety and of new kinds of saints into the forefront of modern life—
saints who can attract attention, saints who can make crowds think what
they really want.
Using the word in its more special sense, the time has come when it is
being keenly realized that if goodness is to be properly appreciated by
crowds, it must be properly advertised.
How can goodness be advertised to Crowds?
Who are the people that can touch the imagination of Crowds?
The best and most suggestive truths that most of us could come to with
regard to doing right, would come from a study of the people who have
tried to make us do it. Most of us, if we were asked to name the people most
prominently connected with the virtues that we have studied and wondered
about most, would mention, probably, either our parents or our preachers.
Many of us feel quite expert about parents. We have studied vividly, and
sometimes with almost a breathless interest, all their little ways of getting
us to be good, and there is hardly any one who has not come to quite
definite conclusions of how he should be preached to. I have thought it
would be not unfruitful to consider in this connection either our parents or
our preachers. I have decided to consider the preachers who try to make me
good, because they are a little less complicated than parents.
Preachers can only be put into classes in a general way. They often
overlap, and many of them change over from one class into another every
now and then on some special subject, or on some special line of experience
which they have had. But for the most part, at least as regards emphasis,
preachers may be said to divide off into three classes:
Those who tease us to do right.
Those who make us see that doing right, if any one wants to do it, is
really an excellent thing.
Those who make us want to do it.
I never go to hear a second time, if I can help it, a preacher who has teased
me to do right. I used to hope at first that perhaps a clergyman who was
teasing people might incidentally slip off the track a minute, and say
something or see something interesting and alive. But, apparently, preachers
who do not see that people should not be teased to do right, do not see other
things, and I have gradually given up having hopeful moments about them.
Why, in a world like this, with the right and the wrong in it all lying so
eloquent and plain and beautiful in the lives of the people about us, and just
waiting to be uncovered a little, waiting to be looked at hard a minute,
should audiences be gathered together and teased to do right?
If the right were merely to be had in sermons or on paper, it might be
different. My own experience with the right has been, if I may speak for
one, that when I get out of the way of the people who are doing it, and let
the right they are doing be seen by people, everybody wants it. When
people who are doing right are quietly revealed, uncovered a little further
by a preacher, everybody envies them, and teasing becomes superfluous.
People sit in their seats and think of them, and become covetous to be like
them. If, this very day, all the ministers of the world were to agree that, on
next Sunday morning at half-past ten o'clock, they all with one accord
would preach a sermon teasing people to be rich, it would not be more
absurd, or more pathetic, or more away from the point, than it would be to
preach a sermon teasing people to be good. They want to be good now; they
envy the people that they see going about the world not leaning on others to
be good—self-poised, independent, free, rich, spiritually self-supporting
persons.
The men and women that we know may be more or less muddled in
their minds with philosophy or with theology, or perhaps they are being
deceived by expediency or being bullied by their environment, but they are
not wicked; they are out of focus, and what they desire when they go to
church on Sunday morning is to get a good look at beautiful and refreshing
things that they want, and for an hour and a half, if possible, with slow
steadied thought see their own lives in perspective. It is a criminal waste of
time to get hundreds of people to come into church on a Sunday morning
and seat them all together in a great room where they cannot get out, and
then tease them and tell them they ought to be good. They knew it before
they came. They are already agreed, all of them, that they want to be good.
They even want to be good in business—as good as they can afford to. The
question is how to manage to do it. The thing that is troubling them is the
technique. How can they be good in their business—more good than their
employers want them to be, for instance—and keep their positions? Doing
as one would wish one had done afterward, or knowing what one is about,
or "being good" as it is sometimes called, is a thing that all really clever
people have agreed upon. They simply cannot manage some of the details—
details like time and place, a detail like being good now, for instance, or like
being good here. It is the more practical things like these that trouble
people, or they grow mixed in their thoughts about the big goods and the
little ones—which shall be first in order of importance or which in the order
of time. And when one sees that people are really like this in their hearts,
and when one sees them, all these poor, helpless people, sitting cooped up
in a church for an hour and a half being teased to be good, it is small
wonder that it seems, or is coming to seem, to the clean-cut morally
businesslike men and women we have to-day, a pitiful waste of time.
I come to the second class of preachers I had in mind with more diffidence.
My feelings about them are not so simple and rudimentary as my feelings
about those who have teased me to be good.
Any man who travels about, or who drops into churches wherever he
happens to be from Sunday to Sunday, is almost sure to find in every city of
considerable size at least one imperious capable baffling clergyman. If one
is strictly honest and fair toward him, to say nothing of being a well-meant
and hopeful human being who is living in the same world with him and
who feels very imperfect too, finding any serious and honest fault with the
sermon, or at least laying one's finger upon what the fault is, seems to be
almost impossible. One simply comes out of the church in a nice, neat little
glow of good-will and admiration, and with a strange, soothing, happy
sense of new, fresh, convenient wisdom.
The only fair way to criticise the preacher who belongs in this class
seems to be to take ten years for it, go in regularly and get a little practice
every Sunday. There are preachers who preach so well that the only way
one can ever find what is the matter with their sermons is to sit quietly
while they are preaching them, and look around at the people. One thinks as
one looks around, "These people are what this man has done."
They are the same people they were ten years ago.
I often hear other sermons that are far easier to criticise. They are one-
sided or narrow, but they make new people.
I might not always like to be in a congregation when a man is preaching
a sermon that makes new people, because he may be making people or
kinds of people that at the time at least I do not need to be. But I naturally
prefer, at least part of the time, a preacher who puts in, before he is through,
some good work on me. There is a preacher in B—— who always arouses
in me, whenever I am in the city, the same old, curious, hopeful feeling
about him that this next one more time he is going to get to me, that I am
going to be attended to. I cannot say how many times I have dropped in
upon him in his big plain church, seen him with his hushed congregation all
about him, all listening to him up to the last minute, each of them sitting all
alone with his own soul, and with him, and with the ticking of the clock.
And the sermon is always about the same. You see him narrowing the truth
down wonderfully, ruthlessly, to You. You begin to see everything—to see
all the arguments, all the circumstances, all the principles. You see them
narrowing you down grimly, closing in upon you, converging you and all
your little, mean life, driving you apparently at last into one helpless
beautiful corner of doing right. You feel while you listen the old sermon-
thrill you have felt before, a kind of intellectual joy in God, in the very
brains of God; you think of how He has arranged right and wrong so
cunningly, laid them all out so plain and so close beside each other for you
to choose to be good. Then the benediction is pronounced over you, the
sevenfold amen dies away over you, and you go home and do as you like.
One sees the sermon for days afterward lying out there in calm and
orderly memory, all so complete and perfect by itself. There does not really
seem to be any need of doing anything more to it. It is what people mean
probably by a "finished sermon." It is as if goodness had been put under a
glass globe in a parlour. You go home proud to think of it, and proud of
course to have such a sermon by you. But you would never think of
touching such a complete and perfect thing during the week the way you
would a poorer sermon, disturbing it hopefully or mussing it over, trying to
work some of it into your own life.
So much for the first two types of preachers: the preachers who stand before
us Sunday morning with goodness placed beside them in a dense darkness
while they talk, and who tease us to look at it in the darkness and to take
some; and those who stand, a cold white light all about them, and use
pointers and blackboards and things—maps of goodness, great charts of
what people ought to be like—and who make one see each virtue just where
it belongs as a kind of dot, like cities in a geography, and who leave us with
the pleasant feeling of how sweet and reasonable God is, or rather would be
if anybody would pay any attention to Him.
I have already hinted at the qualities of the third class of preachers—those
who make me want to be good. They seem to throw goodness as upon a
screen, some vast screen of the world, of this real world about me. They
turn their souls, like still stereopticons, upon the faces of men—men who
are like the men and women I know. I go about afterward all the week
seeing their sermons in the street. Everybody I see, everything that comes
up Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, the very patterns of the days and nights,
of my duties and failures, keep coming up, reminding me to be good. I may
start in—I often do—with such a preacher, criticising him, but he soon gets
me so occupied criticising myself and so lost in wondering how this
something that he has and sees just beyond us, just beyond him, just beyond
me, can be had for other people, and how I can have some of it for myself,
that I forget to criticise. He searches my soul, makes me a new being in my
presence before my eyes—that is, a new being toward some one subject, or
some one possibility in the world. He helps me while in his presence to
accomplish the supreme thing that one man can ever do for another. He
helps me to get my own attention. He makes me see a set of particular
things that I immediately, before his next sentence, am trying to find means
to do. He does not attract my attention toward what he wants, like a
preacher who teases; nor does he attract my attention to what God wants,
like the preacher with the charts of goodness. He succeeds in attracting and
holding down my attention to what I really want for myself or others, and to
what I propose to get.
The imagination of crowds is convinced only by men who have real
genius for expression, for making word-pictures of real things, men who
have what might be called moving-picture minds, and who are so
picturesque and vivid that when they talk to people about goodness they
have seen, everybody feels as if they had been there. It has to be admitted
that this type of preacher, who has a kind of genius, and has developed an
art form for expressing goodness in words, is necessarily an exceptional
man. And it is unreasonable and unfair in the public to expect a man to get
up in the pulpit and, with no costume and no accessories, merely with a
kind of shrewd holiness or divination into human nature, present goodness
so that we seem to be there. It is small wonder that a man who finds he is
expected to be a kind of combination of biograph, brother, spiritual
detective, and angel all in one, in order to do his work successfully has days
of feeling that he has joined the ranks of The Impossible Profession.
Chapter VIII.
Making Goodness Hurry
Table of Contents
Perhaps it has leaked out to those who have been following these pages thus
far, that I am merely at best, if the truth were known, a kind of reformed
preacher.
I admit it. Many other people are. We began, owing to circumstances,
with the idea of getting people to take up goodness by talking about it.
But we have grown discouraged in talking to people about goodness.
More and more, year by year, we have made up our minds, as I have hinted,
to lie low and to keep still and show them some.
And I can only say it again, as I have said it before, if everybody in the
world could know my plumber or pay a bill to him, the world would soon
begin, slowly but surely, to be a very different place.
The first time I saw B—— I had asked him to come over to arrange
with regard to putting in new waterpipes from the street to my house. The
old ones had been put in no one could remember how many years before,
and the pressure of water in the house, apparently from rust in the pipes,
had become very weak. After a minute's conversation I at once engaged B
—— to put in the new and larger pipes, and he agreed to dig open the
trench (about two hundred feet long, and three feet deep) and put the pipes
in the next day for thirty-five dollars. The next morning he appeared as
promised, but, instead of going to work, he came into my study, stood there
a moment before my eyes, and quietly but firmly threw himself out of his
job!
There was no use in spending thirty-five dollars, he said. He had gone to
the City Water Works Office and told them to look into the matter and see if
the connection they had put in at the junction of my pipe with the main in
the street did not need attention. They had found that a new connection was
necessary. They would see that a new one was put in at once. They were
obliged to do it for nothing, he said; and then, slipping (figuratively
speaking) thirty-five dollars into my pocket, he bowed gravely and was
gone.
B—— knew absolutely and conclusively (as any one would with a
look) that I was not the sort of person who would ever have heard of that
blessed little joint out in the street, or who ever would hear of it or who
would know what to do with it if he did.
Sometimes I sit and think of B—— in church, or at least I used to,
especially when his bill had just come in. It was always a pleasure to think
of paying one of B——'s bills—even if it was sometimes a postponed one.
You always knew, with B——, that he had made that bill out to you as if he
had been making out a bill to himself.
Not such a bad thing to think about during a sermon.
I do not deny that I do lose a sentence now and then in sermons; and
while, as every one knows, the sermons I have been provided with in the
old stone church have been of a rare and high order, there have, I do
acknowledge, been bad moments—little sudden bare spots or streaks of
abstraction—and I do not deny that there have been times when I could not
help feeling, as I sat listening, like sending around Monday morning to the
parsonage—my plumber. One could not help thinking what Dr. —— if he
once got started on a plumber like B—— (had had him around working all
the week during a sermon) could do with him.
I have a shoemaker, too, who would help most ministers. I imagine he
would point up their sermons a good deal—if they had his shoes on.
Perhaps shoes and pipes and things like these will be looked upon soon
to-day as constituting the great, slow, modest, implacable spiritual forces of
our time.
At all events, this is the most economical, sensible, thorough way (when
one thinks of it) that goodness can be advertised.
Chapter IX.
Touching the Imagination of Crowds
Table of Contents
A man's success in business to-day turns upon his power of getting people
to believe he has something that they want.
Success in business, in the last analysis, turns upon touching the
imagination of crowds. The reason that preachers in this present generation
are less successful in getting people to want goodness than business men
are in getting them to want motor-cars, hats, and pianolas, is that business
men as a class are more close and desperate students of human nature, and
have boned down harder to the art of touching the imaginations of crowds.
When one considers what it is that touches a crowd's imagination and
how it does it, one is bound is admit that there is not a city anywhere which
has not hundreds of men in it who could do more to touch the imagination
of crowds with goodness than any clergyman could. A man of very great
gifts in the pulpit, a man of genius, even an immortal clergyman, could be
outwitted in the art of touching the imagination of crowds with goodness by
a comparatively ordinary man in any one of several hundred of our modern
business occupations.
There is a certain nation I have in mind as I write, which I do not like to
call by name, because it is struggling with its faults as the rest of us are with
ours. But I do not think it would be too much to say that this particular
nation I have in mind—and I leave the reader to fill in one for himself, has
been determined in its national character for hundreds of years, and is being
determined to-day—every day, nearly every minute of every day, except
when all the people are asleep—by a certain personal habit that the people
have. I am persuaded that this habit of itself alone would have been enough
to determine the fate of the nation as a third-rate power, that it would have
made it always do things with small pullings and haulings, in short breaths,
and hand-to-mouth insights—a little jerk of idealism one day, and a little
jerk of materialism the next—a kind of national palavering, and see-sawing
and gesturing, and talking excitedly and with little flourishes. It is a nation
that is always shrugging its shoulders, that almost never seems to be
capable of doing a thing with fine directness, with long rhythms of purpose
or sustained feeling; and all because every man, woman, and child in the
country—scores of generations of them for hundreds of years—has been
taught that the great spiritual truth or principle at the bottom of correctly
and beautifully buying a turnip is to begin by saying that you do not want a
turnip at all, that you never eat turnips, and none of your family, and that
they never would. The other man begins by pointing out that he is never
going to sell another turnip as long as he lives, if he can help it. Gradually
the facts are allowed to edge in until at last, and when each man has taken
off God knows how much from the value of his soul, and spent two
shillings' worth of time on keeping a halfpenny in his pocket, both parties
separate courteously, only to carry out the same spiritual truth on a radish
perhaps or a spool of thread, or it may be even a house and lot, or a
battleship, or a war, or a rumour of a war, with somebody.
The United States, speaking broadly, is not like this. But it might have
been.
In the United States some forty years ago, being a new country, and
being a country where everything a man did was in the nature of things, felt
to be a first experiment, everybody felt democratic and independent, and as
if he were making the laws of the universe just for himself as he went
along.
There was a period of ten years or so in which every spool of thread and
bit of dress goods—everything that people wore on their bodies or put in
their months, and everything that they read, came up and had to be
considered as an original first proposition, as if there never had been a spool
of thread before, as if each bit of dress goods was, or was capable of being,
a new fresh experiment, with an adventurous price on it; and before we
knew it a moral nagging and edging and hitching had set in, and was fast
becoming in America an American trait, and fixing itself by daily repetition
upon the imagination of the people.
The shopping of a country is, on the whole, from a psychologist's point
of view, the most spiritual energy, the most irrevocable, most implacable
meter there can ever be of the religion a country really has.
There was no clergyman in America who could have made the slightest
impression on this great national list or trend of always getting things for
less than they were worth—this rut of never doing as one would be done by.
What was there that could be done with an obstinate, pervasive, unceasing
habit of the people like this?
What was there that could be done to touch the imagination of the
crowd?
Six thousand women a day were going in and out of A.T. Stewart's great
store on Broadway at that time. A.T. Stewart announced to New York
suddenly in huge letters one day, that from that day forward there should be
one price for everything sold in his store, and that that price would be paid
for it by everybody.
A.T. Stewart's store was the largest, most successful, original, and most
closely watched store in America.
The six thousand women became one thousand.
Then two thousand. Some of them had found that they finished their
shopping sooner; the better class of women, those whose time was worth
the most, and whose custom was the largest, gradually found they did not
want to shop anywhere else. The two thousand became three thousand, four
thousand, six thousand, ten thousand, twelve thousand.
Other department stores wanted the twelve thousand to come to them.
They announced the one price.
Hardware stores did it. Groceries announced one price. Then everybody.
Not all the clergymen in America, preaching every Sunday for months,
could have done very much in the way of seriously touching the
imagination of the crowd on the moral unworthiness, the intellectual
degradation, the national danger of picking out the one thing that nearly all
the people all do, and had to do, all day, every day, and making that thing
mean, incompetent, and small. No one had thought out what it would lead
to, and how monstrous and absurd it was and would always be to have a
nation have all its people taking every little thing all day, every day, that
they were buying, or that they were selling—taking a spool of thread, for
instance—and packing it, or packing their action with it, as full of
adulterated motives and of fresh and original ways of not doing as they
would be done by as they could think up—a little innocent spool of thread
—wreaking all their sins and kinds of sins on it, breaking every one of the
ten commandments on it as an offering....
It was A.T. Stewart, a very ordinary-looking, practical man in a plain,
everyday business, who arrested the attention of a nation and changed the
habit of thought and trend of mind of a great people, and made them a
candid, direct people, a people that went with great sunny prairies and high
mountains, a yea and nay people, straightforward, and free from palavering
forever. A.T. Stewart was accustomed, in his own personal dealings from
day to day, to cut people short when they tried to heckle with him. He liked
to take things for granted, drive through to the point, and go on to the next
one. This might have ended, of course, in a kind of cul de sac of being a
merely personal trait in a clean-cut, manful, straightforward American
gentleman; and if Stewart had been a snob or a Puritan, or had felt superior,
or if he had thought other people—the great crowds of them who flocked
through his store—could never expect to be as good as he was, nothing
would ever have come of it.
It is not likely that he was conscious of the long train of spiritual results
he had set in motion; of the way he had taken the habit of mind, the daily,
hourly psychology of a great people, and had wrought it through with his
own spirit; or of the way he had saved up, and set where it could be used,
everyday religion in America, and had freed the business genius of a nation
for its most characteristic and most effective self-expression.
He merely was conscious that he could not endure palavering in doing
business himself, and that he would not submit to being obliged to endure
it, and he believed millions of people in America were as clean-cut and
straightforward as he was.
And the millions of people stood by him.
Perhaps A.T. Stewart touched the imagination of the crowd because he
had let the crowd touch his and had seen what crowds, in spite of
appearances, were really like.
The enterprise of touching the imagination of the crowd with goodness,
which is being conducted every day on an enormous scale around us, has to
be carried on, like all huge enterprises, by men who are in a large degree
unconscious of it. There are few department stores in England or America
that would expect to be called pious, but if one is deeply and obstinately
interested in the Golden Rule, and in getting crowds of people to believe in
it at a time, it is impossible not to think what sweeps of opportunity
department stores would have with it—with the Golden Rule. With
thousands of people flowing in and out all the week, and with hundreds of
clerks to attend to it, eight hours a day, there would hardly seem to be any
limit to what such a store could do in making the Golden Rule a direct, a
pointed and personal thing, a thing that could not be evaded and could not
be forgotten by thousands of people. The same people all going in and out
of department stores, vast congregations of them, eight hours a day, which
ministers can only get at in small lots, three hundred or so, twenty minutes a
week, and can only get at with words even then—all of them being
convinced in terms they understand, and in terms they keenly feel,
convinced in hats that they will see over and over again, convinced in
velvets that they are going to put on and off for years, in laces, in
waistcoats, shoes, in dining-room chairs, convinced in the very
underclothes next to their skins, the clothes they sleep in all night, in the
very plates on which they eat, while all the time they keep remembering, or
being reminded, just how the things were bought, and just what was
claimed for them and what was not claimed for them, and thinking how the
claims came true or how they did not.
I just saw lying on the table as I came through the hall a moment ago a hat
which (out of all the long rows of hats I can see faintly reaching across the
years) will always be to me a memorable hat. I am free to say that, after all
the ladies it has been taken off to, my great memory of that hat is now and
always will be, as long as I live, the department store at which I bought it,
and the things the department store, before I got through with it, managed to
make the hat say.
I had been in the store the day before and selected, in broad daylight,
with a big mirror staring me out of countenance, a hat which was a quarter
of a size too large. To clinch the matter, I had ordered four ventilating holes
to be punched in it, and had it sent to my rooms to be my hat—implacably
my hat as I supposed, for better for worse, for richer for poorer—always.
The next morning, after standing before a mirror and trying hopefully for a
few minutes to see if I could not look more intelligent in the hat, I returned
to the store firmly. I had made up my mind that I would keep from looking
the way that that hat made me look, at any cost. The store was not
responsible according to the letter either for the hat or for the way I looked
in it. I had deliberately chosen it, looked at myself in cold blood in it, had
those dreadful, irremovable, eternal air-holes dug into it. I would buy a new
one. I jumped into a cab, and a moment after I arrived I found myself before
the clerk from whom I had bought it, with a new one on my head, and was
just reaching into my pocket for my purse when, to my astonishment, I
heard, or seemed to hear, the great Department Store Itself, in the gentle
accents of a young man with a yellow moustache, saying: "I'm sorry"—all
seven storys of it gathering itself up softly, apparently, and saying "I'm
sorry!" The young man explained that he was afraid the hat was wrong the
day before, and thought he ought to have told me so, that the store would
not want me to pay for the mistake.
I came home a changed man. I had been hit by the Golden Rule before
in department stores, but always rather subtly—never with such a broad,
beautiful flourish! I made some faint acknowledgment, I have forgotten
what, and rushed out of the store.
But I have never gone past the store since, on a 'bus, or in a taxi, or
sliding through the walkers on the street, but I have looked up to it—to its
big, quiet windows, its broad, honest pillars fronting a world.
I take off my hat to it.
But it gave me more than a hat.
I think what a thousand department stores, stationed in a thousand
places on this old planet, could do in touching the imagination of the world
—every day, day by day, cityfuls at a time.
I had found a department store that had absolutely identified itself with
my interests, that could act about a hat the way a wife would—a department
store that looked forward to a permanent relation with me—a great live
machine that could be glad and sorry—that really took me in, knew how I
felt about things, cared how I looked as I walked down the street.
Sometimes I think of the poor, wounded, useless thing I took back to them,
those pitiless holes punched in it—just where no one else would ever have
had them. I am human. I always feel about the store, that great marble and
glass Face, when I go by it now as if, in spite of all the difficulties, it
wanted me—to be beautiful! I at least feel and know that the people who
were the brain, the daily moving consciousness behind the face—wanted
me to be a becoming customer to them. They did not want to see me
coming in, if it could possibly be helped, in that hat any more!
I have told this little history of a gray hat, not because it is in any way
extraordinary, but because it is not. The same thing, or something quite like
it, expressing the same spirit, might have happened in any one of the best
hundred department stores in the world.
Most people can remember a time, only a very little while ago, when
clerks in our huge department stores or selling machines were not expected
to be people who would think of things like this to do, or who would know
how, or who would think to consider them good business if they did.
The department store that based its success on selecting clerks of a high
order of human insight, that paid higher wages to its clerks for their power
of being believed in, for their personal qualities and their shrewdness in
helping people and a gift for discovering mutual interests with everybody
and for founding permanent human relations with the public, had not been
thought of a little while ago.
All that had been thought of was the appearance of these things. It was
an employer's business, speaking generally, to get all he could out of his
clerks and have them get as little as possible out of him. It was their
business in their turn to get as much money out of the public as they could
get, and to give the public as little in return as they dared.
The type of employer who liked to do business in this way, and who
believed in it, crowed over the world nearly everywhere as the Practical
Man. And for the time being certainly it has to be admitted that he seemed
the most successful. Naturally there came to be a general impression among
the people that only certain lower orders of life and character could be
employed, or could stand being employed, in the great department stores.
I used often to go into ——'s. Everybody remembers it. I went in, as a
rule, in a helpless, waiting, married way, and as a mere attaché of the truly
wise and good. All I ever did or was expected to do was to stand by and
look wise and discriminating a minute about dress goods, when spoken to. I
used to put in my time looking behind the counters—all those busy, pale,
yellow-lighted people in little holes or stalls trying to be human and natural
in that long, low, indoor street of theirs, crowds of women staring by them
and picking at things. Always that moving sidewalk of questions—that dull,
eager stream of consciousness sweeping by. No sunlight—just the crowds
of covetousness and shrewdness. I used to wonder about the clerks, many of
them, and what they would be like at home or under an apple tree or each
with a bit of blue sky to go with them. They used to seem in those days, as I
looked, mostly poor, underground creatures living in a sort of Subway of
Things in a hateful, hard, little world of clothes, each with his little study or
trick or knack of appearances, standing there and selling people their good
looks day after day at so much a yard.
To-day, in a hundred cities one can go into department shops where one
would get, standing and looking on idly, totally different impressions. There
are hundreds of thousands of young men and women who have made being
a clerk a new thing in the world. The public has already had its imagination
touched by them, and is beginning to deal with clerks, as a class, on a
different level.
This has been brought to pass because the employer has been thought
of, or has thought of himself, who engages and pays for in clerks the
highest qualities in human nature that he can get. He picks out and puts in
power, and persuades to be clerks, people who would have felt superior to it
in days gone by—men and women who habitually depend for their
efficiency in showing and selling goods upon their more generous emotions
and insights, their imaginations about other people. They gather in their
new customers, and keep up their long lists of old and regular customers,
through shrewd visions of service to people, and through a technical gift for
making the Golden Rule work.
When one looks at it practically, and from the point of view of all the
consequences, a bargain is the most spiritual, conclusive, most self-
revealing experience that people can have together. Every bargain is a
cross-section in three tenses of a man. A bargain tells everything about
people—who they are, and what they are like. It also tells what they are
going to be like unless they take pains; and it tells what they are not going
to be like too sometimes, and why.
The man who comes nearest in modern life to being a Pope, is the man
who determines in what spirit and by what method the people under him
shall conduct his bargains and deal with his customers. ——, at the head of
his department store, has a parish behind his counters of twenty-five
hundred men and women. He is in the business of determining their
religion, the way they make their religion work, eight hours a day, six days
a week. He seems to me to be engaged in the most ceaseless, most
penetrating, most powerful, and most spiritual activity of the world. He is
really getting at the imaginations of people with his idea of goodness. If he
does not work his way through to a man's imagination one minute or one
day, he does the next. If he cannot open up a man's imagination with one
line of goods, he does it with another. If he cannot make him see things, and
do as he would be done by, with one kind of customer, another is moved in
front of him presently, and another, and another—the man's inner substance
is being attacked and changed nearly every minute every day. There is
nothing he can do, or keep from doing, in which his employer's idea of
goodness does not surround, besiege, or pursue him. Every officer of the
staff, every customer who slips softly up to the counter in front of him
makes him think of the Golden Rule in a new way or in some shading of a
new way—confronts him with the will, with the expectation, with the
religion of his employer.
In ——'s store (where I looked in a moment yesterday) one thousand of
the two thousand five hundred clerks are men. If I were a minister
wondering nearly every day how to work in for my religion a fair chance at
men, I should often look wistfully from over the edge of my pulpit, I
imagine, to the head of ——'s department store, sitting at that quiet, calm,
empty looking desk of his in his little office at the top of his big building in
—— Street, with nothing but those little six or seven buttons he softly puts
his thumbs on connecting him with a thousand men.
And he does not even need the buttons. Every man knows and feels,
personally and intimately, what the man at the desk is asking him to do with
a particular customer who stands before him at the moment. As soon as the
customer is there, the man at the desk practically is there too. His religion
works by wireless, and goes automatically, and as from a huge stored-up
reservoir, to all that happens in the place. He makes regularly with his idea
of goodness anywhere from twenty to sixty pastoral calls (with every sale
they make) on a thousand men a day. He is not dependent, as the ordinary
minister often is, on their dying, or on their babies, or on their wives, for a
chance to get at men with his religion.
If I wanted to take a spiritual census of modern civilization and get at
the actual scientific facts, what we would have to call, probably the foot-
tons of religion in the world to-day, I would not look for them in the year-
books of the churches, I would get them by going about in the great
department stores, by moving among the men and women in them day after
day, and standing by and looking on invisibly. Like a shadow or a light I
would watch them registering their goodness daily, hourly, on their
counters, over their counters, measuring out their souls before God in dress
goods, shoes, boas, hats, silk, and bread and butter!
This may not be true of the Orient, but it is true, and getting to be more
true every day, of Europe and America.
It is especially true of America. In the things which we borrow in
America, we are far behind the rest of the world. It is to the things that we
create, that we must look alone, for our larger destiny, and our world-
service.
Naturally, in so far as civilization is a race of borrowing, nations like
England and France and Germany a few hundred miles apart from one
another, set the pace for a nation that is three thousand miles away from
where it can borrow, like the United States. It is a far cry from the land of
the Greeks with their still sunny temples and dreams, and from England
with its quiet-singing churches, to New York with its practical sky-scraping
hewing prayer!
New York—scooping its will out of the very heavens!
New York—the World's last, most stern, perhaps most manful prayer of
all—half-asking and half-grasping out of the hand of God!
Here is America's religion! Half afraid at first, half glad, slowly,
solemnly triumphant, as on the edge of an abyss, I have seen America's
religion! I have seen my brother Americans hewing it out—day by day,
night by night, have I seen them—in these huge steel sub-cellars of the sky!
I have accepted the challenge.
If it is not a religion, then it shall be to us a religion to make it a
religion.
The Metropolitan Tower with its big clock dial, with its three stories of
telling what time it is, and its great bell singing hymns above the dizzy
flocks of the skyscrapers, is the soul of New York, to me.
If one could see a soul—if one could see the soul of New York, it would
look more like the Metropolitan Tower than anything else.
It seems to be trying to speak away up there in the whiteness and the
light, the very soul of the young resistless iron-hearted city.
I write as an American. To me there is something about it as I come up
the harbour that fills my heart with a big ringing, as if all the world were
ringing, ringing once more—ringing all over again—up in this white tower
of ours in its new bit of blue sky! I glory in England with it, in Greece, in
Bethlehem. It is as an outpost on Space and Time, for all of us gathering up
all history in it softly—once more and pointing it to God!
It is the last, the youngest-minded, the most buoyant tower—the mighty
Child among the steeples of the world. The lonely towers of Cologne
stretching with that grave and empty nave against the sky, out of that old
and faded region of religion, far away, tremulously send greetings to it—to
this white tower in the west—to where it goes up with its crowds of people
in it, with business and with daily living and hoping and dying in it, and
strikes heaven!
It may be perhaps only the American blood in me. Perhaps it is raw and
new to be so happy. I do not know. I only know that to me the Metropolitan
Tower is saying something that has been never quite said before—
something that has been given in some special sense to us as a trust from
the world. It is to me the steeple of democracy—of our democracy,
England's democracy—the world's democracy. The hollow domes of Sts.
Peter and Paul, and all the rest with their vague, airy other-worldliness, all
soaring and tugging like so many balloons of religion and goodness, trying
to get away from this world—are not to me so splendid, so magnificently
wilful as the Metropolitan Tower—as the souls of these modern, heaven-
striking men, taking the world itself, at last, its streets of stone, of steel, its
very tunnels and lifting them up as blind offerings, as unbounded instincts,
as prayers, as songs to heaven!
I worship my country, my people, my city when I hear the big bell in it
and when I look up to where the tower is in that still place like a sea—look
up to where that little white country belfry sits in the light, in the dark
above the vast and roaring city!
To me, the Metropolitan Tower, sweeping up its prayer out of the streets
the way it does, and doing it, too, right beside that little safe, tucked-in,
trim, Sunday religion of the Madison Square Presbyterian Church, lifts
itself up as one of the mighty signs and portents of our time. Have I not
heard the bell tolling to the people in the midst of business and singing
great hymns? A great city lifts itself and prays in it—prays while it sings
and clangs so absent-looking below.
I like to go out before going to sleep and take a look at it—one more
look before I sleep, upon the tower, strong, unyielding, alive, sinewy,
imperturbable, lifting up within itself the steel and soul of the world. I am
content to go to sleep.
It is a kind of steeple of the business of this world. I would rather have
said that business needed a steeple before until I saw the Metropolitan
Tower and heard it singing above the streets. But I had always wanted
(without knowing it), in a modern office building, a great solemn bell to
remind us what the common day was. I like to hear it striking a common
hour and what can be done in it. I stop in the street to listen—to listen while
that great hive of people tolls—tolls not the reveries of monks above the
roofs of the skyscrapers, but the religion of business—of the real and daily
things, the seriousness of the mighty street and the faces of the men and the
women.
Chapter X.
The Stupendous, the Unusual, the Monotonous,
and the Successful
Table of Contents
The imagination of crowds may be said to be touched most successfully
when it is appealed to in one of four ways:
THE STUPENDOUS. THE UNUSUAL. THE MONOTONOUS. THE
SUCCESSFUL.
Of these four ways, the stupendous, or the unusual, or the successful are
the most in evidence, and have something showy about them, so that we can
look at them afterward, and point out at a glance what they have done. But
probably the underhold on the crowd, the real grip on its imagination, the
one which does the plain, hard, everyday work on a crowd's ideals, which
determines what crowds expect and what crowds are like inside—is the
Monotonous.
The man who tells the most people what they shall be like in this world
is not the great man or the unusual man. He is the monotonous man.
He is the man, to each of us, who determines the unconscious beat and
rhythm with which we live our daily lives.
If we wanted to touch the imaginations of crowds, or of any particular
crowd, with goodness, the best way to do it would probably be, not to go to
the crowd itself, but to the man who is so placed that he determines the
crowd's monotony, the daily rhythm with which it lives—the man, if we can
find him, who arranges the crowd's heart-beat.
It need not take one very long to decide who the man is who determines
the crowd's heart-beat. The man who has the most dominion over the
imaginations of most of us, who stands up high before us out in front of our
lives, the man who, as with a great baton, day after day, night after night,
conducts, as some great symphony, the fate of the world above our heads,
who determines the deep, unconscious thoughts and motives, the inner
music or sing-song, in which we live our lives, is the man to whom we look
for our daily bread.
It is the men with whom we earn our money who are telling us all
relentlessly, silently, what we will have to be like. The men with whom we
spend it, who sell things to us, like the department stores, those huge
machines of attention, may succeed in getting great sweeps of attention out
of crowds at special times, by appealing to men through the unusual and
through the stupendous or the successful. But what really counts, and what
finally decides what men and what women shall be, what really gets their
attention unfathomably, unconsciously, is the way they earn their money.
The feeling men come to have about a fact, of its being what it is, helplessly
or whether or no—the feeling that they come to have about something, of
its being immemorially and innumerably the same everywhere and forever,
comes from what they are thinking and the way they think while they are
earning their money. It is out of the subconscious and the monotonous that
all our little heavens and hells are made. It is our daily work that becomes
to us the real floor and roof of living, hugs up under us like the ground, fits
itself down over us, and is our earth and sky. The man with whom we earn
our money, the man who employs us, his thinking or not thinking, his "I
will" and "I won't," are the iron boundaries of the world to us. He is the
skylight and the manhole of life.
The monotonous, the innumerable and over and over again, one's desk,
one's typewriter, one's machine, one's own particular factory window, the
tall chimney, the little forever motion with one's hand—it is these, godlike,
inscrutable, speechless, out of the depths of our unconsciousness and down
through our dreams, that become the very breath and rumble of living to us,
domineer over our imaginations and rule our lives. It is decreed that what
our Employers think and let us know enough to think shall be a part of the
inner substance of our being. It shall be a part of growing of the grass to us,
and shall be as water and food and sleep. It shall be to us as the shouts of
boys at play in the field and as the crying of our children in the night. To
most men Employers are the great doors that creak at the end of the world.
It is not the houses that people live in, or the theatres that they go to, or
the churches to which they belong, or the street and number—the East End
look or the West End look the great city carves on the faces of these men I
see in the street—that determines what the men are like.
Their daily work lies deeper in them than their faces. One finds one's
self as one flashes by being told things in their walk, in the way they hold
their hands and swing their feet.
And what is it their hands and feet, umbrellas, bundles, and the wrinkles
in their clothes tell us about them?
They tell us how they earn their money. Their hopes, their sorrow, their
fears and curses, their convictions, their very religions are the silent,
irrevocable, heavenly minded, diabolical by-products of what their
Employers think they can afford to let them know enough to think.
"Fight for yourselves. Your masters hate you. They would shoot you
down like rabbits, but they need your labour for their huge profits.
Don't go in till you get your minimum. No Royal Commission, no
promise in the future. Leaders only want your votes; they will sell you.
They lie. Parliament lies, and will not help you, but is trying to sell
you. Don't touch a tool till you get your minimum. Win, win, win! It is
up to all workers to support the miners."
If a man happens to be an employer, and happens to know that he is not
this sort of man, and finds that he cannot successfully carry on his business
unless he can make five hundred men in his factory believe it, what can he
do? How can he touch their imaginations? What language is there, either of
words or of action, that will lead them to see that he is a really a fair-
minded, competent employer, a representative of the interests of all, a
fellow-citizen, a Crowdman, and that his men can afford to believe in him
and coöperate with them?
If they think he would shoot them down like rabbits, it is because they
have not the remotest idea what he is really like. They have not noticed him.
They have no imagination about him, have not put themselves in his place.
How can he get their attention?
Chapter XI.
The Successful
Table of Contents
A little while ago I saw in Paris an American woman, the President of a
Woman's Club (I imagined), who was doing as she should, and was going
about in a cab appreciating Paris, drive up to the Louvre. Leaving her cab,
though I wondered a little why she did, at the door, she hurried up the steps
and swept into the gallery, taking her eleven-year-old boy with her. I came
upon her several times. The Louvre did not interest the boy, and he seemed
to be bothering and troubling his mother, and of course he kept trying very
hard, as any really nice boy would, to get out; but she would not let him,
and he wandered about dolefully, looking at his feet and at the floor, or at
the guards, and doing the best he could. Finally she came over to him; there
was a Murillo he must see—it was the opportunity of his life; she brought
him over to it, and stood him up in front of it, and he would not look; she
took his small brown head in her hands and steered it to the great
masterpiece and held it there—on that poor, silent, helpless Murillo—
until....
I observed that she could steer his head; but I could not help thinking
how much more she would have done if she had known how to steer it
inside.
The invention of the Megaphone, of the Cinema, and the London Times,
and of the Bible, are all a part of the great, happy, hopeful effort of one part
of this world to get the attention of the other part of it, and steer heads
inside.
This art of steering heads inside, which has come to be the secret art of
all the other arts, the secret religion of all the religions, is also the secret of
building and maintaining a civilization and a successful and permanent
business. It is hard to believe how largely, for the last twenty years, it has
been overlooked by employers as the real key of the labour problem—this
art of steering people's heads inside.
We have seen part of the truth. We have put in a good deal of time in
finding fault with labouring men for thinking too much about themselves
and about their class, and for emphasizing their wages more than their
work, and for not having more noble and disinterested characters.
Parliaments, clergymen, and employers have all been troubled for years
about Labour, and they have been trying very hard on Sundays and through
reports of speeches by members of Parliament in the daily press, and
through laws, and through employers' associations, and through factory
rules and fines, to get the attention of labouring men and lift their thoughts
to higher things.
A great many wise things have been said to Labour—masterpieces,
miles of them as it were, whole Louvres of words have been hung upon
their walls.
But in vain!
And all because we have merely taken the outside of the boy's head in
our hands. We have not thought what was really going on in it. We have not
tried to steer it inside. We have been superficial.
It is superficial for a comfortable man with a bun in his pocket to talk to
a starving man about having some higher motive than getting something to
eat. Everybody sees that this is superficial, if we mean by it that his body is
starving. But if we mean something more real and more terrible than that—
that he is starving inside, that his soul is starving, that he has nothing to live
for, no real object in getting something to eat—if we mean by it, in other
words, that the man's imagination is not touched even by his own life,
people take it very lightly.
And it is the most important thing in the world. The one thing now
necessary to society, to industry, is to get hold of the men who are in it, one
by one, and touch their imaginations about themselves. We have millions of
men working without their thoughts and expectations being ventilated or
passed along, year after year.
One sees these men everywhere one goes, in thousands of factories,
doing their work without any draught. We already have tall chimneys for
our coal furnaces; we have next to see the value of tall chimneys, great flues
to the sky, on the lives and thought and the inner energies of men. The most
obvious way to get a draught on a man, to get him to glow up and work is to
cut through an opening in the top of his life.
Just where to cut this opening, and just how to cut it in each man's life
—each man considered as a problem by himself—is the Labour problem.
There are certain general principles that might be put down in passing.
To begin with, we must not feel ashamed to begin implacably with the
actual man just as he is, and with the wants and the motives that he actually
has. We should feel ashamed rather to begin in any other way. It would not
be bright or thoughtful to begin on him with motives he is going to have;
and it certainly would not be religious or worthy of us to try to make him
begin with ours. Perhaps ours are better—for us. Perhaps, too, ours will be
better for him when he is like us (if we can give him any reason to want to
be). In the meantime, what is there that can honestly be called base in
taking human nature as it is and in allowing a sliding scale of motives in
people? Starving people and slaves, or people who are ugly and hateful, i.e.,
not really quite bright toward others, who impute mean, inaccurate motives
to them, can only be patiently expected to have a very small area or even
mote of unselfishness at first. A cross-section of our society to-day
represents the entire geological formation of human nature for 40,000 years.
We need but look on the faces of the men about us as we go down the street.
All history is here this minute.
We wish that Labour had better motives. We wish to get our workmen
to understand us better and believe in us more and work for us harder.
We agree that we must begin with them, if we propose to do this, where
they are.
Where are they?
There are certain general observations that might seem to the point.
1. If a man is a sane and sound man and works hard, he must feel that
everything he does, every minute, is definitely connected with the main
through-train purpose in his life.
2. If the main purpose in his life is domestic and consists in having his
family live well and giving his children a chance, he must feel and be
absolutely sure when he is working better or working worse for his
employer that he is working better or worse for himself and for those for
whom he lives.
3. In the ordinary labourer this domestic unselfishness or house
patriotism is a kind of miniature public spirit. It is the elementary form of
his national or human enthusiasm. It is the form of disinterestedness that
has to be attended to in men first; and the way for society to get the
labouring man to be public-spirited, to have the habit of considering the
rights of others, is for society to have the habit of considering his rights in
his daily work. An intelligent, live man must be allowed a little margin to
practise being unselfish on, if only in the privacy of his own family.
Unselfishness begins in small circles. The starving man must be allowed a
smaller range of unselfishness than the man who has enough. It is not
uncomplimentary or unworthy in human nature to admit that this is so—to
demand that the human being who is starving must be allowed to be selfish.
If he is not bright enough to be selfish when he is hungry he is dangerous to
society. We ought to insist upon his being selfish, and help him in it. Virtue
is a surplus.
4. This is the first humble, stuttering speech the competent modern
employer who proposes to express himself to his men, and get them to
understand him and work with him, is going to make. He is going to pick
out one by one every man in his works who has a decent, modest, manly
desire to be selfish, and help him in it. He is going to do something or say
something that will make the man see, that will make him believe for life,
that the most powerful, the most trustworthy, the most far-sighted man he
can find in the world to be his partner in being decently, soundly, and
respectfully selfish—is his employer.
No employer can expect to get the best work out of a man except by
working down through to the inner organic desire in the man as a man,
except by waking his selfishness up and by making it a larger, fuller, nobler,
weightier selfishness, and turning the full weight of it every minute, every
hour, on his daily work.
The best language an employer can find to express this desire at first to
his workmen, is some form of faithful, honest co-partnership.
5. The ordinary wage labourer has little imagination about other people
because he is not allowed any about himself. The moment he is, and the
moment his employer arranges his work so that he sees every minute all day
that the work which he does for the firm 30 per cent. better counts. 30 per
cent. more on his own main purpose in life, his imagination is touched
about himself and he begins to work like a human being. When a man has
been allowed to work awhile as a human being he will begin to be human
with a wider range. Being a partner touches the imagination and wakes the
man's humanness up. He not only works better, but he loves his family
better when he sees he can do something for them. He serves his town
better and his lodge better when he sees he can do something for them.
6. Being a partner wakes the man's imagination toward those who work
with him, and toward the public and the markets and the goods and the
cities where the goods go. He reads newspapers with a new eye. He
becomes interested in people who buy the goods, and in people who do not.
Why do they not? He gropes toward a general interest in human nature, and
begins to live.
7. A man who is being paid wages one night in a week, has his
imagination touched about his work one night in the week. He is merely
being a wage-earner. In being a partner he is being paid, and feels his pay
coming in, every thirty seconds, in the better way he moves his hands or
does not move his hands. This makes him a man.
8. And, finally, as he knows he is being paid, and that he always will be
paid, what he earns, he stops thinking of the sick, tired side of his work—
the pay he gets out of it, and begins to love the work itself, and begins to be
perfect in it for its own sake. This makes him a gentleman.
9. Being a partner makes a man actively and keenly reasonable and
practical, not only about his own labour, but about the superior value of
other people with whom he works. He wants the best people in the best
places. He begins to have a practical partner's imagination about the men
who are over him, and about their knowing more than he does. If he is
merely paid wages, he is superstitious, and jealous toward those who know
more than he does. If he is paid profits, he is glad that they do, and strikes
in and helps.
10. Another complete range of motives is soon offered to the employee
who is a partner. He feels the joy of being a part of a big, splendid whole, a
disinterested delight and pride in others. He grows young with it, like a boy
in school.
Here is the factory over him, around him—his own vast hockey team—
and over that is the nation, and over that is the world!
An employer can touch the imagination of most men, of the rank and
file of the people, ninety-nine times where other people can touch it once.
And every time he touches it, he touches it to the point.
If men in general do not believe to-day in religion and do not want it, it
is because they have employers who have not seen any place in their
business where they could get their religion in, and have kept the people (in
the one place where they could really learn what religion is) from learning
anything about it. The moment the more common employers see what the
great ones see now, that business is the one particular place in this world
where religion really works, works the hardest, the longest, and the best,
works as it had never been dreamed a religion could be made to work
before—the day school teachers of the world, put the Golden Rule in the
Course everybody will know it.
It only takes a moment's thought to see what the employers of the world
could do with the Golden Rule the moment they take hold of it.
One has but to consider what they have done with it already.
One has but to consider the astounding way in the last fifteen years they
have made everybody not believe in it.
The employers of the world have been saying ten hours a day to
everybody that the Golden Rule is a foolish, pleasant, inefficient, worsted
motto on a parlour wall.
Everybody has believed it.
And now that the big employers are setting the pace and are saying
exactly the opposite thing about the Golden Rule, now that all the
employers are trying to get their employees to be efficient (to do by their
employers as they would be done by), and now that they are trying to be
efficient themselves (are trying to do to their employees as they would have
their employees do to them), the Golden Rule is touching the imagination of
crowds, and the crowd is seeing that the Golden Rule works. They watch it
working every day in the things they know about. Then they believe in it for
other things.
Chapter XII.
The Necks of the Wicked
Table of Contents
A letter lies before me, one out of many others asking me how the author of
"The Shadow Christ," which is a study of the religious values in suffering
and self-sacrifice in this world, takes the low ground that honesty is the best
policy.
I know two kinds of men who believe that honesty is the best policy.
These two men use exactly the same words "Honesty is the best policy."
One man says it.
The other man sings it.
One man is honest because it pays.
The other man is honest because he likes it.
"Honesty is the best policy" as a motive cannot be called religious, but
"Honesty is the best policy" as a Te Deum, as something a man sings in his
heart every day about God, something he sings about human nature is
religious, and believing it the way some men believe it, is an act of worship.
It is like a great gentle mass.
It is like taking softly up one's own planet and offering it to God.
Here it is—the planet. Honesty is organized in the rocks on it and in the
oak trees on it and in the people. The rivers flow to the sea and the heart of
Man flows to God. On this one planet, at least, God is a success.
Possibly it is because many other people beside myself have been slow
in clearly making this distinction between "Honesty is the best policy" as a
motive or a Te Deum, that I have come upon so many religious men and
women in the last two or three years, who, in the finest spirit, have seemed
to me to be doing all that they could to discourage everybody especially to
discourage me, about the Golden Rule.
The first objection which they put forward to the Golden Rule is that it
is a failure.
When I try to deal with this or try to tell them about Non-Gregarious,
the second objection that they put forward is, that it is a success.
If they cannot discourage me with one of these objections they try to
discourage me with the other.
They point to the Cross.
Some days I cannot help wondering what Christ would think if He were
to come back and find people, all these good Christian people everywhere
using the Cross—the Cross of all things in the world as an objection to the
Golden Rule and to its working properly, or as a general argument against
expecting anything of anybody.
I do not know that I have any philosophy about it that would be of any
value to others.
I only know that I am angry all through when I hear a certain sort of
man saying, and apparently proving, that the Golden Rule does not work.
And I am angry at other people who are listening with me because they
are not angry too.
Why are people so complacent about crosses? And why are they willing
to keep on having and expecting to have in this world all the good people
on crosses? Why do they keep on treating these crosses year after year,
century after century, in a dull tired way as if they had become a kind of
conventionality of God's, a kind of good old church custom, something that
He and the Church by this time, after two thousand years, could not really
expect to try to get over or improve upon?
I do not know that I ought to feel as I do.
I only know that the moment I see evil triumphing in this world, there is
one thing that that evil comes up against.
It comes up against my will.
My will, so far as it goes, is a spiritual fact.
I do not argue about it, nor do I know that I wish to justify it. I merely
accept my will as it is, as one spiritual fact.
I propose to know what to do with it next.
The first thing that I have done, of course, has been to find out that there
are millions of other so-called Christian people who have encountered this
same fact that I have encountered.
There are at least some of us who stand together. Our wills are set
against having any more people die on crosses in this world than can be
helped. If there is any kind of skill, craftmanship, technique, psychology,
knowledge of human nature which can be brought to bear, which will keep
the best people in this world not only from being, but from belonging on
crosses in it, we propose to bring these things to bear. We are not willing to
believe that crowds are not inclined to Goodness. We are not willing to
slump down on any general slovenly assumption about the world that
goodness cannot be made to work in it.
If goodness is not efficient in this world we will make it efficient.
Our reason for saying this is that we honestly glory in this world. We
believe that at this moment while we are still on it, it is in the act of being a
great world, that it is God's world, and in God's Name we will defend its
reputation.
We do not deny that it may be better spiritual etiquette, more heroic
looking and may have a certain moral grace, so far as a man himself is
concerned, if the world makes him suffer for being honest. But after all he
is only one man, and whether he dislikes his suffering or likes it and feels
fine and spiritual over it, it is only one man's suffering.
But why is it that when the world makes a man suffer, everybody should
seem always to be thinking of the man? Why does not anybody think of the
world?
Is not the fact that a whole world, eternal and innumerable, is supposed
to be such a mean, dishonest sort of a world that it will make a man suffer
for being good a more important fact than the man's suffering is? It seems
to me to be taking not lower but higher ground when one insists on
believing in the race one belongs to and in believing that it is a human race
that can be believed in. After two thousand years of Christ, it is a lazy, tired,
anæmic slander on the world to believe that it does not pay to be good in it.
The man who believes it, and acts as if he believed it, is to-day and has
been from the beginning of time the supreme enemy of us all. He is guilty
before heaven and before us all and in all nations of high treason to the
human race. One of the next most important things to do in modern religion
is going to be to get all these morally dressed-up, noble-looking people who
enjoy feeling how good they are because they have failed, to examine their
hearts, stop enjoying themselves and think.
For hundreds of years we have religiously run after martyrs and we
have learned in a way, most of us, to have a kind of cooped-up patriotism
for our own nation, but why are there not more people who are patriotic
toward the whole human race? One has been used to seeing it now for
centuries, good people all over the world hanging their harps on willow
trees, or snuggling down together by the cold sluggish stream of their lives,
and gossiping about how the world has abused them, when they would be
far better occupied, nine out of ten of them—in doing something that would
make it stop. There was a poet and soldier some thousands of years ago
who put more real religion (and put it too, into his imprecatory psalms),
than has been put, I believe, into all the sweet whinings and the spiritual
droopings of the world in three thousand years. I do not deny that I would
quarrel, as a matter of form, with the lack of urbanity, with a certain ill-
nature in the imprecatory Psalms; but with the spirit in them, with the
motive and mighty desire, with the necessity in the man's heart that was
poured into them, I have the profoundest sympathy.
David had a manly, downright belief. His belief was that if sin is
allowed to get to the top in this world of ours, it is our fault. David felt that
it was partly his—and being a king—very much his, and as he was trying to
do something about it, he naturally wanted the world to help.
What he really meant—what lay in the background of his petition—the
real spirit that made him speak out in that naïve bold way before the Lord,
and before everybody—that made him ask the great God in heaven all
looking so white and so indifferent, to come right down please and jump on
the necks of the wicked, was a vivid, live vision of his own for his own use
that he was going to make the world more decent. He was spirited about it.
If God did not, He would, and naturally when he came to expressing how
he felt in prayer, he wanted God to stand by him. To put it in good plain
soldier-like Hebrew, He wanted God to jump on the necks of his enemies.
Speaking strictly for ourselves, in our more modern spirit of course, we
would want to modulate this, we admit that we would not ask God to do a
little thing like jumping on the necks of the wicked—just for us—nor would
we care to break away from the other things we are doing and attend to it
ourselves, nor would we even favour their necks being jumped on by
others, but while we do not agree with David's particular request, we do
profoundly agree with the way he felt when he made it. We would not make
our flank movement on the wicked in quite the same way and according to
our more modern and more scientific manner of thought, we would want to
do something more practical with the wicked, but we would want to do
something with them and we would want to do it now.
As we look at it, it ought not to be necessary to jump on the necks of the
wicked to make them good, that is, to make them understand what they
would wish they had done in twenty years. We live in a more reasoning and
precise age and what more particularly concerns us in the wicked is not
their necks, but their heads and their hearts. It seems to us that they are not
using them very much and that the moment they do and we can get them to,
they will be good. Possibly it was a mere matter of language, a concession
to the then state of the language—David's wanting their necks to be jumped
on so that he could get their attention at first and make them stop and think
and understand. More subtle ways of expressing things to the wicked have
been thought of to-day than of jumping on their necks, but the principle
David had in mind has not changed, the principle of being loyal to the
human race, the principle of standing up for people and insisting that they
were really meant to be better than they were or than they thought they
could be—a kind of holy patriotism David had for this world. The main fact
about David seems to be that he believed he belonged to a great human
race. Incidentally he believed he belonged to a human race that was really
quite bright, bright enough at least to make people sorry for doing wrong in
it—a human race that was getting so shrewd and so just and so honest that it
took stupider and stupider people every year to be wicked, and when he
found, judging from recent events in Judea, that this for the time being was
not so, he had a hateful feeling about it, which it seems to some of us, vastly
improved him and would improve many of us. We do not claim that the
imprecatory Psalms were David's best, but they must have helped him
immensely in writing the other ones.
We may be wrong. But it has come to be an important religious duty to
some of us, or rather religious joy, to hate the prosperity of the wicked. We
hate the prosperity of the wicked, not because it is their prosperity and not
ours, but because their prosperity constitutes a sneer or slander on the
world. We have no idea of wanting to go about faithfully jumping upon the
necks of the wicked. What we want is to feel that we are in a world where
the good people are happy and are making goodness reasonable, successful,
profitable and practical in it. We want an earth with crowds on it who see
things as they are, and who guess so well on what they want (i.e., who are
good) that other people who do not know what they want and are not good,
will be lonesome.
We have made up our minds to live in a world not where the wicked
will feel that their necks are going to be jumped on (which is really a rather
interesting and prominent feeling on the whole), but a world where the
wicked will be made to feel that nobody notices their necks, that they are
not worth being jumped on, a world where nobody will have time to go out
back and jump on them, a world where the wicked will not be able to think
of anything important to do, and where the wicked things that are left to do
will be so small and so stupid that nobody will notice. They will be ignored
like boys with catcalls in the street. When we can make people who do
wrong feel unimportant enough, there is going to be some chance for the
good.
If we could find some sweet, proper, gentle, Christian-looking way of
conveying to these people for a few swift, keen minutes how little
difference it makes when they and people like them do wrong, they would
steal over in a body and do right.
This is our program. We are making preliminary arrangements for a
world in which after this, very soon now, righteousness is going to attend
strictly to its own business and unrighteousness is going to be crowded out.
No one will feel that he has time in two or three hundred years from now to
go out of his way into some obscure corner of the world and jump on the
necks of the wicked.
But this is a matter of form. The main fundamental manful instinct
David had—the idea that there should not be any more people dying on
crosses than could be helped—that collective society should take hold of
Evil and set it down hard in its chair and make it cry seems to many of us
absolutely sound. Of course, we feel that it is not for us, those who love
righteousness, to jump on the necks of the wicked. We prefer to have it
attended to in a more dignified, impersonal way by Society as a whole. So
we believe that Society should proceed to making goodness and honesty
pay. If Society will not do it we will do it. The world may be against it at
first but we will at least clear off a small place on it—in our own business
for instance—where our goodness can command the most shrewdness and
the most technique—and we will do what we can slowly—one industry at a
time, to remove the slander on goodness that goodness is not inefficient,
and the slander on the world that goodness cannot be self-supporting, self-
respecting (and without disgrace), even comfortable in it.
The old hymn with which many of us are familiar is well and true
enough. But it does not seem that standing up for Jesus is the most
important point in the world just now. A great many people are doing it.
What we need more is people who will stand up for the world. When people
who are standing up for the world stand and sing "Stand up for Jesus" it will
begin to count. Let four hundred Nons sing it; and we will all go to church.
If nine of the people out of ten who are singing "Stand up for Jesus"
would stand up for the world, that is, if they would stop trading with their
grocer when they find he slides in regularly one bad orange out of twelve
and promptly look up a grocer who does not do such things, and trade with
him, it would not be necessary for people to do as they so often do
nowadays, fall back on a little wistful half discouraged last resort like
"standing up for Jesus."
Standing up for the world means standing by men who believe in it,
standing by men who make everything they do in business a declaration of
their faith in God and their faith in the credit of human nature, men who put
up money daily in their advertising, their buying and selling, on the loyalty,
common sense, brains, courage, goodness, and righteous indignation of the
people.
The idea that goodness is sweet and helpless and that Jesus was meek
and lowly and has to be stood up for is now and always has been a slander.
It does not seem to some of us that He would want to be stood up for and
we do not like the way some people call Him meek and lowly. It would be
more true to say that He merely looks meek and lowly; that is, if most men
had done or not done or had said or not said things in the way he did, they
would have been considered meek and lowly for it. He had a way of using a
soft answer to turn away wrath. But there was not anything really meek and
lowly about his giving the soft answer. No meek and lowly man would ever
have thought of such a thing as turning away wrath with a soft answer. He
would have been afraid of looking weak. He would not have had the energy
or the honesty or the spiritual address to know or to think of a soft answer
that would do it.
The spirit of fighting evil with good—a kind of glorious self-will for
goodness, for doing a thing the higher and nobler way and making it work,
the spirit of successful implacably efficient righteousness is the last and
most modern interpretation of the New Testament, the crowd's latest cry to
its God. Crowds will always crucify and crosses will never go by. But we
are going to have a higher ideal for crosses. We are not going (out of sheer
shame for the world), to think seriously any longer of dying on a cross, or
letting any one else die on one for a little rudimentary platitude, a quiet,
sensible, everyday business motto for any competent business man like "Do
unto others as you would have them do unto you."
Chapter XIII.
Is It Wrong for Good People to be Successful?
Table of Contents
We are having and are about to have notably and truly successful men who
have the humility and faithfulness, the spiritual distinction of true and great
success.
I want to interpret, if I can, these men. I would like to put with the great
martyrs, with the immortal heroes of failure, these modern silent, unspoken,
unsung mighty men, the heroes of success. I look forward to seeing them
placed among the trophies of religion, in the heart of mankind at last.
I cannot stand by and watch these men being looked upon by good
people as men the New Testament made no room for, secretly disapproved
of by religious men and women, as being successes, as being little, noisy,
disturbing, contradictions of the New Testament as talking back to the
Cross.
These things I have been trying to say about the Cross as a means of
expressing goodness to crowds have brought me as time goes on into close
quarters with many men to whom I pay grateful tribute, men of high spirit,
who strenuously disagree with me.
I am not content unless I can find common ground with men like these.
They are wont to tell me when we argue about it that whatever I may be
able to say for success as a means of touching the imaginations of crowds
with goodness, great or attractive or enthralling characters are not produced
by success. Success does not produce great characters. It is now and always
has been failure that develops the characters of the men who a truly great.
Perhaps failure is not the only way.
When I was talking with —— a little while ago about Non-Gregarious's
goodness and how it succeeded, he was afraid that if his goodness
succeeded there must have been something the matter with it.
I could see that he was wondering what it was.
Non's success troubled him. He did not think it was exactly religious.
"Real religion" he said, "was self-sacrifice. There always had to be
something of the Cross about real religion."
I said that Non's religion was touched at every point with the Cross.
It seemed to me that it was the spirit of eagerness in it that was the great
thing about the Cross. If Non would all but have died to make the Golden
Rule work in this world, if he daily faced ruin and risked the loss of
everything he had in this life to prove that the Golden Rule was a success,
that is if he really had a Cross and if he really faced it—dying on it, or not
dying on it, could not have made him one whit more religious or less
religious than he was. What Non was willing to die for, was his belief in the
world, and scores of good Christian people tried in those early days of his
business struggle to keep him from believing in the world. There was hardly
a day at first but some good Christian would step into Non's office and tell
him the world would make him suffer for it if he kept on recklessly
believing in it and doing all those unexpected, unconventional, honest
things that somehow, apparently, he could not help doing.
They all told him he could not succeed. They said he was a failure. He
would suffer for it.
I would like to express if I can, what seems to be Non's point of view
toward success and failure.
If Non were trying to express his idea of the suffering of Christ, I
imagine he would say that in the hardest time of all when his body was
hanging on the Cross, the thing that was really troubling Christ was not that
he was being killed. The thing that was troubling him was that the world
really seemed, at least for the time being, the sort of world that could do
such things. He did not take his own cross too personally or too literally as
the world's permanent or fixed attitude toward goodness or every degree of
goodness. There was a sense in which he did not believe except temporarily
in his own cross. He did not think that the world meant it or that it would
ever own up that it meant it.
Probably if we had crosses to-day the hard part of dying on one would
be, not dying on it, but thinking while one was dying on it that one was in
the sort of world that could do such things.
It is Non's religion not to believe every morning as he goes down to his
office that he is in a mean world, a world that would want to crucify him for
doing his work as well as he could.
Perhaps this was the spirit of the first Cross, too. We have every reason
to believe that if Christ could have come back in the flesh three days after
the crucifixion and lived thirty-three years longer in it, he would have
occupied himself exclusively in standing up for the world that had crucified
him, in saying that it was a small party in a small province that did it, that it
was temporary and that they did it because they were in a hurry.
It was not Christ, but the comparatively faint-believing, worldly minded
saints that have enjoyed dying on crosses since, who have been proud of
being martyrs.
Among those who have tried the martyr way of doing things Jesus is
almost the only one who has not in his heart abused the world. Most
martyrs have made a kind of religion out of not expecting anything of it and
of trying to get out of it. "And ye, all ye people, are ye suitable or possible
people for me to be religious with?" the typical martyr exclaims to all the
cities, to all the inventors, to the scientists and to the earth-redeemers, to his
neighbours and his fellow men. It was not until science in the person of
Gallileo came to the rescue of Christianity and began slowly to bring it back
to where Christ started it—as a noble, happy enterprise of standing up for
this world and of asserting that these men who were in it are good enough
to be religious here and to be the sons of God now—that Christianity began
to function. Religion has been making apparently a side trip for nearly
twelve hundred years, a side trip into space or into the air or into the grave
for holiness for the eternal, and for the infinite.
Doubtless very often people on crosses really have been holier than the
people who knew how to be good without being crucified. Sometimes it has
been the other way. It would have been just as holy in Non to make the
gospel work in New York as to make a blaze, a show or advertisement of
how wicked the world was, and of how inefficient the gospel was—by
going into insolvency.
He has had his cross, but instead of dying on it, he has taken it up and
carried it. Scores of risks and difficulties that he has grappled with would
have become crosses at once if equally good, but less resourceful men, had
had them. Letting one's self be threatened with the cross a thousand times is
quite as brave as dying on one once. The spirit, or at least the shadow, of a
cross must always fall daily on any life that is stretching the world, that is
freeing the lives of other men against their wills. The whole issue of
whether there will be a cross or the threat of a cross turns on a man's insight
into human nature and his quiet and practical imagination concentrated
upon his work.
Not dying on a cross is a matter of technique. One sees how not to, and
one does not. It might be said that the world has two kinds of redeemers, its
cross-redeemers and its success-redeemers. The very best are on crosses,
many of them. Perhaps in the development of the truth the cross-redeemers
come first; they are the pioneers. Then come the success-redeemers, then
everybody!
Chapter XIV.
Is It Second Rate for Good People to be
Successful?
Table of Contents
Of course the most stupendous success that has ever been made—the
world's most successful undertaking from a technical point of view as an
adaptation of means to ends was the attempt that was made by a man in
Galilee years and years ago to get not only the attention of a whole world,
but to get the attention of a whole world for two thousand years.
This purpose of arresting the attention of a world and of holding it for
two thousand years was accomplished by the use of success and of failure
alternately.
Christ tried success or failure according to which method (time and
place considered) would seem to work best.
His first success was with the doctors.
His next success was based on His instinct for psychology, His power of
divining people's minds, which made possible to Him those extraordinary
feats in the way of telling short stories that would arrest and hold the
attention of crowds so that they would think and live with them for weeks
to come.
His next success was a success based on the power of His personality,
and His knowledge of the human spirit and his victory over His own spirit
—his success in curing people's diseases and His extraordinary roll of
miracles.
He finally tried failure at the end, or what looked like failure, because
the Cross completed what he had had to say.
It made His success seem greater.
The world had put to death the man who had had such great successes.
People thought of His successes when they thought of Him on the
Cross, and they have kept thinking of them for thousands of years.
But the Cross itself, or the use of failure was a sowing of the seed, a
taking the truth out of the light and the sunshine and putting it in the dark
ground.
The Cross was promptly contradicted with the Resurrection. All this, it
seems to some of us, is the most stupendous and successful undertaking
from a purely technical point of view that the world has seen. In the last
analysis it was not His ideas or His character merely, but it was His
technique that made Christ the Son of God and the Master of the Nations of
the Earth.
I think that while Christ would not have understood Frederick Taylor's
technique, his tables of figures or foot-tons or logarithms he would have
understood Frederick Taylor.
Nearly all the time that could be said to have been spent in his life in
dealing with other men he spent in doing for them on a nobler scale the
thing that Frederick Taylor did. He went up to men—to hundreds of men a
day, that he saw humdrumming along, despising themselves and despising
their work and expecting nothing of themselves and nothing of any one else
and asked them to put their lives in his hands and let him show what could
be done with them.
This is Frederick Taylor's profession.
The Sermon on the Mount began with telling people that they would be
successful if they knew how—if they had a vision. It proceeded to give
them the vision. It began with giving them a vision for the things that they
had, told them how even the very things that they had always thought
before were what was the matter with the world they could make a great use
of. "Blessed are the peacemakers. Blessed are those that hunger; blessed are
the meek."
And He then went on to tell them how much finer, and nobler and more
free from the cares and weights of this earth they could be if they wanted to
be, than they had dared to believe. He told the people who were around
Him bigger things about human nature, how successful it was or could be
than any one had ever claimed for people in this world before. They put
Him up on a Cross at last and crucified Him because they thought He was
too hopeful about them, and about human nature or because, as they would
have put it, He was blasphemous and said every man was a Son of God.
As human nature then was and in the then spirit of the world, no better
means than a Cross could have been employed to get the attention of all
men, to make a two thousand year advertisement for all nations of what a
success human nature was, of what men really could be like.
But I think that if Christ were to come to us again and if he were to try
to get the attention of the whole world once more to precisely the same
ideas and principles that he stood for before, the enterprise would be
conducted in a very different manner.
There is a picture of Albert Durer's which hangs near my desk, and once
more as I write these lines my eyes have fallen on it. It is the familiar one
with the lion and the lamb in it, lying down together, and with the big room
with the implements of knowledge scattered about in it and at the other end
in the window at the table with a book, an old, bent-over scientist with a
halo over his head.
If Christ were to appear suddenly in this modern world to-morrow, the
first thing He would see and would go toward, would be the halo over the
scientist's head.
There is nothing especially picturesque or religious looking, nothing, at
least, that could be put in a stained-glass window in Frederick Taylor's
tables and charts and diagrams of the number of foot-tons a pig-iron handler
can lift with his arms in a day.
But if Christ returned to the world to-morrow and if what He wanted to
do to-morrow was to get the universal, profound, convinced attention of all
men to the Golden Rule, I believe He would begin the way Frederick Taylor
did, by—being concrete. If He wanted to get men in general, men in
business, to love one another He would begin by trying to work out some
technical, practical way in which certain particular men in a certain
particular place could afford to love one another.
He would find a practical way for instance for the employers and pig-
iron handlers in the Midvale Steel Works to come to some sort of common
understanding and to work cheerfully and with a free spirit together. I think
he would proceed very much in the way that Frederick Taylor did.
He would not say much about the Golden Rule. He would give each
man a vision for his work, and of the way it lapped over into other men's
work and leave the Golden Rule a chance to take care of itself. This is all
the Golden Rule, as a truth or as a remark needs just now.
For two thousand years men have devoted themselves Sunday day after
Sunday to saying over and over again that men should love one another.
The idea is a perfectly familiar one. When Christ said it two thousand years
ago, it was so original and so sensational that just of itself and as a mere
remark it had a carrying power over the whole earth.
Everybody believes it now—that it is a true remark—but like a score of
other remarks that have been made and some of the noblest Christ made, is
it not possible that it has long since in its mere capacity of being a remark,
gone by? There is no one who has not heard about our loving one another.
The remark we want now is how we can do it. This is the remark that Mr.
Frederick Taylor has made. It is not very eloquent. It is a mere statement of
fact. It has taken him nearly thirty-three years to make it.
The gist of it is that for thirty-three years, the employers and the pig-
iron handlers in the Midvale Steel Works, Pennsylvania, have been devoted
to one another and to one another's interests and acting all day every day as
if of course their interests were the same, and it has been found that
employees when their employers coöperated with them could lift forty-
seven tons instead of twelve and a half a day, and were getting 60 per cent.
more wages.
Everybody listens. Everybody sees at a glance that when it comes to
making remarks about doing as one would be done by, this is the one
remark that we have all been waiting to hear some one make for two
thousand years.
The Cross or the last-resort type of religion was as far as St. Augustine or
St. Francis in their world could get. It was all that the Middle Ages were
ready for or that could be claimed for people who had to live in ages
without a printing press, in which no one in the crowd could expect to know
anything and in which there were no ways of letting crowds know things.
To-day there is no reason why the Cross as a contrivance for attracting
the attention of all people to goodness should be exclusively relied upon.
Possibly the Cross was intended, at the time, as the best possible way of
starting a religion, when there was none, or possibly for keeping it up when
there was very little of it.
But now that Christianity has been occupied two thousand years in
putting in the groundwork, in laying down the principles of success, and in
organizing them into the world, has been slowly making it possible with
crowds that could not be long deceived for success to be decent. The leaven
has worked into human nature and Christianity has produced The
Successful Temperament.
Success has become a spiritual institution. In other words, the hour of
the Scientist, of the man with a technique, of the man who sees how, the
man of The Successful Temperament is at hand.
Everything we plan for the world, including goodness, from this day—
must reckon with him—with the Man Who Sees How.
Chapter XV.
The Successful Temperament
Table of Contents
I also, Gentle Reader, have despised and do despise "success."
I also have stood, like you, perhaps, and I am standing now in that
ancient, outer court, where I can keep seeing every day The Little Great
Men with all their funny trappings on,—their hoods, and their ribbons, and
their train-bearers, drive up before us all and go in to The Great Door. I
have gone by in the night and have heard the buzz of their voices there. I
have looked, like you, up at the great lighted windows of Prosperity from
the street.
And in the broad daylight I have seen them too. I have stood on the curb
in the public way with all the others and watched silently the parade of The
Little Great go by.
I have waited like you, Gentle Reader, and smiled or I have turned on
my heel sadly, or wearily or bitterly or gayly and walked away down my
own side street of the world and with the huzzahs of the crowd echoing
faintly in my ears have gone my way.
But I keep coming back to the curb again.
I keep coming back because, every now and then among all the gilt
carriages and the bowing faces in them, or among all the big yellow vans or
cages with the great beasts of success in them, the literary foxes, the
journalist-juggernauts, the Jack Johnsons of finance, the contented,
gurgling, wallowing millionaires—I cannot help standing once more and
looking among them, for one, or for possibly two, or three or four who may
be truly successful men. Some of them are merely successful-looking. I
often find as I see them more closely, that they are undeceived, or humble,
or are at least not being any more successful-looking than they can help,
and are trying to do better.
They are the men who have defied success to succeed and who will defy
it again and again.
They are the great men.
The great man is the man who can get himself made and who will get
himself made out of anything he finds at hand.
If success cannot do it, he makes failure do it. If he cannot make success
express the greatness or the vision that is in him, he makes failure express
it.
But this book is not about great men and goodness. It is about touching
the imagination of crowds with goodness, about making goodness
democratic and making goodness available for common people.
A stupendous success in goodness will advertise it as well as a stupendous
failure.
Goodness has had its cross-redeemers to attract the attention of half a
world.
Possibly it is having now its success-redeemers to attract the attention of
the other half.
The people the success-redeemers reach would turn out to be, possibly,
very much more than half.
The Cross, as a means of getting the attention of crowds, or of the more
common people in our modern, practical-minded Western world, was
apparently adapted to its purpose as long as it was used for church purposes
or as long as it was kept dramatic or sensational or remote, or as long as it
was a cross for some one else, but as a means of attracting the attention of
crowds of ordinary men and women to goodness in common everyday
things, it is very doubtful if failure—in the power of steady daily pulling on
men's minds, has done as much for goodness as success.
It is doubtful if, except as an ideal or conventional symbol the cross has
ever been or ever could be what might be called a spiritually middle-class
institution. It has been reserved for men of genius, pioneers and world-
designers to have those colossal and glorious crosses that have been
worshipped in all ages, and must be worshipped in all ages as the great
memorials of the human race.
But the more common and numerous types of men, the men who do not
design worlds, but who execute them, build them, who carry the new
designs of goodness out, who work through the details and conceive the
technique of goodness are men in whom the spiritual and religious power
takes the natural form of success.
It seems to be the nature of the modern and the western type of man to
challenge fatalism, to defy a cross. He would almost boast that nobody
could make him die on it. This spirit in men too is a religious spirit. It is the
next hail of goodness. Goodness posts up its next huge notice on the world:
SUCCESS
It is going to make the more rudimentary everyday people notice it, and
it is going to make them notice it in everyday things. It does not admit that
goodness is merely for the spiritual aristocrats for those greater souls that
can search out and appreciate the spiritual values in failure.
It believes that goodness is for crowds. It has discovered that crosses, to
common people in common things, seem oriental and mystical. The
common people of the western world instead of being born with dreamy
imaginations are born with pointed and applied ones. It is not impossible
that the comparative failure of the Christian religion in the western world
and in the later generations is that it has been trying to be oriental and
aristocratic in appealing to what is really a new type of man in the world—
the scientific and practical type as we see it in the western nations all about
us to-day.
We can die on crosses in our Western world as well as any one and we
can do it in crowds too as they do in India, but we propose if crosses are
expected of us to know why in crowds. Knowing why makes us think of
things and makes us do things. It is the keynote of our temperament.
And it is not fair to say of us when we make this distinction that we do
not believe in the cross. But there are times when some of us wish that we
could get other people to stop believing in it. We would all but die on the
cross to get other people to stop dying on one for platitudes, to get them to
work their way down to the facts and focus their minds on the practical
details of not dying on a cross, of forming a vision of action which will
work. It goes without saying that as long as crowds are in the world crosses
will not go by, but it is wicked not to make them go by as fast as possible,
one by one. They were meant to be moved up higher. We are eager not to
die on the same cross for the same thing year after year and century after
century. It seems to us that the eagerness that always goes with the cross
always was and always will be the essential, powerful and beautiful thing in
it.
And it is this new eagerness in the modern spirit, a kind of hurrying up
of the souls of the world that is inspiring us to employ our western genius in
inventing and defending and applying the means of goodness and in finding
ways of making goodness work. We will not admit that men were intended
to die on crosses from a sheer, beautiful, heavenly shiftlessness, vague-
mindedness, mere unwillingness to take pains to express themselves or
unwillingness to think things out and to make things plain to crowds. It
does not seem to us that it is wicked to employ success as well as failure, to
state our religion to people. It seems to us that it goes naturally with the
scientific and technical temperament of the people that we should do this. It
is not superior and it is not inferior. It is temperamental and it is based upon
the study of the psychology of attention, on a knowledge of what impresses
a certain kind of man and of what really is conclusive with crowds and with
average men and women. It is the distinctive point of view of the pragmatic
temperament, of the inductive mind. The modern mind is interested in facts
and cannot make a religion out of not knowing them. There was a time once
when people used to take their bodily diseases as acts of God. We have
made up our minds not to have these same bodily diseases now. We have
discovered by hard work and constant study that they are not necessary. The
same is true of our moral diseases and of our great social maladies.
It is going to be the same with crosses. It is a sin and a slander and
affront to human nature and to God to die on a cross if it can be helped by
hard work and close thinking, or by touching the imaginations of others.
Most of us acting in most things are not good enough to die on crosses.
We are not worthy, it would not be humble in us to. Crosses are only
reserved for the newest and most rare truths, and for the newest and most
rare men. They are still, and they still can be made to be, a means of grace
and of perfection to people who have gifts of learning things by suffering,
but as a means of making other people and people in crowds see things, the
right to use a cross is not for those of us who are merely lumbering
spiritually along, trying to catch up to a plain, simple-hearted old platitude,
eighteen hundred years late like the Golden Rule. The right to a cross is
reserved for those who are up on the higher reaches, those great bleak
stretches or moors of truth where men go forth and walk alone with God
hundreds of years ahead.
Chapter XVI.
The Men Ahead Pull
Table of Contents
Writing a hopeful book about the human race with the New York Sun, Wall
Street, Downing Street and Bernard Shaw looking on is uphill work.
Sometimes I wish there were another human race I could refer to when I
am writing about this one, one every one knows. The one on Mars, for
instance, if one could calmly point to it in the middle of an argument, shut
people off with a wave of one's hand and say, "Mars this" and "Mars that"
would be convenient.
The trouble with the human race is that when one is talking to it about
itself, it thinks it is It.
It is not It yet.
The earth and everything on it is a huge Acorn, tumbling softly through
the sky.
Our boasted Christianity (crosses, and resurrections and cathedrals and
all) is a Child crying in the night.
It is not necessary for me to prove to the satisfaction of the New York Sun
and Bernard Shaw that the Golden Rule has not reached the superior moral
stage of being taken as a platitude by all of our people who are engaged in
business. It is enough to submit that the most creative and forceful business
men—the men who set the pace, the foremen of the world, are taking it so,
and that others are trying to be as much like them as they can. Wickedness
in this world is not going to stop with a jerk. It is merely being better
distributed. Possibly this is all there is to the problem, getting sin better
distributed. The Devil has never had a very great outfit or any great weight,
but he has always known where to throw it, and he has always done an
immense business on a small capital and the only way he has managed to
get on at all, is by organizing, and by getting the attention of a few people at
the top. Now that the moral sense of the world has become quickened, and
that rapid transit and newspapers and science and the fact-spirit have gained
their hold, the sins of the world are being rapidly distributed, not so much
among the men who determine things as among those who cannot.
Everything is following the fact-spirit. The modern world and
everything in it, is falling into the hands of the men who cannot be cheated
about facts, who get the facts first and who get them right.
The world cannot help falling, from now on, slowly—a little
ponderously perhaps at first—into the hands of good men. To say that the
world is falling into the hands of men who cannot be cheated and to say that
it is falling into the hands of good men is to say the same thing.
The men who get the things that they want, get them by seeing the
things as they are. Goodness and efficiency both boil down to the same
quality in the modern man, his faculty for not being a romantic person and
for not being cheated.
A good man may be said to be a man who has formed a habit, an
intimate personal habit of not being cheated. Everything he does is full of
this habit. The sinful man, as he is usually called, is a man who is off in his
facts, a man who does not know what he really wants even for himself. In a
matter-of-fact civilization like ours, he cannot hope to keep up. If a man can
be cheated, even by himself—of course other people can cheat him and
everybody can take advantage of him. He naturally grows more
incompetent every day he lives. The men who are slow or inefficient in
finding out what they really want and slow in dealing with themselves are
necessarily inefficient and behind hand in dealing with other people. They
cannot be men who determine what other people shall do.
It is true that for the moment, it still seems—now that science has only
just come to the rescue of religion, that evil men in a large degree are the
men who still are standing in the gate and determining opportunities and
letting in and letting out Civilization as they please. But their time is
limited.
The fact-spirit is in the people. We enjoy facts. Facts are the modern
man's hunting, his adventure and sport. The men who are ahead are getting
into a kind of two-and-two-are-four habit that is like music, like rhythm. It
becomes almost a passion, almost a self-indulgence in their lives. Being
honest with things, having a distaste for being cheated by things, having a
distaste for being cheated by one's self and for cheating other people, runs
in the blood in modern men. The nations can be seen going round and round
the earth and looking one another long and earnestly in the eyes. The poet is
turning his imagination upon the world about him and upon the fact that
really works in it. The scientific man has taken hold of religion and
righteousness is being proved, melted down in the laboratory, welded
together before us all and riveted on to the every day, on to what really
happens, and on to what really works. Goodness in its baser form already
pays. Only the biggest men may have found it out, but everybody is
watching them. The most important spiritual service that any man can
render the present age is to make goodness pay at the top (in the most
noticeable place) in some business where nobody has made it pay before.
Anybody can see that it almost pays already, that it pays now here, now
there. At all events, anybody can see that it is very noticeable that the part
of the world that is most spiritual is not merely the part that is whining or
hanging on crosses. It is also the part that is successful. One knows scores
of saints with ruddy cheeks. It is getting to be a matter of principle almost
in a modern saint—to have ruddy cheeks.
I submit this fact respectfully to Bernard Shaw, Wall Street, Downing
Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, and even to the New York Sun, that vast
machine for laughing at a world down in its snug quarters in Park Row—
that the saint with ruddy cheeks is a totally new and disconcerting fact in
our modern life. He is the next fact the honest pessimist will have to face.
I submit that this saint with ruddy cheeks is here, that he is lovable,
imperturbable, imperious, irrepressible, as interesting as sin, as catching as
the Devil and that he has come to stay.
He stays because he is successful and can afford to stay.
He is successful because he is good.
Only religion works.
I am aware that the New York Sun might quarrel with just exactly this
way of putting it.
I might put it another way or possibly try to say it again after saying
something else first. Viz.: The man who is successful in business is the man
who can get people to do as much as they can do and a great deal more than
they think they can do.
Only a very lively goodness, almost a religion in a man, can do this. He
has to have something in him very like the power of inventing people or of
making people over.
To be specific: In some big department stores, as one goes down the
aisle, one will see over and over again the clerks making fun of customers.
One by one the customers find it out and the more permanent ones,
those who would keep coming and who have the best trade, go to other
stores.
How could such a thing be stopped in a department store by a practical
employer? Can he stop it successfully by turning on his politeness?
Of course he can make his clerks polite-looking by turning on his
politeness. But politeness in a department store does not consist in being
polite-looking. Being polite-looking does not work, does not grip the
customer or strike in and do things and make the customer do things.
A machine like a department store, made up of twenty-five hundred
human beings, which is carving out its will, its nature, stamping its pattern
on a city, on a million men, or on a nation, cannot be made to work without
religion. If the clerks are making fun of people, only religion can stop it.
Perhaps you have been made fun of yourself, Gentle Reader? You have
observed, perhaps, that in making fun of people (making fun of you, for
instance), the assumption almost always is, that you are trying to be like the
Standard Person, and that this (they look at you pleasantly as you go by) is
as near as you can get to it! If an employer wishes to make his clerk an
especially valuable clerk, if he wishes to make his clerk an expert in human
nature or a good salesman, one who sees a customer when he comes along
as he really is, and as he is trying to be, he will only be able to do it by
touching something deep down in the clerk's nature, something very like his
religion—his power of putting himself in the place of others. He can only
do it by making a clerk feel that this power in him of doing as he would be
done by, and seeing how to do it, i.e., the religion in him, is what he is hired
for.
It is visionary to try to run a great department store, a great machine of
twenty-five hundred souls, a machine of human emotions, of five thousand
eyes and ears, a huge loom of enthusiasm, of love, hate, covetousness,
sorrow, disappointment, and joy without having it full of clerks who are
experts in human nature, putting themselves in the place of crowds of other
people, clerks who are essentially religious.
So we watch the men who are ahead driving one another into goodness.
The man who is not able to create, distribute or turn on, in his business
establishment, goodness, social insight, and customer-insight in it, can only
hope to-day to keep ahead in business by having competitors as inefficient
as he is.
The man who is ahead has discovered himself. Everything the man
ahead is doing eight hours a day, is seen at last narrowing him down,
cornering him into goodness.
Of course as long as people looked upon goodness as a Sunday affair, a
few hours a week put in on it, we were naturally discouraged about it.
It is still a little too fresh looking and it may be still a little too clever for
everybody, but slowly, irrevocably, we see it coming. We can look up
almost any day and watch some goodness—now—at least one specimen or
so, in every branch of business.
We watch daily the men who are ahead, pulling on the goodness of the
world and the Crowds pushing on it.
Chapter XVII.
The Crowds Push
Table of Contents
The men who are ahead make goodness start, but it is the crowds that make
it irresistible.
The final, slow, long, imperious lift on goodness is the one the crowd
gives. Of course, for the most part, modern business is largely done with
crowds. Crowds are doing it and crowds are nearly always watching it.
The factory is slower than the department store in being good because
the men in it deal with crowds of things and crowds of wheels and not with
crowds of people.
All responsible people are forced to be good, with crowds around them,
expecting it of them.
Crowds at the very least are a kind of vast, insinuating, penetrating,
omnipresent, permeating police force of righteousness.
In a department store, the crowds, twelve thousand a day, are like some
huge coil of hose or vacuum cleaner, lying about the place, sucking up,
drawing out, and demanding goodness from the clerks. Clerks develop
human insight and powers faster in department stores than machinists do in
factories because they are exposed to more people and to larger crowds. The
stream clears itself.
The last forms of business to yield to the new spirit are to be the lonely
ones, the ones where light, air, human emotions, and crowds are shut out.
The lonely forms of business will at last be vitalized and socialized by
men of organizing genius, who will invent the equivalent of crowds going
by, who will contrive ways of putting a few responsible persons in sight or
in a position where they will feel crowds going by their souls, looking into
them as if they were shop windows. Crowds can keep track of a few. The
crowds will see that these few are the kind of men who will keep track of
all.
Crowds in the end will not accept less than the best. With crowds of
people and crowds of places and crowds of times we are good. In all things
crowds can see or be made to see we are safe. Progress lies in making
crowds see through people, making crowds go past them. While they are
going past them, they lure their goodness on.
Chapter XVIII.
The Man Who Says How, Says How
Table of Contents
The people who are worried and discouraged about goodness in this world,
one finds when one studies them a little, are almost always worried in a
kind of general way. They do not worry about anything in particular. Their
religion seems to be a kind of good-hearted, pained vagueness.
The religion of the people who never worry at all, the thoughtless
optimists, is quite the same too, except that they have a kind of happy, rosy-
lighted vagueness instead.
For about two thousand years now, goodness has been in the hands of
vague people. Some of them have used their vagueness to cry with softly,
and some of them have used it to praise God with and to have many fine,
brave, general feelings about God.
I have tried faithfully, speaking for one, to be religious with both of
these sets of people.
They make one feel rather lonesome.
If one goes about and takes a grim happiness, a kind of iron joy in
seeing how successful a locomotive is, or if one watches a great, worshipful
ocean liner with delight, or if, down in New York, one looks up and sees a
new skyscraper going slowly up, unfolding into the sky before one, lifting
up its gigantic, restless, resistless face to God; there comes to seem to be
something about churches and about good people and about the way they
have of acting and thinking about goodness and doing things with
goodness, that makes one unhappy.
Perhaps one has just come from it and one's soul is filled with the stern,
glad singing of a great foundry, of the religious, victorious praising spirit of
man, dipping up steel in mighty spoonfuls—the stuff the inside of the earth
is made of, and flinging it together into a great network or crust for the
planet—into mighty floors or sidewalks all round the earth for cities to
tread on and there comes to seem something so successful, so manlike, so
godlike about it, about the way these men who do these things do them and
do what they set out to do, that when I find myself suddenly, all in a few
minutes on a Sunday morning, thrown out of this atmosphere into a
Christian church, find myself sitting all still and waiting, with all these good
people about me, and when I find them offering me their religion so
gravely, so hopefully, it all comes to me with a great rush sometimes—
comes to me as out of great deeps of resentment, that religion could
possibly be made in a church to seem something so faint, so beautifully
weary, so dreamy, and as if it were humming softly, absently to itself.
I wonder in the presence of a Christianity like this whether I am a
Christian or not—the quartet choirs, confections, the little, dainty, faintly
sweet sermons—it is as if—no I will not say it....
I have this moment crossed the words out before my eyes. It is as if,
after all, religion, instead of being as I supposed down at the foundry, the
stern and splendid music of man conquering all things for God, were, after
all, some huge, sublime and holy vagueness, as if the service and the things
I saw about me were not hard true realities—as if going to Church were like
sitting in a cloud—some soft musical cloud or floating island of goodness
and drifting and drifting....
Not all churches are alike, but I am speaking of something that must have
happened to many men. I but record this blank space on this page, as a
spiritual fact, as a part of the religious experience of a man trying to be
good.
When this little experience of which the words have to be crossed out
after going to Church—finally settles down, there is still a grim truth left in
it.
The vagueness of the man who is good, who locks himself up in a
Church and says, "Oh God! Oh God! Oh God!" and the vigour and
incisiveness of the man who says nothing about it and who goes out of
doors and acts like a god all the week—these remain with me as a daily and
abiding sense.
And when I find myself myself, I, who have gloried in cathedrals since I
was a little child, looking ahead for a God upon the earth, and when I see
the foundries, the airships, the ocean liners beckoning the soul of man upon
the skies, and the victory of the soul over the dust and over the water and
over the air and when I see the Cathedrals beside them, those vast, faint,
grave, happy, floating islands of the Saved, drifting backward down the
years, it does not seem as if I could bear the foundries saying one thing
about my God and the cathedrals saying another.
I have tried to see a way out. Why should it be so?
I have seen that the foundries, the ocean liners, and the airships are in
the hands of men who say How.
Perhaps we will take goodness and cathedrals, very soon now, and put
them for a while in the hands of the men who say how. If St. Francis, for
instance, to-day, were to be suddenly more like Bessemer, or if Dr. Henry
Van Dyke were more like Edison or if the Reverend R.J. Campbell were
more like Sir Joseph Lister or if the Bishop of London were to go at London
the way Marconi goes at the sky, what would begin to happen to goodness?
One likes to imagine what would happen if that same spirit, the spirit of
"how" were brought to bear upon a great engineering enterprise like
goodness in this world.
Perhaps the spirit of "how" is the spirit of God.
Perhaps religion in the twentieth century is Technique.
Technique in the twentieth century is the Holy Ghost.
Technique is the very last thing that has been thought of in religion.
Religion is being converted before our eyes. It is becoming touched with
the temper of science, with the thoroughness, the doggedness, the
inconsolableness of science until it is seeing how and until it is saying how.
When the inventors, in our machine age, get to work on goodness in the
way that they are getting to work on other things, things will begin to
happen to goodness that the vague, sweet saints of two thousand years have
never dreamed of yet.
In London and New York, in this first quarter of the twentieth century
Christianity will not be put off as a spirit. The right of Christianity to be a
spirit has lapsed.
Christianity is a Method.
What Christ meant when He said He was the Truth and the Life, has
been understood, on the whole, very well. What He meant by saying He
was the Way, we are now beginning, to work out.
A thousand or two years ago, when two men stood by the roadside and
made a bargain, it was their affair.
When two men stand on the sidewalk now and make a bargain, say in
New York, they have to deal and to deal very thoughtfully and accurately
with ninety million people who are not there. They do this as well as they
can by imagining what the ninety million people would do and say, and
how they would like to be done by, if they were there.
The facilities for finding out what the ninety million people would do
and say, and what they would want, the general conveniences for assuring
the two men on the sidewalk that they will be able to conduct their bargain,
and to get the other ninety million in, accurately, that they will be able to do
by them as they would be done by—these have scarcely been arranged for
yet.
In our machine age, with our railroads, and our telephones suddenly
heaping our lives up on one another's lives, almost before we have noticed
it, our religious machinery to go with our other machinery, our machinery
that we are going to be Christians with, has not been invented yet.
Religion two-men size, or man and woman size, or one family or two
family size or village size has been worked out. Religion as long as it has
been concerned with a few people and was a matter of love between
neighbours, or of skill in being neighbourly, has had no special or
imperative need for science or the scientific man.
Now that religion is obliged to be an intimate, a confiding relation
between ninety million people, the spiritual genius, devotion, and holiness
of the scientific man, of the man who says "how" has come to be the
modern man's almost only access to his God.
A ninety million man-power religion is an enterprise of spiritual
engineering, a feat in national and international statesmanship, a gigantic
structural constructive achievement in human nature. Doing as one would
be done by, with a few people, is a thing that any man can sit down and read
his Bible a few minutes and arrange for himself. He can manage to do as he
would be done by, fairly well in the next yard. But how about doing as one
would be done by with ninety million people—all sizes, all climates, all
religions, Buffalo, New Orleans, Seattle? How about doing as one would be
done by three thousand miles?
It is an understatement to say, as we look about our modern world, that
Christianity has not been tried yet.
Christianity has not been invented yet.
What was invented two thousand years ago was the spirit of
Christianity.
Christianity has been for two thousand years a spirit.
It is almost like a new religion to me just of itself to think of it. It is like
being presented suddenly with a new world to think of it, to think that all
we have really done with Christianity as yet is to use it as a breath or spirit.
I look at the vision of the earth to-day, of the great cities rushing
together at last and running around the world like children running around a
house—great cities shouting on the seas, suddenly sliding up and down the
globe, playing hopscotch on the equator, scrambling up the poles—all these
colossal children!... Here we all are!—a whiff of steam from the Watts's
steam kettle and a wave of Marconi across the air and we have crept up
from our little separate sunsets, all our little private national bedrooms of
light and darkness into the one single same cunning dooryard of a world!
Our religion, our politics, our Bibles, kings, millionaires, crowds, bombs,
prophets and railroads all hurling, sweeping, crashing our lives together in a
kind of vast international collision of intimacy.
All the Christianity we can bring to bear or that we can use to run this
crash of intimacy with is a spirit, a breath.
We do not well to berate one another or to berate one another's motives
or to assail human nature or to grow satirical about God with all our little
battered helpless Christians about us and our unadjusted religions.
We are a new human race grappling with a new world. Our Christianity
has not been invented yet and if we want a God, we will work like chemists,
like airmen, turn the inside of the earth out, dump the sky, move mountains,
face cities, love one another, and find Him!
In the meantime until we have done this, until we have worked as
chemists and airmen work, Christianity is a spirit.
It explains all this eager jumble of the world, brushes away our
objections, frees our hearts, gives us our program, makes us know what we
are for, to stop and think a moment of this—that Christianity is a spirit.
Everything that is passing wonderful is a spirit at first. God begins
building a world as a world-spirit, out of a spirit brooding upon the waters.
Then for a long while the vague waters, then for a long while a little vague
land or spirit-of-planet before a real world.
And every real belief that man has had, has begun as a spirit.
For two thousand years Man has had the spirit of immortality. Homer
had it. Homer had moments when improvising his mighty song all alone, of
hearing or seeming to hear, faintly, choruses of men's voices singing his
songs after him, a thousand years away.
As he groped his way up in his singing, he felt them in spirit, perhaps,
the lonely wandering minstrels in little closed-in valleys, or on the vast
quiet hills, filling the world with his voice when he was dead, going about
with his singing, breaking it in upon the souls of children, of the new boys
and girls, and building new worlds and rebuilding old worlds in the hearts
of men. Homer had the spirit of hearing his own voice forever, but the
technique of it, the important point of seeing how the thing could really be
done, of seeing how people, instead of listening to imitations or copies or
awkward echoes of Homer, should listen to Homer's voice itself—the
timbre, the intimacy, the subtlety, the strength of it—the depth of his heart
singing out of it. All this has had to wait to be thought out by Thomas A.
Edison.
Man has not only for thousands of years had the spirit of immortality, of
keeping his voice filed away if any one wanted it on the earth, forever, but
he has had all the other spirits or ghosts of his mightier self. He has had the
spirit of being imperious and wilful with the sea, of faring forth on a planet
and playing with oceans, and now he has worked out the details in ocean
liners, in boats that fly up from the water, and in boats which dive and swim
beneath the sea. For thousands of years he has had the spirit of the
locomotive working through, troops of runners or of dim men groping
defiantly with camels through deserts, or sweeping on on horses through the
plains, and now with his banners of steam at last he has great public trains
of cars carrying cities.
For hundreds of years man has had the spirit of the motor-car—of
having his own private locomotive or his own special train drive up to his
door—the spirit of making every road his railway. For a great many years
he has had the spirit of the wireless telegraph and of using the sky. Franklin
tried using the sky years ago but all he got was electricity. Marconi knew
how better. Marconi has got ghosts of men's voices out of the clouds, has
made heaven a sounding board for great congregations of cities, and
faraway nations wrapped in darkness and silence whisper round the rolling
earth. Man has long had the spirit of defying the seas. Now he has the
technique and the motor-boat. He has had the spirit of removing oceans and
of building huge, underground cities, the spirit of caves in the ground and
mansions in the sky, and now he has subways and skyscrapers. For a
thousand years he has had the spirit of Christ and now there is Frederick
Taylor, Louis Brandeis, Westfield Pure Food, Doctor Carrel, Jane Addams,
and Filene's Store. Vast networks—huge spiritual machines of goodness are
crowding and penetrating to-day, fifteen pounds to the square inch, the
atmosphere of the gospel into the very core of the matter of the world, into
the everyday things, into the solids of the lives of men.
It takes two great spirits of humanity to bring a great truth or a new
goodness into this world; one spirit creates it, the other conceives it, gathers
the earth about it and gives it birth. These two spirits seem to be the spirits
of the poet and the scientist.
We are taking to-day, many of us, an almost religious delight in them
both. We make no comparisons.
We note that the poet's inspiration comes first and consists in saying
something that is true, that cannot be proved.
A few people with imagination, here and there, believe it.
The scientist's inspiration comes second and consists in seeing ways of
proving it, of making it matter of fact.
He proves it by seeing how to do it.
Crowds believe it.
Chapter XIX.
And the Machine Starts
Table of Contents
One of the things that makes one thoughtful in going about from city to city
and dropping into the churches is the way the people do not sing in them
and will not pray in them. In every new strange city where one stops on a
Sunday morning, one looks hopefully—while one hears the chimes of bells
—at the row of steeples down the street. One looks for people going in who
seem to go with chimes of bells. And when one goes in, one finds them
again and again, inside, all these bolt-up-right, faintly sing-song
congregations.
One wonders about the churches.
What is there that is being said in them that should make any one feel
like singing?
The one thing that the churches are for is news—news that would be
suitable to sing about, and that would naturally make one want to sing and
pray after one had heard it.
There is very little occasion to sing or to pray over old news.
Worship would take care of itself in our churches if people got the latest
and biggest news in them.
News is the latest faith men have in one another, the last thing they have
dared to get from God.
It is not impossible that just at the present moment, and for some little
time to come, there is really very little worth while that can be said about
Christianity, until Christianity has been tried. I cannot conceive of Christ's
coming back and saying anything just at the moment. He would merely
wonder why, in all these two thousand years, we had not arranged to do
anything about what He had said before. He would wonder how we could
keep on so, making his great faith for us so poetic, visionary, and
inefficient.
It is in the unconscious recognition of this and of the present spiritual
crisis of the world, that our best men, so many of them, instead of going
into preaching are going into laboratories and into business where what the
gospel really is and what it is really made of, is being at last revealed to
people—where news is being created.
Perhaps it would not be precisely true—what I have said, about Christ's
not saying anything. He probably would. But he would not say these same
merely rudimentary things. He would go on to the truths and applications
we have never heard or guessed. The rest of his time he would put in in
proving that the things that had been merely said two thousand years ago,
could be done now. And He would do what He could toward having them
dropped forever, taken for granted and acted on as a part of the morally
automatic and of-course machinery of the world.
The Golden Rule takes or ought to take, very soon now, in real religion,
somewhat the same position that table manners take in morals.
All good manners are good in proportion as they become automatic. In
saying that honesty pays we are merely moving religion on to its more
creative and newer levels. We are asserting that the literal belief in honesty,
after this, ought to be attended to practically by machinery. People ought to
be honest automatically and by assumption, by dismissing it in business in
particular, as a thing to be taken for granted.
This is what is going to happen.
Without the printing press a book would cost about ten thousand dollars,
each copy.
With the printing press, the first copy of a book costs perhaps about six
hundred dollars.
The second costs—twenty-nine cents.
The same principle holds good under the law of moral automatics.
Let the plates be cast. Everything follows. The fire in the Iroquois
Theatre in Chicago cost six hundred dead bodies.
Within a few months outward opening doors flew open to the streets
around a world.
Everybody knew about outward opening doors before.
They had the spirit of outward opening doors. But the machinery for
making everybody know that they knew it—the moral and spiritual
machinery for lifting over the doors of a world and making them all swing
suddenly generation after generation the other way, had not been set up.
Of course it would have been better if there had been three hundred
dead bodies or three dead bodies—but the principle holds good—let the
moral plates be cast and the huge moral values follow with comparatively
little individual moral hand labour. The moral hand labour moves on to
more original things.
The same principle holds good in letting an American city be good in
seeing how to make goodness in a city work.
Let the plates be once cast—say Galveston, Texas; or De Moines, Iowa,
and goodness after you have your first specimen gets national
automatically.
Two hundred and five cities have adopted the Galveston or commission
government in three years.
The failure for the time being apparently of the more noble and aggressive
kinds of goodness against the forces of evil is a matter of technique. Our
failure is not due to our failure to know what evil really is, but due to our
wasteful way of tunnelling through it.
Our religious inventors have failed to use the most scientific method.
We have gone at the matter of butting through evil without thinking enough.
Less butting and more thinking is our religion now. We will not try any
longer to butt a whole planet when we try to keep one man from doing
wrong.
We will butt our way through to the man who sees where to butt and
how to butt. Then all together!
Very few of the wrongs that are done to society by individuals would be
done if civilization were supplied with the slightest adequate machinery or
conveniences for bringing home to people vividly who the people are they
are wronging, how they are wronging them, and how the people feel about
it. This machinery for moral and social insight, this intelligence-engine or
apparatus of sympathy for a planet to-day, before our eyes is being invented
and set up.
Sometimes I almost think that history as a study or particularly as a habit of
mind ought to be partitioned off and not allowed to people in general to-
day. Only men of genius have imagination enough for handling history so
that it is not a nuisance, a provincialism and an impertinence in the serene
presence to-day of what is happening before our eyes. History makes
common people stop thinking or makes them think wrong, about nine tenths
of the area of human nature, particularly about the next important things
that are going to happen to it.
Our modern life is not an historian's problem. It is an inventor's
problem. The historian can stand by and can be consulted. But things that
seem to an historian quite reasonably impossible in human nature are true
and we must all of us act every day as if they were true. We but change the
temperature of human nature and in one moment new levels and
possibilities open up on every side.
Things that are true about water stop being true the moment it is heated
212 degrees Fahrenheit. It begins suddenly to act like a cloud and when it is
cooled off enough a cloud acts like a stone. Railroad trains are run for
hundreds of miles every year in Siberia across clouds that are cold enough.
We raise the temperature of human nature and the motives with which men
cannot act to-day suddenly around a world are the motives with which they
cannot help acting to-morrow.
The theory of raised temperatures alone, in human nature, will make
possible to us ranges of goodness, of social passion and vision, that only a
few men have been capable of before.
All the new inventions have new sins, even new manners that go with
them, new virtues and new faculties. The telephone, the motor-car, the
wireless telegraph, the airship and the motor-boat all make men act with
different insights, longer distances, and higher speeds.
Men who, like our modern men, have a going consciousness, see things
deeper by going faster.
They see how more clearly by going faster.
They see farther by going faster.
If a man is driving a motor-car three miles an hour all he needs to attend
to with his imagination is a few feet of the road ahead.
If he is driving his car thirty miles an hour and trying to get on by
anticipating his road a few feet ahead, he dies.
The faster a man goes—if he has the brains for it—the more people and
the more things in the way, his mind covers in a minute—the more
magnificently he sees how.
On a railway train any ordinary man any day in the year (if he goes fast
enough) can see through a board fence. It may be made of vertical slats five
inches across and half an inch apart. He sees through the slits between the
slats the whole country for miles. If he goes fast enough a man can see
through a solid freight train.
All our modern industrial social problems are problems of gearing
people up. Ordinary men are living on trains now—on moral trains.
Their social consciousness is being geared up. They are seeing more
other people and more other things and more things beyond the Fence.
The increased vibration in human nature and in the human brain and
heart that go with the motor-car habit, the increased speed of the human
motor, the gearing up of the central power house in society everywhere is
going to make men capable of unheard-of social technique. The social
consciousness is becoming the common man's daily habit. Laws of social
technique and laws of human nature which were theories once are habits
now.
There is a certain sense in which it may be said that the modern man
enjoys daily his moral imagination. He is angered and delighted with his
social consciousness. He boils with rage or sings when he hears of all the
new machines of good and machines of evil that people are setting up in our
modern world.
There is a sense in which he glories in the Golden Rule. The moral-
machinist's joy is in him. He is not content to watch it go round and round
like some smooth-running Corliss engine which is not connected up yet—
that nobody really uses except as a kind of model under glass or a miniature
for theological schools. He cannot bear the Golden Rule under glass. He
wants to see it going round and round, look up at it, immense, silent,
masterful, running a world. He delights in the Golden Rule as a part of his
love of nature. It is as the falling of apples to him. He delights in it as he
delights in frost and fire and in the glorious, modest, implacable, hushed
way they work!
We are in an age in which a Golden Rule can sing. The men around us
are in a new temper. They have the passion, almost, the religion of precision
that goes with machines.
While I have been sitting at my desk and writing these last words, the
two half-past-eight trains, at full speed, have met in the meadow.
There is something a little impersonal, almost abstracted, about the way
the trains meet out here on their lonely sidewalk through the meadow,
twenty inches apart—morning after morning. It always seems as if this time
—this one next time—they would not do it right. One argues it all out
unconsciously that of course there is a kind of understanding between them
as they come bearing down on each other and it's all been arranged
beforehand when they left their stations; and yet somehow as I watch them
flying up out of the distance, those two still, swift thoughts, or shots of
cities—dark, monstrous (it's as if Springfield and Northampton had caught
some people up and were firing them at each other)—I am always
wondering if this particular time there will not be a report, after all, a clang
on the landscape, on all the hills, and a long story in the Republican the next
morning.
Then they softly crash together and pass on—two or three quiet whiffs
at each other—as if nothing had happened.
I always feel afterward as if something splendid, some great human act
of faith, had been done in my presence. Those two looming, mighty
engines, bearing down on each other, making an aim so, at twenty inches
from death, and nothing to depend on but those two gleaming dainty strips
or ribbons of iron—a few eighths of an inch on the edge of a wheel—I
never can get used to it: the two great glowing creatures, full of thunder and
trust, leaping up the telegraph poles through the still valley, each of them
with its little streak of souls behind it; immortal souls, children, fathers,
mothers, smiling, chattering along through Infinity—it all keeps on being
boundless to me, and full of a glad boyish terror and faith. And under and
through it all there is a kind of stern singing.
I know well enough, of course, that it is a platitude, this meeting of two
trains in a meadow, but it never acts like one. I sometimes stand and watch
the engineer afterward. I wonder if he knows he enjoys it. Perhaps he would
have to stop to know how happy he was, and not meet trains for a while.
Then he would miss something, I think; he would miss his deep joyous
daily acts of faith, his daily habits of believing in things—in steam, and in
air, and in himself, and in the switchman, and in God.
I see him in his cab window, he swings out his blue sleeve at me! I like
the way he stakes everything on what he believes. Nothing between him
and death but a few telegraph ticks—the flange of a wheel.... Suddenly the
swing of his train comes up like the swing and the rhythm of a great creed.
It sounds like a chant down between the mountains. I come into the house
lifted with it. I have heard a man believing, believing mile after mile down
the valley. I have heard a man believing in a Pennsylvania rolling mill, in a
white vapour, in compressed air and a whistle, the way Calvin believed in
God.
Book Three.
Letting the Crowd be Beautiful
Table of Contents
TO WILBUR WRIGHT AND WILLIAM MARCONI
 
"Great Spirit—Thou who in my being's burning mesh
Hath wrought the shining of the mist through and through the flesh,
Who, through the double-wondered glory of the dust
Hast thrust
Habits of skies upon me, souls of days and nights,
Where are the deeds that needs must be,
The dreams, the high delights,
That I once more may hear my voice
From cloudy door to door rejoice—
May stretch the boundaries of love
Beyond the mumbling, mock horizons of my fears
To the faint-remembered glory of those years—
May lift my soul
And reach this Heaven of thine
With mine?"
"Come up here, dear little Child
To fly in the clouds and winds with me,
and play with the measureless light!"
Part One.
Wistful Millionaires
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Mr. Carnegie Speaks Up
Table of Contents
As I was wandering through space the other day—just aeroplaning past on
my way over from Mars—I came suddenly upon a neat, snug little property,
with a huge sign stuck in the middle of it:
THE EARTH: THIS DESIRABLE PROPERTY TO LET. Rockefeller,
Carnegie, Morgan & Co.
I was just about to pass it by, inferring naturally that it must be a mere
bank, or wholesale house, or something, when it occurred to me it might do
no harm to stop over on it, and see. I thought I might at least drop in and
inquire what kind of a firm it was that was handling it, and what was their
idea, and what, if anything, they thought their little planet was for, and what
they proposed to do with it.
I found, on meeting Mr. Rockefeller and Mr. Carnegie and Mr. Morgan,
to my astonishment, that they did not propose to do anything with it at all.
They had merely got it; that was as far as they had thought the thing out
apparently—to get it. They seemed to be depending, so far as I could judge,
in a vague, pained way, on somebody's happening along who would think
perhaps of something that could be done with it.
Of course, as Mr. Carnegie (who was the talking member of the firm)
pointed out, if they only owned a part of it, and could sell one part of it to
the other part there would still be something left that they could do, at least
it would be their line; but merely owning all of it, so, as they did, was
embarrassing. He had tried, Mr. Carnegie told me, to think of a few things
himself, but was discouraged; and he intimated he was devoting his life just
now to pulling himself together at the end, and dying a poor man. But that
was not much, he admitted, and it was really not a very great service on his
part to a world, he thought—his merely dying poor in it.
When I asked him if there was anything else he had been able to think
of to do for the world—
"No," he said, "nothing really; nothing except chucking down libraries
on it—safes for old books."
"And Mr. Morgan?" I said.
"Oh! He is chucking down old china on it, old pictures, and things."
"And Mr. Rockefeller?"
"Mussing with colleges, some," he said, "just now. But he doesn't, as a
matter of fact, see anything—not of his own—that can really be done with
them, except to make them more systematized and businesslike, make them
over into sort of Standard Oil Spiritual Refineries, fill them with millions
more of little Rockefellers—and they won't let him do that. Of course, as
you might see, what they want to do practically is to take the Rockefeller
money and leave the Rockefeller out. Nobody will really let him do
anything. Everything goes this way when we seriously try to do things. The
fact is, it is a pretty small, helpless business, owning a world," sighed Mr.
Carnegie.
"This is why we are selling out, if anybody happens along. Anybody,
that is, who really sees what this piece of property is for and how to develop
it, can have it," said Mr. Carnegie, "and have it cheap."
Mr. Carnegie spoke these last words very slowly and wearily, and with
his most wistful look; and then, recalling himself suddenly, and handing me
a glass to look at New York with and see what I thought of it, he asked to be
excused for a moment, and saying, "I have fourteen libraries to give away
before a quarter past twelve," he hurried out of the room.
Chapter II.
Mr. Carnegie Tries to Make People Read
Table of Contents
I found, as I was studying the general view of New York as seen from the
top through Mr. Carnegie's glass, that there appeared to be a great many
dots—long rows of dots for the most part—possibly very high buildings,
but there was one building, wide and white and low, and more spread-out
and important-looking than any of the others, which especially attracted my
attention. It looked as if it might be a kind of monument or mausoleum to
somebody. On looking again I found that it was filled with books, and was
the Carnegie Public Library. There were forty more Libraries for New York
Mr. Carnegie was having put up, I was told, and he had dotted them—
thousands of them almost everywhere one could look, apparently, on his
own particular part of the planet.
A few days later, when I began to do things at a closer range, I took a
little trip to New York, and visited the Library; and I asked the man who
seemed to have it in charge, who there was who was writing books for Mr.
Carnegie's Libraries just now, or if there was any really adequate
arrangement Mr. Carnegie had made for having a few great books written
for all these fine buildings—all these really noble book-racks, he had had
put up. The man seemed rather taken aback, and hesitated. Finally, I asked
him point blank to give me the name of the supposed greatest living author
who had written anything for all these miles of Carnegie Libraries, and he
mentioned doubtfully a certain Mr. Rudyard Kipling. I at once asked for his
books, of course, and sat down without delay to find out if he was the
greatest living author the planet had, what it was he had to say for it and
about it, and more particularly, of course, what he had to to say it was for.
I found among his books some beautiful and quite refined
interpretations of tigers and serpents, a really noble interpretation or
conception of what the beasts were for all the glorious gentlemanly beasts
—and of what machines were for—all the young, fresh, mighty, worshipful
engines—and what soldiers were for. But when I looked at what he thought
men were for, at what the planet was for, there was practically almost
nothing. The nearest I came to it was a remark, apparently in a magazine
interview which I cannot quote correctly now, but which amounted to
something like this: "We will never have a great world until we have some
one great artist or poet in it, who sees it as a whole, focuses it, composes it,
makes a picture of it, and gives the men who are in it a vision to live for."
Since then I have been trying to see what Messrs. Rockefeller, Carnegie,
and Morgan could do to produce and arrange what seemed to me the one
most important, imperative, and immediate convenience their planet could
have, namely, as Mr. Kipling intimated, some man on it, some great creative
genius, who would gather it all up in his imagination—the beasts, and the
people, and the sciences, and the machines—in short, the planet as a whole,
and say what it was for. It is from this point of view that I have been drawn
into writing the following pages on the next important improvements—
what one might call the spiritual Unreal-Estate Improvements, for Messrs.
Rockefeller, Carnegie, and Morgan's property which will have to be
installed. I have been going over the property more or less carefully in my
own way since, studying it and noting what had been done by the owners,
and what possibly might be done toward arranging authors, inventors, seers,
artists, or engineers or other efficient persons who would be able to inquire,
to think out for a world, to express for it, some faint idea of what it was for.
Chapter III.
Mr. Nobel Tries to Make People Write
Table of Contents
Not unnaturally, of course, I turned to see what had already been done by
the more powerful men the planet had produced, in the way of arranging for
the necessary seers and geniuses to run the world with, and I soon found
that by far the most intelligent and far-seeing attempt that had been made
yet in this direction had been made by an inspired, or semi-inspired,
millionaire in Sweden, named Alfred Nobel, an idealist, who had made a
large but unhappy fortune out of an explosive to stop war with. His general
idea had been that dynamite would make war so terrible that it would shock
people into not fighting any more, and that gradually people, not having to
spend their time in thinking of ways of killing one another, would have
more time than they had ever had before to think of other and more
important things. It was the disappointment of his life that his invention,
instead of being used creatively, used to free men from fighting and make
men think of things, had been used largely as an arrangement for making
people so afraid of war that they could not think of anything else.
Whichever way he turned he saw the world in a kind of panic, all the old
and gentle-minded nations with their fair fields, their factories and art
galleries, all hard at work piling up explosives around themselves until they
could hardly see over them. As this was the precise contrary of what he had
intended, and he had not managed to do what he had meant to do with
making his money, he thought he would try to see if he could not yet do
what he had meant to do in spending it. He sat down to write his Will, and
in this Will, writing as an inventor and a man of genius, he tried to express,
in the terms of money, his five great desires for the world. He wished to
spend forty thousand dollars a year, every year forever, after he was dead,
on each of these five great desires. There were five great Inventors that he
wanted, and he wanted the whole world searched through for them, for each
of them, once more every year, to see if they could be found. Mr. Nobel
expressed his desire for these five Inventors as people often manage to
express things in wills, in such a way that not everybody had been sure
what he meant. There seems to have been comparatively little trouble, from
year to year, in awarding the prizes to some adequate inventor in the
domain of Peace, of Physics, of Chemistry, and of Medicine; but the Nobel
Prize Trustees, in trying to pick out an award each year to some man who
could be regarded as a true inventor in Literature, have met with
considerable difficulty in deciding just what sort of a man Alfred Nobel had
in mind, and had set aside his forty thousand dollars for when he directed
that it should go—to quote from the Will—"To the person who shall have
produced in the field of Literature the most distinguished work of an
idealistic tendency."
Allen Upward, for instance, an Englishman unknown in Stockholm,
invented and published a book four years ago, called the "New Word,"
which was so idealistic and distinguished a book, and so full of new ideas
and of new combinations of old ideas, that there was scarcely a publisher in
England who did not instinctively recognize it, who did not see that it
would not pay at once, and that therefore it was too strange and original and
too important a book for him to publish, and after a long delay the book was
finally printed in Geneva.
A copy was sent to the Nobel Prize Trustees.
One would have thought, looking at it theoretically, that here was
precisely the sort of situation that Alfred Nobel, who had been the
struggling inventor of a great invention that would not pay at once himself,
would have been looking for. A book so inventive, so far ahead, that
publishers praised it and would not invest in it, one would have imagined to
be the one book of all others for which Alfred Nobel stood ready and
waiting to put down his forty thousand dollars.
But Mr. Nobel's forty thousand dollars did not go to a comparatively
obscure and uncapitalized inventor who had written a book to build a world
with, or at least a great preliminary design, or sketch, toward a world. The
Nobel Prize Trustees, instead of giving the forty thousand dollars to Allen
Upward, looked carefully about through all the nations until their eyes fell
on a certain Mr. Rudyard Kipling. And when they saw Mr. Rudyard
Kipling, piled high with fame and five dollars a word, they came over
quietly to where he was and put softly down on him forty thousand dollars
more.
I do not know, but it is not inconceivable, that Kipling himself would
rather have had Allen Upward have it.
I am not quarrelling with the Trustees, and am merely trying to think
things out and understand. But it certainly is a question that cannot but keep
recurring to one's mind—the unfortunate, and perhaps rather unlooked-for,
way in which Mr. Nobel's Will works. And I have been wondering what
there is that might be done, the world being the kind of world it is, which
would enable the Nobel Prize Trustees to so administer the Will that its
practical weight on the side of Idealism, and especially upon the crisis of
idealism in young authors, would be where Mr. Nobel meant to have it.
One must hasten to admit that Mr. Upward's book is open to question;
that, in fact, it is the main trait of Mr. Upward's book that it raises a
thousand questions; and that it would be a particularly hard book for most
men to give a prize to, quietly go home, and sleep that night. I must hasten
to admit also that, judging from their own point of view, the Nobel Prize
Trustees have so far done quite well. They have attained a kind of triumph
of doing safe things—things that they could not be criticised for; and they
could well reply to this present criticism that there was no other course that
they could take. Unless they had a large fund for butting through all nations
for obscure geniuses, and for turning up stones everywhere to look for
embryo authors—unless they had a fund for going about among the great
newspapers, the big magazines, and peeping under them through all the
world for geniuses—and unless they had still another large fund for
guaranteeing their decision when they had found one, a fund for convincing
the world that they were right, and that they were not wasting their forty
thousand dollars—the Trustees have taken a fairly plausible position. Their
position being that, in default of perfectly fresh, brand-new, great men, and
in view of the fact, in a world like this that geniuses in it are almost
invariably, and, as a matter of course, lost or mislaid until they are dead,
much the best and safest thing that Trustees of Idealism could do was to
watch the drift of public opinion in the different nations, to adopt the course
of noting carefully what the world thought were really its great men, and
then (at a discreet and dignified distance, of course) tagging the public, and
wherever they saw a crowd, a rather nice crowd, round a man, standing up
softly at the last moment and handing him over his forty thousand dollars.
This has been the history of the Nobel Trustees of Idealism, thus far.
But in a way, we are all the trustees of idealism, and the problem of the
Nobel Prize Trustees is more or less the problem of all of us. We are
interested as well as they in trying to find out how to recognize and reward
men of genius. What would we do ourselves if we were Nobel Prize
Trustees? Precisely what was it that Alfred Nobel intended to achieve for
Literature when he made this bequest of forty thousand dollars a year in his
Will, for a work of Literature of an idealistic tendency?
To take a concrete case, I can only record that it has seemed to me that
if Alfred Nobel himself could have been on hand that particular year, and
could have read Mr. Upward's book, he would have given the prize of forty
thousand dollars to Allen Upward. He would not have given the prize to Mr.
Kipling—he would have given it twenty years before; but in this particular
year of which I am writing, when he saw these two men together, I believe
he would have given the prize to Allen Upward, and he would have hurried.
I would like to put forward at this point two inquiries. First, why did the
Trustees not award the prize to Allen Upward? And second, what would
have happened if they had?
First, the Trustees could not be sure that Mr. Upward in his work of
genius was telling the truth.
Second, they could not be sure that the world would approve of his
having forty thousand dollars for telling the truth. Perhaps the world would
have rather had him paid forty thousand dollars for not telling it.
Third, Mr. Kipling was safe. No creative work had to be done on
Kipling; all they had to do was to send him the cheque. Great crowds had
swept in from all over the world, and nominated Mr. Kipling; the
Committee merely had to confirm the nomination.
Fourth, Mr. Upward, like all idealists, like all men who have the power
of throwing this world into the melting-pot and bringing it out new again
partly unrecognizable (which, of course, is the regular historical, almost
conventional, thing for an idealist to do with a world), bewildered the Nobel
Prize Committee. They could not be sure but that Mr. Upward's next book
would be thought in the wrong, and make their having given him forty
thousand dollars to write it ridiculous.
What would have happened if the Trustees had given the prize to Mr.
Upward?
First, practically no one would have known who he was, and twenty-
five nations would have been reading his book in a week, to see why the
prize was given to him. The book would have been given the most
widespread, highly stimulated, forty-thousand-dollar-power attention that
any book in any age has had.
Only now and then would a man go over and take down his old
Kiplings from the shelf and read them, because he had heard that Mr.
Kipling had forty thousand dollars more than he had had before.
Secondly, Mr. Upward's new book would have the stimulus of his
knowing while he was writing it that every word would be read by
everybody. All the draught on the fire of his genius of the whole listening
world would result in a work that even Mr. Upward himself perhaps would
hardly believe he had written. As events turned out, and Mr. Upward did not
get the prize there might be many reasons to believe that his next book
might be out of focus, might be a mere petulant, scolding book, his
exultation spent or dwindled, because his last tremendous wager—that the
world wanted the truth—was lost.
Scolding in a book means, as a rule, either juvenility or it means relapse
into conscious degeneration of the soul—the focussing and fusing power in
a man. I have sometimes wondered if even Christ, if He had not died in His
thirty-third year, made His great dare for the world on the cross early, would
not have stopped believing so magnificently in other people at about forty
or forty-five or so, and would not have spent the rest of His days in railing
at them, and in being very bitter and helpless and eloquent about Rome and
Jerusalem. I have caught myself once or twice being glad Abraham Lincoln
died suddenly just when he did, his great faith and love all warm in him,
and his great oath for the world—that it was good—still fresh upon his lips!
Writing a book like Allen Upward's for a planet with a vision of a
thousand years singing splendidly through it, and then just reading it all
alone afterward when he has written it, and going over the score all alone
by himself, would seem to be a good deal of a strain. To be contradicted out
loud and gloriously by a world might be inspiring, but to be contradicted by
a solid phalanx of silent nations, trooping up behind one another,
unanimous, impervious, is enough to make any radiant, long-accumulated
genius pause in full career, question himself, question his vision as a
chimera, as some faintly lighted Northern Lights upon the world, that would
never mean anything, that was an illusion, that would just flicker in the
great dark once more and go out.
I do not say that this is true, or that it would be true of Allen Upward.
But I have read his book. I should think it might be true.
What Alfred Nobel had in mind, his whole idea in his Will, it seems to
some of us, was to put in his forty thousand dollars at the working end of
some man's mind, at the end of the man's mind where the forty thousand
dollars would itself be creative, where the forty thousand dollars would get
into the man, and work out through the man and through his genius into the
world. It does not seem to me that he wanted to put his forty thousand
dollars at the idle, old remembering end of a man's mind; that he meant it
should be used as a mere reward for idealism. I doubt if it even so much as
occurred to Alfred Nobel, who was an idealist himself, that idealism, after a
man had managed to have some in this world, would be rewarded, or could
possibly be paid for, by any one. He knew, if ever a man knew, that idealism
was its own reward, and that it was priceless, and that any attempt to reward
it with money, to pay a man for it after he had had it, and after it was all
over, would make forty thousand dollars look shabby, or at least pathetic
and ridiculous. What he wanted to do was to build his forty thousand dollars
over into a Man. He wanted to feel that this money that he had made out of
dynamite, out of destruction, would be wrought, through this man, into
exultation, into life. He had proposed that this forty thousand dollars should
become poetry in this man's book, that it should become light and heat, a
power-house of thought, of great events. What Alfred Nobel had in mind, I
think, with his little forty thousand dollars, was that it should be given a
chance to become an intimate part of some man's genius; that it should
become perhaps at last a Great Book—that great foundry of men's souls,
where the moulds of History are patterned out, and where the hopes of
nations and the prayers of women and children and of great men are, and
where the ideals of men—those huge drive-wheels of the world—are cast in
a strange light and silence.
I wondered if they could have thought of this when they voted on Allen
Upward's book that day three years ago—those twenty grave, quiet
gentlemen in frockcoats in Stockholm!
I have picked out Mr. Upward's book because it is the most difficult, the
most hazardous, and the least fortunate one I know, to make my point with;
and because a great many people will get the reaction of disagreeing with
me, and feeling about it probably, the way the Nobel Prizes Trustees did. I
have wanted to take a book which has the traits in it for which men of
genius are persecuted or crucified or ignored—our more modern timid or
anonymous form of the cross. If Mr. Upward had been given the Prize by
the Nobel Prize Trustees, it will have to be admitted a howl would have
gone up round the world that would not have quieted down yet; and it is this
howl that Mr. Nobel intended his Prize for, and that he thought a man would
need about forty thousand dollars to meet.
I might have taken any one of several other books, and they would have
illustrated my point snugly and more conveniently; but just that right touch
of craziness that Nobel had in mind, and that goes with great experiment of
spirit—the chill, Nietzsche-like wildness, that bravado before God and man
and before Time, that swinging one's self out on Eternity, which make
Upward a typical man of genius, would have been lacking. K—— (whose
criticisms of books are the most creative ones I know) said of Upward's
book that he felt very happy and strangely emancipated when he read it, but
that it was an uncanny experience, as if he had been made of thin air, had
become a kind of aerated being, a psychic effect that genius often has; and
K—— admitted to me confidentially that he felt that possibly he and
Upward were being a little crazy and happy together by themselves,
breaking out into infinite space so, and he took the book over to W——,
and left it on his desk slinkingly and half-ashamed and without saying
anything about it. He said he was enormously relieved next time he saw W
——, felt as if he had just been pulled out of Bedlam to find that there was
at least one other man in the world apparently in his right mind, who valued
the book as he did.
This is the precise feeling, it seems to me, that the Nobel Prize was
intended to champion and to stand by and temporarily defend in a new
author—the feeling he gives us of being in the presence of unseen forces, of
incalculableness. It was this way Allen Upward has of taking his reader
apart or up into a high place (like the Devil), and dizzying him, taking away
his breath with Truth, that Nobel had in mind. He wanted to spend eight
thousand pounds a year on providing for the world one more book which
would give the ordinary man the personal feeling of being with a genius,
cold, lonely, cosmic genius, the sense of a chill wind of All Space Outside
blowing through—a book which is a sort of God's Wilderness, in which
ordinary men with their ordinary plain senses round them move about dazed
a little and as trees walking—a great, gaunt, naked book.
Alfred Nobel was the inventor of an explosive, a rearranger of things
assumed and things unbedded, and it was this same expansive, half-terrible,
half-sublime power in other men and other men's books he wanted to
endow—the power to free and mobilize the elements in a world, make it
budge over a little toward a new one. He wanted to spend forty thousand
dollars a year on the man in literature who had the pent-up power in him to
crash the world's mind open once more every year like a Seed, and send
groping up out of it once more its hidden thought.
I may not be right in anticipating the eventual opinion of Allen
Upward's book; but even if I am wrong, it will have helped perhaps to call
attention to the essential failure of the Nobel Prize Trustees to side with the
darers and experimenters in literature, to take a serious part in those great
creative, centrifugal movements in the souls of men in which new worlds
and the sense of new worlds are swept in upon us. For the Sciences, which
are more matter of fact and tangible, the Nobel Prize is functioning more or
less as Mr. Nobel intended, but certainly in Literature it will have to be
classed as one more of our humdrum regular millionaire arrangements for
patting successful people expensively on the back. It acts twenty years too
late, falls into line with our usual worldly ornamental D.D., LL.D. habit,
and has become, so far as Literature is concerned, a mere colossal, kindly,
doddering Old Age Pension from a few gentlemen in Stockholm. It adds
itself as one more futile effort of men of wealth—or world owners to be
creative and lively with money, very much on the premises with money,
after they are dead.
Chapter IV.
Paper Books, Marble Pillars, and Wooden Boys
Table of Contents
I have sometimes wished that Mr. Carnegie would post the following sign
up on his Libraries, on the outside where people are passing, and on the
inside in the room where people sit and think:
A MILLION DOLLARS REWARD.
WANTED, A GREAT LIVING AMERICAN AUTHOR FOR MY
LIBRARIES IN THE UNITED STATES. AT PRESENT OUR GREAT
AUTHOR IN AMERICA APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN LOST OR
MISLAID; ANY ONE FINDING HIM, OR ANY ONE THAT MIGHT
DO FOR HIM TEMPORARILY, PLEASE COMMUNICATE WITH
ME.
ANDREW CARNEGIE.
Mr. Carnegie's Libraries must be a source of constant regret to the
author of "Triumphant Democracy." They are generally made up of books
written in the Old World. It would be interesting to know what are the real
reasons great Libraries are not being written for Mr. Carnegie in America,
and what there is that Mr. Carnegie or other people can do about it. They
are certainly going to be written in America some time, and certainly, unless
the best and greatest part of the Carnegie Library of the future is to be the
American part of it, the best our Carnegie Libraries will do for America will
be to remind us of what we are not. Unless we can make the American part
of Mr. Carnegie's Libraries loom in the world as big as Mr. Carnegie's
chimneys, America—which is the last newest experiment station of the
world—is a failure.
It has occurred to me to try to express, for what it may be worth, a point
of view toward Triumphant Democracy Mr. Carnegie may have
inadvertently overlooked.
If Mr. Carnegie would establish in every town where he has put a
Library, by endowment or otherwise, a Commission, or what might be
called perhaps a Searching Party, in that community, made up of men of
inventive and creative temperament, who instinctively know this
temperament in others—men in all specialities, in all walks of life, who are
doing things better than any one wants to pay them to do them—and if Mr.
Carnegie would set these men to work, in one way and another, looking up
boys who are like them, boys about the town, who are doing things better
than any one wants to pay them to do them—he would soon get a monopoly
of the idealism of the world; he would collect in thirty-five years, or in one
generation, an array of living great men, of national figures, men who
would be monuments to Andrew Carnegie, as compared with which his
present libraries, big, thoughtless, innumerable, humdrum, sogging down
into the past, would be as nothing. Mr. Carnegie has given forty libraries to
New York; and I venture to say that there is at this very moment, running
round the streets of the great city, one single boy, who has it in him to
conceive, to imagine, and hammer together a new world; and if Mr.
Carnegie would invest his fortune, not in buildings or in books, but in
buying brains enough to find that boy, and if the whole city of New York
were to devote itself for one hour every day for years to searching about
and finding that boy, to seeing just which he is, to going over all the other
boys five hours a day to pick him out, it would be—well, all I can say is, all
those forty libraries of Mr. Carnegie's, those great proud buildings, would
do well if they did not do one thing for six years but find that boy!
There is a boy at this very moment with strings and marbles and a
nation in his pocket, a system of railroads—a boy with a national cure for
tuberculosis, with sun-engines for everybody—there is a boy with
cathedrals in him too, no doubt or some boy like young Pinchot, with
mountainsful of forests in his heart.
This is what Mr. Carnegie himself would like to do, but with his big,
stiff, clumsy libraries trailing their huge, senseless brick-and-mortar bodies,
their white pillars and things, about the country, unmanned, inert, eyeless,
all those great gates and forts of knowledge, Coliseums of paper, and with
the mechanical people behind the counters, the policemen of the books, all
standing about protecting them—with all this formidable array, how can
such a boy be hunted out or drawn in, or how would he dare go tramping in
through the great gates and hunting about for himself? He could only be
hunted out by people all wrought through with human experience, men and
women who would give the world to find him, who are on the daily lookout
for such a boy—by some special kind of eager librarian, or by disguised
teachers, anonymous poets, or by diviners, by expert geniuses in boys. If
Mr. Carnegie could go about and look up and buy up wherever he went
these men who have this boy-genius in them, deliver them from empty,
helpless, mere getting-a-living lives; and if he could set these men, and set
them about thickly, among the books in his libraries—those huge anatomies
and bones of knowledge he has established everywhere, all his great literary
steel-works—men would soon begin to be discovered, to be created, to be
built in libraries ... but as it is now....
Gentle Reader, have you ever stood in front of one of them, looked up at
the windows, thought of all those great tiers, those moulds and blocks of
learning on the shelves; and have you never watched the weary people that
dribble in from the streets and wander coldly about, or sit down listless in
them—in those mighty, silent empires of the past? have you never thought
that somewhere all about them, somewhere in this same library, there must
be some white, silent, sunny country of the future, full of children and of
singing, full of something very different from these iron walls of wisdom?
And have you never thought what it would mean if Mr. Carnegie would
spend his money on search parties for people among the books, or what it
would mean if the entire library, if all the books in it, became, as it were,
wired throughout with live, splendid, delighted men and women, to make
connections, to establish the current between the people and the books, to
discover the people one by one and follow them to their homes, and follow
them in their lives, and take out the latent geniuses, and the listless
engineers 
and 
poets, 
and 
the 
Kossuths, 
Cæsars, 
the 
Florence
Nightingales...?
It is only by employing forces that can be made extremely small,
invisible, personal, penetrating, and spiritual, that this sort of work can be
done. It must be delicate and wonderful workmanship, like the magnet, like
the mighty thistledown in the wind, like electricity, like love, like hope—
sheer, happy, warm human vision going about and casting itself, casting all
its still and tiny might, its boundless seed, upon the earth: but it would pay.
The same people too, specialists in detecting and developing inventors,
could be supplied also to all other possible callings. They would constitute a
universal profession, penetrating all the others. They would go hunting
among foremen and in machine shops for the misplaced geniuses, tried by
wrong standards, underpaid for having other gifts. They would keep a
lookout through all the schools and colleges, looking over the shoulders of
scolding teachers and absent professors. They would go about studying the
playgrounds and mastering the streets.
We do not a little for the Submerged Tenth and the sons of the poor, and
we have schools or missions for the sons of the rich, but one of the things
we need next to-day is that something should be done for the sons of the
great neglected respectable classes. Far more important than one more
library—say in Denver, for instance would be a Denver Bureau of
Investigation, to be appointed, of high-priced, spirited men, of expert
humanists, to study difficulties, and devise methods and missions for
putting all society in Denver through filters or placers, and finding out the
rich human ore, finding out where everybody really belonged, and what all
the clever misplaced people were really for. Of course it would take money
to do all this, and flocks of free people who are doing the work they love.
But it is not book-racks, nor paper, nor ink, nor stone steps, nor white pillars
—it is free men and free women America and England are asking of their
Andrew Carnegies to-day.
Mr. Carnegie has not touched this human problem in his libraries. If
Society were fitted up all through with electric connections, men with a
genius for discovering continents in people, Columbuses, boy-geniuses; and
if there were established everywhere a current between every boy and the
great world, this would be something on which Mr. Carnegie could make a
great beginning with the little mite of his fortune. If we were to have even
one city fitted up in this way, it would be hard to say how much it would
mean—one city with enough people in it who were free to do beautiful
things, free to be curious about the others, free to follow clues of greatness,
free to go up the streams of Society to the still, faint little springs and
beginnings of things. It would soon be a memorable city. A world would
watch it, and other cities would grope toward it. Instead of this we have
these big, hollow, unmanned libraries of Mr. Carnegie's everywhere, with
no people practically to go with them, no great hive of happy living men
and women in and out all day cross-fertilizing boys and books.
There seems to be something unfinished and stolid and brutal about a
Carnegie Library now. The spirit of the garden and the sea, of the spring
and the light, and of the child, is not in it. They have come to seem to some
of us mere huge Pittsburgs of brains—all these impervious, unwieldy,
rolling-mills of knowledge. I should think it would be a terrible prospect to
grow old with, just to sit and see them flocking across the country from
your window, all these huge smoke-stacks of books in their weary, sordid
cities; and the boys who might be great men, the small Lincolns with
nations in their pockets, the little Bells with worlds in their ears, the
Pinchots with their forests, the McAdoos and Roosevelts, the young
Carnegies and Marconis in the streets!
Chapter V.
The Humdrum Factory and the Tumpty-tum
Theatre
Table of Contents
Mr. Israel Zangwill in presiding at the meeting of the Sociological Society
the other night remarked, in referring to inspired millionaires, that as a rule
in the minds of most people nowadays a millionaire seemed to be a kind of
broken-off person, or possibly two persons. There always seemed to have to
be a violent change in a millionaire somewhere along the middle of his life.
The change seemed to be associated in some way, Mr. Zangwill thought
with his money. He reminded one of the patent-medicine advertisements,
"Before and After Taking."
I have been trying to think why it is that the average millionaire reminds
people—as 
Mr. 
Zangwill 
says 
he 
does—of 
a 
patent-medicine
advertisement, "Before and After Taking."
I have thought, since Mr. Zangwill made this remark, of getting together
a small collection of pictures of millionaires—two pictures of each, one
before and the other after taking—and having them mounted in the most
approved patent-medicine style, and taking them down to Far End and
asking Mr. Zangwill to look them over with me and see if he thought—he,
Israel Zangwill, the novelist, the play-wright, the psychologist—really
thought, that millionaires "Before and After" were as different as they
looked.
I imagine he would say—and practically without looking at the pictures
—that of course to him or to me perhaps, or to any especially interested
student of human nature, millionaires are not really different at all "Before
and After Taking"; that they merely had a slightly different outer look. They
would merely look different, Mr. Zangwill would say, to the common run or
majority of people—the people one meets in the streets.
But would they?
One of the most hopeful things that I have been thinking of lately is that
the people—the ordinary people one meets in the streets—are beginning
quite generally to see through their millionaires, and to see that their money
almost never really cures them. Most very rich men, indeed, are having
their times now, of even seeing through themselves; and it brings me up
abruptly with a shock to think that the ordinary people who pass in the
streets would be deceived by these simple little pictures Before and After.
They have been deceived until lately, but are they being deceived now? I
would like to see the matter tested, and I have thought it would be a good
idea to take my small collection of pictures of millionaires—two pictures of
each, one Before and the other After Taking—to a millionaire—of course
some really reformed or cured one—and ask him to pay the necessary
expenses in the columns of the Times, and of the Westminster Gazette, and
the Daily Chronicle, and other representative London journals (all on the
same morning), of having the pictures published. We could then take what
might be called a social, human, economic inventory of London: ask people
to send in their honest opinions, on looking at the pictures, as to whether
Money, Before and After Taking, does or does not produce these remarkable
cures in millionaires. I very much doubt if Mr. Zangwill would be found to
be right in his estimate of our common people to-day.
I venture to believe that it is precisely because our common people are
seeing that millionaires are not changed Before and After Taking that the
majority of time millionaires we have to-day have come to be looked upon
as one of the charges—one of the great spiritual charges and burdens
modern Society has to carry.
Society has always had to do what it could for the poor, but in our
modern civilization, in a new and big sense, we have to see now what there
is, if possibly anything, that can be done for the rich.
We have come to have them now almost everywhere about us—these
great spiritual orphans, with their pathetic, blind, useless fortunes piled up
around them; and Society has to support them, to keep them up morally,
keep them doing as little damage as possible, and has to allow day by day
besides for the strain and structural weakness they bring upon the girders of
the world—the faith of men in men, and the credit of God, which alone can
hold a world together.
It is not denied that the average millionaire, when he has made his
money, does different-looking things, and gathers different-looking objects
about him, and is seen in different-looking places. And it is not denied that
he changes in more important particulars than things. He quite often
changes people, the people he is seen with but he never or almost never
changes himself. He is not one man when he is putting money into his
pocket and another when he is taking it out.
We keep hoping at first with each new mere millionaire that when he
gets all the money he has wanted it will change him; but we find it almost
never does.
Merely reversing the motion with a pocket does not make a man a new
and beautiful creature, and one soon sees that the typical millionaire is
governed by the same bargain principles, is bullied and domineered over by
the same personal limitations, the same old something-for-nothing habits. If
he had the habit, while getting money out of people, of getting the better of
them, he still insists on getting the better of people when he gives it to them
or to their causes. He takes it out of their souls. There never has been a
millionaire who runs his business on the old humdrum principle of merely
making all the money he can who does not run his very philanthropies
afterward on the same general principle of oppressing everybody, of
outwitting everybody—and of doing people good in a way that makes them
wish they were dead. Philanthropy as a philosophy, and even as an
institution, is getting to be nearly futile to-day, for the reason that
millionaires—valid, authentic cases of millionaires who are really cured—
who are changed either in their motives or their methods with regard to
what they do with money, except in rare cases, do not exist.
The New Theatre in New York, which was started as a kind of Polar
Expedition to discover and rescue Dramatic Art in America, failed because
two hundred and forty millionaires tried to help it. If enough millionaires
could have been staved off from that enterprise, or if it could have been
taken in hand either by fewer or more select millionaires coöperating with
the public and with artists of all classes, New Theatre of New York would
not have been obliged, as it has been since, to start all over again on a new
basis. The blunders in creative public work that men who get rich in the
wrong way are always sure to make had to be made first. They nearly
always have to be made first. There is hardly a single enterprise of higher
social value in which the world is interested to-day which is not being
gravely threatened in efficient service by letting in too many millionaires,
and by paying too much attention to what they think. If our people were
generally alive to the terrific sameness and monotony of a millionaire's life
"before and after," and if millionaires were looked over discriminatingly
before being allowed to take part in great public enterprises like the cinema,
for instance, the newspapers, the hospitals, the theatres, there is hardly any
limit to the new things that public enterprises would begin to make happen
in the world, and the new men that would begin to function in them.
Of course, if what a great vision for the people—i.e., a public enterprise
is for, is to make money, it would be different. The mere millionaire might
understand, and his understanding might help. But if an institution is
founded (like a great theatre) to be a superb and noble masterpiece of
understanding and changing human nature; if it is founded to be a creative
and dominating influence, to build up the ideals and fire the enthusiasm of a
city, to lay the foundations of the daily thoughts and the daily motives of a
great people, the mere millionaire finds, if he tries to manage it, that he is
getting in beyond his depth. A man who has made his money by exploiting
and taking advantage of the public can only be expected, in conducting a
Theatre, to be an authority on how to exploit a public and take advantage of
it still more, and how to make it go to the play that merely looks like the
play that it wants.
Millionaires as a class, unless they are men who have made their money
in the artist's or the inventor's spirit, really ought to be expected by this
time, except in the size of their cheques, to be modest and thoughtful, to
stand back a little and watch other people. The millionaires themselves, if
they thought about it, would be the first to advise us not to pay too much
attention to them. They are used to large things, and they know that the only
way to do, in conducting great enterprises, is to select and use men (whether
millionaires or not) for the particular efficiencies they have developed. If
we are conducting what is called a charity, we will not expect that a
millionaire can do good things unless he is a good man. He spoils them by
picking out the wrong people. And we will not expect him to do artistic
things unless he has lived his life and done his business in the spirit and the
temperament of the artist. He will not know which the artists are or what the
artists are like inside; and he will not like them and they will not like him,
nor will they be interested in him or interested in working with him.
Everything that artists or men of creative temperament try to do with the
common run of millionaires—all these huge, blind, imponderable
megatheriums, stamping along through life, ordering people about—ends in
the same way—in irksomeness, bewildered vision, fear, compromise, and
failure, as seen from the inside. Seen on the outside or before the public, of
course, the Institution will have the same old, bland, familiar air of looking
successful and of looking intelligent, and yet of being uninteresting, and of
not changing the world by a hair's breadth.
The only millionaires who should be allowed to have a controlling
interest in public enterprises are millionaires who do not need to be
different before and after making their money. Everybody is coming to see
this, sooner or later. It is already getting very hard to raise money for any
public enterprise in which mere millionaires or bewildered, unhappy rich
men are known to have a controlling interest. The most efficient and far-
sighted men do not expect anything very decided or of marked character
from such enterprises, and will no longer lend to them either their brains or
their money. Mere millionaires will soon have to conduct their public
enterprises quite by themselves, and they will then soon fall of their own
weight. The moment men are put in control of public enterprises by the size
of their brains instead of the size of their cheques, the whole complexion of
what are known as our public enterprises will change, and churches,
theatres, hospitals, settlements, art galleries, and all other great public
causes, instead of boring everybody and teasing everybody, will be
attracting everybody and attracting everybody's money. They will be full of
character, courage, and vision. Our present great, vague, helpless, plaintive
public enterprises—one third art, one third millionaire, one third deficit—
drag along financially because they are listless compromises, because they
have no souls or vision, and are not interesting—not even interesting to
themselves.
Men with creative or imaginative quality, and courage, and insight into
ordinary human nature, and far-sightedness of what can be expected of
people, do not get on with the ordinary millionaire. It cannot be denied that
millionaires and artists get together in time; but the particular point that
seems to be interesting to consider is how the millionaires and artists can be
got together before the artists are dead, and before the millionaires stop
growing and stop being creative and understanding creative men.
It might be well to consider the present situation in the concrete—the
theatre, for instance—and see how the situation lies, and where one would
have to begin, and how one would have to go to work to change it.
The present failure of the theatre to encourage what is best in modern
art is due to the fact that the public is unimaginative and inartistic.
If a public is unimaginative and inartistic, the only way the best things
that are offered can succeed with them is by having these best things held
before them long and steadily enough for them slowly to compare them
with other things, and see that they are better than the other things, and that
they are what they want.
Unimaginative and inartistic people do not know what they want. If
things are tried long enough with them they do. When they have been tried
long enough with them they support them themselves.
The only way fine things can be tried long enough is with sufficient
capital.
The only way sufficient capital for fine things can be obtained is by
having millionaires who appreciate fine things, and believe in them, and
believe the public in time will believe in them.
The only way in which a millionaire can recognize and believe in the
fine things and in the best artists is by being, in spirit and temperament at
least, an artist himself.
The only way in which a millionaire can be an artist is to work every
day in the spirit in which the artist works.
This means the artist in business.
(1) The artist in business is the man who makes things people already
want enough to make money, and who makes things he is going to make
people want enough to make new values and to be of some use.
(2) The artist in business is the employer who makes new things and
men together. He lets the men who make new things with him become new
men; and when the things are made, they go forth in their turn and make
new men and make new publics. New publics have had to be made for
everything: for the first umbrellas, for the first telephones, the first
typewriters. New publics have had to be made for Wagner, for Sunlight
Soap, for Bernard Shaw; and it is the men who make new publics—be it for
big or little things—who are artists. They are in spirit, prophets, kings, and
world-builders.
(3) Incidentally, the artist in business—the employer who creates new
values and is creative himself—will like creative men in his factory, and
will treat them so that they will put their creativeness into his business; he
not only will be an artist himself, but he will have, comparatively speaking,
a factory full of artists working with him. And when the factories pour out
the men at night, and the smoke and the murmur cease, and the windows
are dark, they will go to creative and live men's plays.
So it has come to pass that the modern business man of the artist sort
holds the arts of modern times in the hollow of his hand. He is a past-master
of creating new publics.
(4) The artist in business is the man who educates and draws out, at
every point where his business touches them, every day, all day, the men
with whom he works. He educates and develops the men who make the
things. He educates and develops the men who buy them. Even the people
who wish they had bought them, are educated or secreted, by the artist in
business. He is a maker of new publics, a world-builder, whichever way he
turns. A business man who merely makes for people what they want, and
who does not get the prestige with men of making for them things that they
did not know they wanted, is a failure and falls behind in his business. All
the big men in business work in future tenses. They are prophets, historians,
and they are Now-men, men who work by seeing the truth all round the
present moment, the present persons, and the present market, and before it
and behind it. Millionaires who are making their money in this spirit will
understand and believe in plays that are written in this spirit, and the people
who work for such employers will like to go to such plays, and the theatre
managers, instead of being the bullies and tyrants of the world of art, will
be held in the power of the men who see things and who make things—men
who in vast sweeps called audiences, night after night, make new men upon
the earth.
Part Two.
Iron Machines
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Steeples and Chimneys
Table of Contents
I went to the Durbar the other night in cinema colour and saw the King and
Queen through India. I had found my way, with hundreds of others, into the
gallery of the Scala Theatre, and out of that big, still rim of watchful
darkness where I sat I saw—there must have been thousands of them—
crowds of camels running.
And crowds of elephants went swinging past.
I watched them like a boy, like a boy standing on the edge of a thousand
years and looking off at a world.
It was stately and strange, and like far music to sit quite still and watch
civilizations swinging past.
Then suddenly it became near and human—the spirit of playgrounds
and of shouting and boyish laughter ran through it. And we watched the
elephants, naked and untrimmed, lolling down to the lake and lying down to
be scrubbed in it with comfortable low snorting and slow rolling in the
water, and the men standing by all the while like little play-nurses and
tending them, their big bungling babies, at the bath. A few minutes later we
watched the same elephants, hundreds of them, their mighty toilets made,
pacing slowly past, swinging their gorgeous trappings in our eyes, rolling
their huge hoodahs at us, and all the time still those little funny dots of men
beside them, moving them silently, moving them invisibly as by a spirit, as
by a kind of awful wireless—those great engines of the flesh! I shall never
forget it or live without it, that slow pantomime of those mighty, silent
Eastern nations, their religions, their philosophies, their wills, their souls,
moving their elephants past—the long panorama of it, of their little awful
human wills, all those little black, helpless-looking slits of Human Will
astride those mighty necks!
I have the same feeling when I see Count Zeppelin with his airship, or
Grahame-White at Hendon, riding his vast cosmic pigeon up the sky; and it
is the same feeling I have with the locomotives—those unconscious,
forbidding, coldly obedient terrible fellows! Have I not lain awake and
listened to them storming through the night, heard them out there ahead
working our wills on the blackness, on the thick night, on the stars, on
Space, and on Time while we slept?
My main feeling at the Durbar while I watched those splendid beasts—
the crowds of camels, the crowds of elephants—all being driven along by
the little, faint, dreamy, sleepy-looking people was, "Why don't their
elephants turn around on them and chase them?"
I kept thinking at first that they would, almost any minute.
Our elephants chase us—most of us. Who has not seen locomotives
coming quietly out of their roundhouses in New York and begin chasing
people, chasing whole towns, tearing along with them, making everybody
hurry whether or no, speeding up and ordering around by the clock great
cities, everybody alike, the rich and the poor, the just and the unjust, for
hundreds of miles around? In the same way I have seen, hundreds of times,
motor cars turning around on their owners and chasing them—chasing them
fairly out of their lives. And hundreds of thousands of little wood-and-
rubber Things with nickel bells whirring, may be seen ordering around
people—who pay them for it—in any city of our modern world.
Now and then one comes on a man who keeps a telephone, who is a
gentleman with it, and who keeps it in its place, but not often.
There are certain questions to be asked and to be settled in any
civilization that would be called great.
First: Do the elephants chase the men in it? Second: And if—as in our
Western civilization—the men have made their own elephants, why should
they be chased by them?
There are some of us who have wondered a little at the comparative
inferiority of organ music. We have come to the conclusion that perhaps
organ music is inferior because it has been largely composed by organists,
by men who sit at organ machines many hours a day, and who have let their
organ machines with all their stops and pedals, and with all their stop-and-
pedal-mindedness, select out of their minds the tones that organs can do
best—the music that machines like.
Wagner has come to be recognized as a great and original composer for
a machine age because he would not let his imagination be cowed by the
mere technical limitations, the narrow-mindedness of brass horns, wooden
flutes, and catgut; he made up his mind that he would not sing violins. He
made violins sing him.
Perhaps this is the whole secret of art in a machine civilization.
Perhaps a machine civilization is capable of a greater art than has ever
been dreamed in the world before, the moment it stops being chased by its
elephants. The question of letting the crowd be beautiful in our world of
machines and crowds to-day turns on our producing Machine-Trainers.
Men possessed by watches in their vest pockets cannot be inspired, men
possessed by churches or religion-machines cannot be prophets, men
possessed by school-machines cannot be educators.
The reason that we find the poet, or at least the minor poet, discouraged
in a machine age probably is, that there is nothing a minor poet can do in it.
Why should nightingales, poppies, and dells expect, in a main trial of
strength, to compete with machines? And why should human beings
running for their souls in a race with locomotives expect to keep very long
from losing their souls?
The reason that most people are discouraged about machinery to-day is
that this is what they think a machine civilization is. They whine at the
machines. They blame the locomotive.
A better way for a man to do would be to stop blaming the locomotive,
and stop running along out of breath beside it, and climb up into the cab.
This is the whole issue of art in our modern civilization—climbing up
into the cab.
First come the Machine-Trainers, or poets who can tame engines. Then
the other poets.
In the meantime, the less we hear about nightingales and poppies and
dells and love and above, the better.
Poetry must make a few iron-handed, gentle-hearted, mighty men next.
It is because we demand and expect the beautiful that we say that poetry
must make men next.
The elephants have been running around in the garden long enough.
Chapter II.
Bells and Wheels
Table of Contents
We are living in a day of the great rebellion of the machines. Out of a
thousand thousand roundhouses and factories, vast cities and nations of
machines on the land and on the sea have risen before the soul of man and
said, "We have served you; now, you serve us."
A million million vulgar, swaggering Goliaths, one sees them
everywhere; they wave their arms at us around the world, they puff their
white breath at us, they spit smoke in our eyes, line up in a row before the
great cities, before the mighty-hearted nations, and say it again and again,
all in chorus, "We have served you, now, you serve us!"
It has come to sound to some of us as a kind of chant around our lives.
But why should we serve them?
I have seen crowds of minor poets running, their little boxes of perfume
and poetry, their cologne water, their smelling-salts, in their hands.
And, of course, if the world were all minor poets the situation would be
serious.
And I have seen flocks of faint-hearted temples, of big, sulky, beautiful,
absent-minded colleges, looking afraid. Every now and then perhaps one
sees a professor run out, throw a book at the machines, and run back again.
Oxford still looks at science, at matter itself, tremulously, with that same
old, still, dreamy air of dignity, of gentlemanly disappointment.
And if the world were all Oxford the situation would be serious.
When Oxford with its hundred spires, its little beautiful boy choirs of
professors, draws me one side from the Great Western Railway Station, and
intones in those still, solemn, lonely spaces the great truth in my ears, that
machines and ideals cannot go together, that the only way to deal with
ideals is to keep them away from machines, my only reply is that ideals that
are so tired that they are merely devoted to defending themselves, ideals
that will not and cannot go forth and be the breath of the machines, ideals
that cannot and will not master the machines, that will not ride the machines
as the wind, overrun matter, and conquer the earth, are not ideals for
gentlemen.
At least they are not ideals that can keep up the standard of the Oxford
gentleman.
A gentleman is a man who is engaged in expressing his best and noblest
self in every fibre of his mind and every fibre of his body. He makes the
very force of gravity pulling on his clothes express him, and the movements
of his feet and his hands. He gathers up his rooms into his will and all the
appointments of his life and crowds into them the full meaning of his soul.
He makes all these things say him.
The main attribute of a man who is not a gentleman is that he does not
do these things, that he cannot inform his body with his spirit.
I go back to the Great Western Railway, ugly as it still is. I go alone, and
sadly if I must, and for a little time—without the deep bells and without the
stained-glass windows, without all that dear, familiar beauty I have loved in
the old and quiet quadrangles—I take my stand beside the Great Western
Railway! I claim the Great Western Railway for the spirit of man and for
the will of God!
With its vast shuttle of steam and shining engines, its little, whispering
telegraph office, the Great Western Railway is a part of my body. I lay my
will on the heart of London with it, or I sleep in the old house in Lynmouth
with it. I am the Great Western Railway, and the Great Western Railway is
ME. And from the heart of the roar of London to the slow, sleepy surge of
the sea in my window at Lynmouth it is mine! Though it be iron and wood,
switches, whistles, and white steam, it is my body, and I inform it with my
spirit, or I die. With the will of God I endow it, with the glory of the world,
with the desires of my heart, and with the prayers of the hurrying men and
women.
I declare that that same glory I have known before, and that I will
always know, and will never give up, in the old quiet quadrangles of Oxford
and in the deep bells and in the still waters, as in some strange, new, and
mighty Child, is in the Great Western Railway too.
When I am in the train it sings. Strangely and hoarsely It sings! I lie
down to rest. It whistles on ahead my ideals down the slope of the world. It
roars softly, while I sleep, my religion in my ears.
Chapter III.
Dew and Engines
Table of Contents
When I was small, and wanted suddenly to play tag or duck-on-the-rock I
had a little square half-mile of boys near by to play with.
My daughter plays tag or plays dolls, any minute she likes, with a whole
city. She is not surprised at the telephone; she takes it for granted like
sunshine and milk. It is a part of the gray matter in her brain—a whole city,
six or seven square miles of it. A little mouthpiece on a desk, a number, and
two hundred little girls are hers in a minute, to play dolls with. She thinks in
miles when she plays, where I thought in door-yards. The whole city is a
part of the daily, hourly furniture of her mind. The little gray molecules in
the structure of her brain are different from those in mine.
I have seen that Man moves over with each new generation into a bigger
body, more awful, more reverent and free than he has had before.
A few minutes ago, here where I am writing, an engine all in bright,
soft, lit-up green with little lines of yellow on it and flashing silver feet, like
a vision, swept past—through my still glass window, through the quiet
green fields—like a great, swift, gleaming whisper of London. And now, all
in six seconds, this great quiet air about me is waked to vast vibrations of
the mighty city. Out over the red pines, the lonely gorse fields, I have seen
passing the spirit of the Strand. I have seen the great flocking bridges and
the roar about St. Paul's in communion with the treetops and with the
hedgerows and with the little brooks, all in six seconds, when an engine,
with its vision like a cloud of glory swept past.
And yet there are people in Oxford who tell me that an engine when it is
in the very act of expressing such stupendous and boundless thoughts, of
making such mighty and beautiful things happen, is not beautiful, that it has
nothing to do with art. They can but watch the machines, the earth black
with them, going about everywhere mowing down great nations and rolling
under the souls of men.
I cannot see it so. I see a thousand thousand engines carrying dew and
green fields to the stones of London. I see the desires of the earth hastening.
The ships and the wireless telegraph beckon the wills of cities on the seas
and on the sky. With the machines I have taken a whole planet to me for my
feet and for my hands. I gesture with the earth. I hand up oceans to my God.
Chapter IV.
Dead as a Door Nail!
Table of Contents
There are people who say that machines cannot be beautiful, and cannot
make for beauty, because machines are dead.
I would agree with them if I thought that machines were dead.
I have watched in spirit, hundreds of years, the machines grow out of
Man like nails, like vast antennæ—a kind of enormous, more unconscious
sub-body. They are apparently of less lively and less sensitive tissue than
tongues or eyes or flesh; and like all bones they do not renew, of course, as
often or as rapidly as flesh. But the difference between live and dead
machines is quite as grave and quite as important as the difference between
live and dead men. The generally accepted idea a live thing is, that it is a
thing that keeps dying and being born again every minute; it is seen to be
alive by its responsiveness to the spirit, to the intelligence that created it and
that keeps re-creating it. I have known thousands of factories; and every
factory I have known that is really strong or efficient has scales like a
snake, and casts off its old self. All the people in it, and all the iron and
wood in it, month by month are being renewed and shedding themselves.
Any live factory can always be seen moulting year after year. A live spirit
goes all through the machinery, a kind of nervous tissue of invention, of
thought.
We already speak of live and dead iron, of live and dead engines or half-
dead and half-sick engines, and we have learned that there is such a thing as
tired steel. What people do to steel makes a difference to it. Steel is
sensitive to people. My human spirit grows my arm and moves it and
guides it and expresses itself in it, keeps re-creating it and destroying it; and
daily my soul keeps rubbing out and writing in new lines upon my face; and
in the same way my typewriter, in a slow, more stolid fashion, responds to
my spirit too. Two men changing typewriters or motor-cars are, though
more subtly, like two men changing boots. Sewing machines, pianos, and
fiddles grow intimate with the people who use them, and they come to
express those particular people and the ways in which they are different
from others. A Titian-haired typewriter girl makes her machine move
differently every day from a blue-eyed one. Typewriters never like to have
their people take the liberty of lending them. Steel bars and wooden levers
all have little mannerisms, little expressions, small souls of their own,
habits of people that they have lived with, which have grasped the little
wood and iron levers of their wills and made them what they are.
It is somewhere in the region of this fact that we are going to discover
the great determining secret of modern life, of the mastery of man over his
machines. Man, at the present moment, with all his new machines about
him, is engaged in becoming as self-controlled, as self-expressive, with his
new machines, with his wireless telegraph arms and his railway legs, as he
is with his flesh and blood ones. The force in man that is doing this is the
spiritual genius in him that created the machine, the genius of imperious
and implacable self-expression, of glorious self-assertion in matter, the
genius for being human, for being spiritual, and for overflowing everything
we touch and everything we use with our own wills and with the ideals and
desires of our souls. The Dutchman has expressed himself in Dutch
architecture and in Dutch art; the American has expressed himself in the
motor-car; the Englishman has expressed himself, has carved his will and
his poetry upon the hills, and made his landscape a masterpiece by a great
nation. He has made his walls and winding roads, his rivers, his very
treetops express his deep, silent joy in the earth. So the great, fresh young
nations to-day, with a kind of new, stern gladness, implacableness, and
hope, have appointed to their souls expression through machinery. Our
Engines and our radium shall cry to God! Our wheels sing in the sun!
Machinery is our new art-form. A man expresses himself first in his
hands and feet, then in his clothes, and then in his rooms or in his house,
and then on the ground about him; the very hills grow like him, and the
ground in the fields becomes his countenance; and now, last and furthest of
all, requiring the liveliest and noblest grasp of his soul, the finest circulation
of will of all, he begins expressing himself in his vast machines, in his
three-thousand-mile railways, in his vast, cold-looking looms and dull steel
hammers. With telescopes for Mars-eyes for his spirit, he walks up the
skies; he expresses his soul in deep and dark mines, and in mighty foundries
melting and re-moulding the world. He is making these things intimate,
sensitive, and colossal expressions of his soul. They have become the
subconscious body, the abysmal, semi-infinite body of the man, sacred as
the body of the man is sacred, and as full of light or of darkness.
So I have seen the machines go swinging through the world. Like
archangels, like demons, they mount up our desires on the mountains. We
do as we will with them. We build Winchester Cathedral all over again, on
water. We dive down with our steel wheels and nose for knowledge—like a
great Fish—along the bottom of the sea. We beat up our wills through the
air. We fling up, with our religion, with our faith, our bodies on the clouds.
We fly reverently and strangely, our hearts all still and happy, in the face of
God!
Chapter V.
An Oxford Man and an Inch of Iron
Table of Contents
The whole process of machine-invention is itself the most colossal, spiritual
achievement of history. The bare idea we have had of unravelling all
creation, and of doing it up again to express our own souls—the idea of
subduing matter, of making our ideals get their way with matter, with
radium, ether, antiseptics, is itself a religion, a poetry, a ritual, a cry to
heaven. The supreme, spiritual adventure of the world has become this task
that man has set himself, of breaking down and casting away forever the
idea that there is such a thing as matter belonging to matter—matter that
keeps on in a dead, stupid way, just being matter. The idea that matter is not
all alive with our souls, with our desires and prayers, with hope, terror,
worship, with the little terrible wills of men and the spirit of God, is already
irreligious to us. Is not every cubic inch of iron (the coldest-blooded
scientist admits it) like a kind of little temple, its million million little atoms
in it going round and round and round dancing before the Lord?
And why should an Oxford man be afraid of a cubic inch of iron, or
afraid of becoming like it?
I daily thank God that I have been allowed to belong to this generation.
I have looked at last a little cubic inch of iron out of countenance. I can sit
and watch it, the little cubic inch of iron, in its still coldness, in all its little
funny play-deadness, and laugh! I know that to a telescope or a god, or to
me, to us, the little cubic inch of iron is all alive inside, that it is whirling
with will, that it is sensitive in a rather dead-looking but lively cosmic way,
sensitive like another kind of more slowly quivering flesh, sensitive to
moons and to stars and to heat and cold, to time and space and to human
souls. It is singing every minute low and strange, night and day, in its little
grim blackness, of the glory of Things. I am filled with the same feeling, the
same sense of kindred, of triumphant companionship, when I go out among
them and watch the majestic family of the machines, of the engines, those
mighty Innocents, those new awful sons of God, going abroad through all
the world, looking back at us when we have made them, unblinking and
without sin!
Like rain and sunshine, like chemicals, and like all the other innocent,
godlike things, and like waves of water and waves of air, rainbows,
starlight, they say what we make them say. They are alive with the life that
is in us.
The first element of power in a man, in getting control of his life in our
modern era, is to have spirit enough to know what matter is like.
The Machine-Trainer is the man who sees what the machines are like.
He is the man who conceives of iron-and-wood machines, in his daily habit
of thought, as alive. He has discovered ways in which he can produce an
impression upon iron and wood with his desires, and with his will. He goes
about making iron-and-wood machines do live things.
It is never the machines that are dead.
It is only mechanical-minded men that are dead.
Chapter VI.
The Machines' Machines
Table of Contents
The fate of civilization is not going to be determined by people who are
morbidly like machines on the one hand, or by people who are morbidly
unmechanical, on the other.
People in a machine civilization who try to live without being automatic
and mechanical-minded part of the time and in some things, people who try
to make everything they do artistic and self-expressive and hand-made, who
attend to all their own thoughts and finish off all their actions by hand
themselves, soon wish they were dead.
People who do everything they do mechanically, or by machinery, are
dead already.
It is bad enough for those of us who are trying to live our lives ourselves
—real, true, hand-made individual lives—to have to fight all these
machines about us trying daily to roar and roll us down into humdrum and
nothingness, without having to fight besides all these dear people we have
about us too, who have turned machines, even one's own flesh and blood.
Does not one see them—see them everywhere—one's own flesh and blood,
going about like stone-crushers, road-rollers, lifts, lawn-mowers?
Between the morbidly mechanical people and the morbidly
unmechanical people, modern civilization hangs in the balance.
There must be some way of being just mechanical enough, and at the
right time and right place, and of being just unmechanical enough at the
right time and right place. And there must be some way in which men can
be mechanical and unmechanical at will.
The fate of civilization turns on men who recognize the nature of
machinery, who make machines serve them, who add the machines to their
souls, like telephones and wireless telegraph, or to their bodies, like radium
and railroads, and who know when and when not and how and how not to
use them who are so used to using machines quietly and powerfully, that
they do not let the machines outwit them and unman them.
Who are these men?
How do they do it?
They are the Machine-Trainers. The men who understand people-
machines, who understand iron machines, and who understand how to make
people-machines and iron machines run softly together.
Chapter VII.
The Men's Machines
Table of Contents
There was a time once in the old simple individual days when drygoods
stores could be human. They expressed, in a quiet, easy way, the souls of
the people who owned them.
When machinery was invented and when organization was invented—
machines of people—drygoods stores became vast selling machines.
We then faced the problem of making a drygoods store with twenty-five
hundred clerks in it as human as a drygoods store with fifteen.
This problem has been essentially and in principle solved. At least we
know it is about to be solved. We are ready to admit—most of us—that it is
practicable for a department store to be human. Everything the man at the
top does expresses his human nature and his personality to his clerks. His
clerks become twenty-five hundred more of him in miniature. What is
more, the very stuff in which the clerks in department stores work—the
thing that passes through their hands, is human, and everything about it is
human, or can be made human; and all the while vast currents of human
beings, huge Mississippis of human feeling, flow past the clerks—
thousands and thousands of souls a day, and pour over their souls, making
them and keeping them human. The stream clears itself.
But what can we say about human beings in a mine, about the
practicability of keeping human twenty-five hundred men in a hole in the
ground? And how can a mine-owner reach down to the men in the hole,
make himself felt as a human being on the bottom floor of the hole in the
ground?
In a department store the employer expresses himself to his clerks
through every one of the other twenty-five hundred; they mingle and stir
their souls and hopes and fears together, and he expresses himself to all of
them through them all.
But in a mine, two men work all alone down in the dark hole in the
ground. Thousands of other men, all in dark holes, are near by, with nothing
but the dull sound of picks to come between. In thousands of other holes
men work, each with his helper, all alone. The utmost the helper can do is to
grow like the man he works with, or like his own pick, or like the coal he
chips out, or like the black hole. The utmost the man who mines coal can
do, in the way of being human, is with his helper.
In a factory, for the most part, the only way, during working hours, an
employer can express himself and his humanness to his workman is through
the steel machine he works with—through its being a new, good, fair
machine or a poor one. He can only smile and frown at him with steel, be
good to him in wheels and levers, or now and then perhaps through a
foreman pacing down the aisles.
The question the modern business man in a factory has to face is very
largely this: "I have acres of machines all roaring my will at my men. I have
leather belts, printed rules, white steam, pistons, roar, air, water and fire and
silence to express myself to my workmen in. I have long monotonous
swings and sweeps of cold steel, buckets of melted iron, strips of wood,
bells, whistles, clocks—to express myself, to express my human spirit to
my men. Is there, or is there not, any possible way in which my factory with
its machines can be made as human and as expressive of the human as a
department store?"
This is the question that our machine civilization has set itself to answer.
All the men with good honest working imaginations, the geniuses and
the freemen of the world, are setting themselves the task of answering it.
Some say, "Machines are on the necks of the men. We will take the
machines away."
Others say, "We will make our men as good as our machines. We will
make our inventions in men catch up with our inventions in machines."
We naturally turn to the employer first as having the first chance. What
is there an employer can do to draw out the latent force in the men, evoke
the divine, incalculable passion sleeping beneath in the machine-walled
minds, the padlocked wills, the dull unmined desires of men? How can he
touch and wake the solar plexus of labour?
If any employer desires to get into the inner substance of the most
common type of workman, be an artist with him, express himself with him
and change the nature of that substance, give it a different colour or light or
movement so that he will work three times as fast, ten times as cheerfully
and healthfully, and with his whole body and soul, spirit, and how is he
going to do it?
Most employers wish they could do this. If they could persuade their
men to believe in them, to begin to be willing to work with them instead of
against them, they would do it.
What form of language is there, whether of words or of actions, that an
employer can use to make the men who work nine hours a day for him and
to whom he has to express himself across acres of machines, believe in him
and understand him?
The modern employer finds himself set sternly face to face, every day
of his life, with this question. All civilization seems crowding up day by
day, seems standing outside his office door as he goes in and as he goes out,
and asking him—now with despair, now with a kind of grim, implacable
hope, "Do you believe, or do you not believe, a factory can be made as
human as a department store?"
This question is going to be answered first by men who know what iron
machines really are, and what they are really for, and how they work—who
know what people-machines really are, and what they are really for, and
how they work. They will base all that they do upon certain resemblances
and certain differences between people and machines.
They will work the machines of iron according to the laws of iron.
They will work the machines of men according to the laws of human
nature.
There are certain facts in human nature, feelings, enthusiasms and
general principles concerning the natural working relation between men and
machines, that it may be well to consider in the next chapter as a basis for a
possible solution.
What are our machines after all? How are the machines like us? And on
what theory of their relation to us can machines and men expect in a world
like this to run softly together? These are the questions men are going to
answer next. In the meantime, I venture to believe that no man who is
morose to-day about the machines, or who is afraid of machines in our
civilization—because they are machines—is likely to be able to do much to
save the men in it.
Chapter VIII.
The Basement of the World
Table of Contents
Every man has, according to the scientists, a place in the small of his back
which might be called roughly, perhaps, the soul of his body. All the little
streets of the senses or avenues of knowledge, the spiritual conduits through
which he lives in this world, meet in this little mighty brain in the small of a
man's back.
About nine hundred millions of his grandfathers apparently make their
headquarters in this little place in the small of his back.
It is in this one little modest unnoticed place that he is supposed to keep
his race-consciousness, his subconscious memory of a whole human race,
and it is here that the desires and the delights and labours of thousands of
years of other people are turned off and turned on in him. It is the brain that
has been given to every man for the heavy everyday hard work of living.
The other brain, the one with which he does his thinking and which is kept
in an honoured place up in the cupola of his being, is a comparatively light-
working organ, merely his own private personal brain—a conscious, small,
and supposably controllable affair. He holds on to his own particular
identity with it. The great lower brain in the small of his back is merely lent
to him, as it were, out of eternity—while he goes by.
It is like a great engine which he has been allowed the use of as long as
he can keep it connected up properly with his cerebral arrangements.
This appears to be mainly what the cerebral brain is for, this keeping the
man connected up. It acts as a kind of stopcock for one's infinity, for
screwing on or screwing off one's vast race-consciousness, one's all-
humanityness, all those unsounded deeps or reservoirs of human energy, of
hope and memory, of love, of passionate thought, of earthly and heavenly
desire that are lent to each of us as we slip softly by for seventy years, by a
whole human race.
A human being is a kind of factory. The engine and the works and all
the various machines are kept in the basement, and he sends down orders to
them from time to time, and they do the work which has been conceived up
in the headquarters. He expects the works down below to keep on doing
these things without his taking any particular notice of them, while he
occupies his mind, as the competent head of a factory should, with the
things that are new and different and special and that his mind alone can do
—the things which, at least in their present initial formative or creative
stage, no machines as yet have been developed to do, and that can only be
worked out by the man up in the headquarters himself personally, by the
handiwork of his own thought.
The more a human being develops, the more delicate, sensitive, strong,
and efficient, the more spirit-informed once for all the machines in the
basement are. As he grows, the various subconscious arrangements for
discriminating, assimilating and classifying material, for pumping up
power, light, and heat to headquarters, all of which can be turned on at will,
grow more masterful every year. They are found all slaving away for him
dimly down in the dark while he sleeps. They hand him up in his very
dreams new and strange powers to live and know with.
The men who have been the most developed of all, in this regard,
civilization has always selected and set apart from the others. It calls these
men, in their generation, men of genius.
Ordinary men do not try to compete with men of genius.
The reason that people set the genius apart and do not try to compete
with him is that he has more and better machinery than they have. It is
always the first thing one notices about a man of genius—the incredible
number of things that he manages to get done for him, apparently the things
that he never takes any time off, like the rest of us, to do himself. The
subconscious, automatic, mechanical equipment of his senses, the
extraordinary intelligence and refinement of his body, the way his senses
keep his spirit informed automatically and convey outer knowledge to him,
the power he has in return of informing this outer knowledge with his spirit,
with his will, with his choices, once for all, so that he is always able
afterward to rely on his senses to work out things beautifully for him quite
by themselves, and to hand up to him, when he wants them, rare, deep,
unconscious knowledge—all the things he wants to use for what his soul is
doing at the moment—it is these that make the man of genius what he is.
He has a larger and better factory than others, and has developed a huge
subconscious service in mind and body. Having all these things done for
him, he is naturally more free than others and has more vision and more
originality, his spirit is swung free to build new worlds—to take walks with
God, until at last we come to look upon him, upon the man of genius, a little
superstitiously. We look up every little while from doing the things
ourselves that he gets done for him by his subconscious machinery, and we
wonder at him, we wonder at the strange, the mighty feats he does, at his
thousand-leagued boots, at his apparent everywhereness. His songs and
joys, sometimes, to us, his very sorrows, look miraculous.
And yet it is all merely because he has a factory, a great automatic
equipment, a thousand employee-sense perceptions, down in the basement
of his being, doing things for him that the rest of us do, or think we are
obliged to do ourselves, and give up all of our time to. He is not held back
as we are, and moves freely. So he dives under the sea familiarly, or takes
peeps at the farther side of the stars, or he flies in the air, or he builds
unspeakable railroads or thinks out ships or sea-cities, or he builds books,
or he builds little new still-undreamed-of worlds out of chemistry, or he
unravels history out of rocks, or plants new cities and mighty states without
seeming to try, or perhaps he proceeds quietly to be interested in men, in all
these funny little dots of men about him; and out of the earth and sky, out of
the same old earth and sky everybody else had had, he makes new kinds
and new sizes of men with a thought like some mighty, serene child playing
with dolls!
It is generally supposed that the man of genius rules history and dictates
the ideals, the activities of the next generation, writes out the specifications
for the joys and sorrows of a world, and lays the ground-plans of nations
because he has an inspired mind. It is really because he has an inspired
body, a body that has received its orders once for all, from his spirit. We
would never wonder that everything a genius does has that vivid and
strange reality it has, if we realized what his body is doing for him, how he
has a body which is at work automatically drinking up the earth into
everything he thinks, drinking up practicability, art and technique for him
into everything he sees and everything he hopes and desires. And every year
he keeps on adding a new body, keeps on handing down to his basement
new sets, every day, of finer and yet finer things to do automatically. The
great spiritual genius becomes great by economizing his consciousness in
one direction and letting it fare forth in another. He converts his old
inspirations into his new machines. He converts heat into power, and power
into light, and comes to live at last as almost any man of genius can really
be seen living—in a kind of transfigured or lighted-up body. The poet
transmutes his subconscious or machine body into words; and the artist,
into colour or sound or into carved stone. The engineer transmutes his
subconscious body into long buildings, into aisles of windows, into stories
of thoughtful machines. Every great spiritual and imaginative genius is
seen, sooner or later, to be the transmuted genius of some man's body. The
things in Leonardo da Vinci that his unconscious, high-spirited, automatic
senses gathered together for him, piled up in his mind for him, and handed
over to him for the use of his soul, would have made a genius out of
anybody. It is not as if he had had to work out every day all the old details
of being a genius, himself.
The miracles he seems to work are all made possible to him because of
his thousand man-power, deep subconscious body, his tremendous factory
of sensuous machinery. It is as if he had practically a thousand men all
working for him, for dear life, down in his basement, and the things that he
can get these men to attend to for him give him a start with which none of
the rest of us could ever hope to compete. We call him inspired because he
is more mechanical than we are, and because his real spiritual life begins
where our lives leave off.
So the poets who have filled the world with glory and beauty have been
free to do it because they have had more perfect, more healthful and
improved subconscious senses handing up wonder to them than the rest of
us have.
And so the engineers, living, as they always live, with that fierce, silent,
implacable curiosity of theirs, woven through their bodies and through their
senses and through their souls, have tagged the Creator's footsteps under the
earth, and along the sky, every now and then throwing up new little worlds
to Him like His worlds, saying, "Look, O God, look at THIS!"—the
engineers whose poetry is too deep to look poetic have all done what they
have done because the unconscious and automatic gifts of their senses, of
the powers of their observation, have swung their souls free, given them
long still reaches of thought and vast new orbits of desire, like gods.
All the great men of the world have always had machinery.
Now, everybody is having it. The power to get little things,
innumerable, omnipresent, for-ever-and-ever things, tiny just-so things,
done for us automatically so that we can go on to our inspirations is no
longer to-day the special prerogative of men of genius. It is for all of us.
Machinery is the stored-up spirit, the old saved-up inspiration of the world
turned on for every man. And as the greatness of a man turns on his
command over machinery, on his power to free his soul by making his body
work for him, the greatness of a civilization turns upon its getting machines
to do its work. The more of our living we can learn to do to-day,
automatically, the more inspired and creative and godlike and unmechanical
our civilization becomes.
Machinery is the subconscious mind of the world.
Chapter IX.
The Ground Floor Folks
Table of Contents
I would not have, if I could afford it, a thing in my house that is not hand-
made. I have come to believe that machinery is going to make it possible
for everybody to have hand-made things in their homes, things that have
been made by people who love to make them, and by people who, thinks to
the machines, are soon bound to have time to make them. Some will have
gifts for hand-made furniture, others for hand-made ideas. Perhaps people
will even have time for sitting down to enjoy hand-made ideas, to enjoy
hand-made books—and enjoy reading books by hand. We may have time
for following an author in a book in the slow, old, deep, loving, happy,
hand-made fashion we used to know—when we have enough machines.
It looks as if it might be something like this.
Every man is going to spend his mornings in the basement of society,
taking orders and being a servant and executing automatically, like a
machine if need be, the will of the world, making what the world wants in
the way it wants it, expressing society and subordinating himself. In the
afternoon he shall come up out of the basement, and take his stand on the
ground floor of the world, stop being a part of the machinery, and be a man,
express himself and give orders to himself and do some work he loves to do
in the way he loves to do it, express his soul in his labour, and be an artist.
He will not select his work in the morning, or select his employer, or say
how the work shall be done. He will himself be selected, like a young tree
or like an iron nail, because he is the best made and best fitted thing at hand
to be used in a certain place and in a certain way.
When the man has been selected for his latent capacities, his employer
sets to work on him scientifically and according to the laws of physics,
hygiene, conservation of energy, the laws of philosophy, human nature,
heredity, psychology, and even metaphysics, teaches the man how to hold
his hands, how to lift, how to sit down, how to rest, and how to breathe, so
that three times as much work can be got out of him as he could get out of
himself. A mind of the highest rank and, if necessary, thirty minds of the
highest rank, shall be at his disposal, shall be lent him to show him how his
work can be done. The accumulated science and genius, the imagination
and experience, of hundreds of years, of all climates, of all countries, of all
temperaments shall be heaped up by his employers, gathered about the
man's mind, wrought through his limbs, and help him to do his work.
All labour down in the basement of society shall be skilled labour. The
brains of men of genius and of experts shall be pumped into labour from
above until every man in the basement shall earn as much money in three
hours a day as he formerly had earned in nine.
Between the time a man saves by having machinery and the time he
saves by having the brains of great men and geniuses to work with, it will
be possible for men to do enough work for other people down in the
basement of the world in a few hours to shut the whole basement up, if we
want to, by three o'clock. Every man who is fit for it shall spend the rest of
his time in planning his work himself and in expressing himself, and in
creating hand-made and beautiful, inspired and wilful things like an artist,
or like a slowed-down genius, or at least like a man or like a human being.
Every man owes it to society to spend part of his time in expressing his
own soul. The world needs him. Society cannot afford to let him merely
give to it his feet and his hands. It wants the joy in him, the creative desire
in him, the slow, stupid, hopeful initiative, in him to help run the world.
Society wants to use the man's soul too—the man's will. It is going to
demand the soul in a man, the essence or good-will in him, if only to protect
itself, and to keep the man from being dangerous. Men who have lost or
suppressed their souls, and who go about cursing at the world every day
they live in it, are not a safe, social investment.
But while every man is going to see that he owes it to society to use a
part of his time in it in expressing himself, his own desires, in his own way,
he is going to see also that he owes it to society to spend part of his time in
expressing others and in expressing the desires and the needs of others. The
two processes could be best effected at first probably by alternating, by
keeping the man in equilibrium, balancing the mechanical and the spiritual
in his life. Eventually and ideally, he will manage to have time in a higher
state of society to put them together, to express in the same act at the same
time, and not alternating or reciprocally, himself and others. And he will
succeed in doing what the great and free artist does already. He will make
his individual self-expression so great and so generous that it is also the
expression of the universal self. Every man will be treated according to his
own nature. Doubtless some men have not brains enough in a week to
supply them for one hour a day of self-directed work. It would take them
five hours a day to think how to do one hour's worth of work. Men who
prefer, as many will, not to think, and who like the basement better, can
substitute in the basement for their sons, and buy if they like, the freedom
of sons who prefer thinking, who would like to work harder than their
fathers would care to work, up on the ground floor of the world. But as time
goes on, it is to be hoped that every man will climb up slowly, and will
belong less and less of his time to the staff that borrows brains, and more
and more of his time to the staff that hands brains down, and that directs the
machinery of the world. The time of alternation in dealing with different
callings will probably be adjusted differently, and might be made weeks
instead of days, but the principle would be the same. The forces that are
going to help, apparently, in this evolution will be the labour exchange—the
centre for the mobilization of labour, the produce exchange, the inventor's
spirit in the labour unions and employers' associations, and the gradual
organization by inventors of the common vision of all men, and setting it at
work on the supreme task of modern life—the task of drawing out, evoking
each particular man in the world, and in behalf of all, freeing him for his
own particular place.
Chapter X.
The Machine-Trainers
Table of Contents
The fundamental failure of humanity so far is in self-assertion.
The essential distinctive trait of modern civilization is machinery.
Machinery logically and irrevocably involves the coöperative action of
individuals.
If we make levers and iron wheels work by putting them together
according to their nature, we can only make vast masses of men work by
putting them together according to their nature.
So far we have been trying to make vast masses of men work together
in precisely the same way we make levers and iron wheels work together.
We have thought we could make diabolically, foolishly, insanely inflexible
men-machines which violate at every point the natural qualities and
instincts of the materials of which they are made.
We have failed to assert ourselves against our iron machines. We have
let our iron machines assert themselves against us. We have let our iron
machines be models for us. We have overlooked the difference in the nature
of the materials in machines of iron and machines of men.
A man is a self-reproducing machine, and an iron machine is one that
has to be reproduced by somebody else.
In a man-machine arrangements must be made so that each man can be
allowed to be the father of his own children and the author of his own acts.
In society or the man-machine, if it is to work, men are individuals.
Society is organically, irrevocably dependent upon each man, and upon
what each man chooses according to his own nature to do himself.
The result is, the first principle of success in constructing and running a
social machine is to ask and to get an answer out of each man who is, as we
look him over and take him up, and propose to put him into it, "What are
you like?" "What are you especially for?" "What do you want?" "How can
you get it?"
Our success in getting him properly into our machine turns upon a loyal,
patient, imperious attention on our part to what there is inside him, inside
the particular individual man, and how we can get him to let us know what
is inside, get him to decide voluntarily to let us have it, and let us work it
into the common end.
In this amazing, impromptu, new, and hurried machine civilization
which we have been piling up around us for a hundred years we have made
machines out of everything, and our one consummate and glaring failure in
the machines we have made is the machine we have made out of ourselves.
Mineral machines are made by putting comparatively dead, or at least
dead-looking, matter together; vegetable machines or gardens, are made by
studying little unconscious seeds that we can persuade to come up and to
reproduce themselves. Man-machines are produced by putting up possible
lives before particular individual men, and letting them find out (and
finding out for ourselves, too), day by day, into which life they will grow
up.
Everything in a social machine, if it is a machine that really works, is
based on the profound and special study of individuals: upon drawing out
the aptitudes and motives, choices and genius in each man; the passion, if
he has any; the creative desire, the self-expressing, self-reproducing, inner
manhood; the happy strength there is in him.
Trades unions overlook this, and treat all men alike and all employers
alike. Employers have very largely overlooked it.
It is the industrial, social, and religious secret of our modern machine
civilization. We need not be discouraged about machines, because the secret
of the machine civilization has as yet barely been noticed.
The elephants are running around in the garden. But they have merely
taken us by surprise. It is their first and their last chance. The men about us
are seeing what to do. We are to get control of the elephants, first, by
getting control of ourselves. We are beginning to organize our people-
machines as if they were made of people; so that the people in them can
keep on being people, and being better ones. And as our people-machines
begin to become machines that really work, our iron machines will no
longer be feared. They will reach over and help. As we look about us we
shall see our iron machines at last, about all the world, all joining in, all
hard at work for us, a million, million machines a day making the crowd
beautiful.
Chapter XI.
Machines, Crowds, and Artists
Table of Contents
A crowd civilization produces, as a matter of course, crowd art and art for
crowded conditions. This fact is at once the glory and the weakness of the
kind of art a democracy is bound to have.
The most natural evidence to turn to first, of the crowd in a crowd age,
is such as can be found in its literature, especially in its masterpieces.
The significance of shaking hands with a Senator of the United States is
that it is a convenient and labour-saving way of shaking hands with two or
three million people. The impressiveness of the Senator's Washington voice,
the voice on the floor of the Senate, consists in the mystical undertone—the
chorus in it—multitudes in smoking cities, men and women, rich and poor,
who are speaking when this man speaks, and who are silent when he is
silent, in the government of the United States.
The typical fact that the Senator stands for in modern life has a
corresponding typical fact in modern literature. The typical fact in modern
literature is the epigram, the senatorial sentence, the sentence that
immeasurably represents what it does not say. The difference between
democracy in Washington and democracy in Athens may be said to be that
in Washington we have an epigram government, a government in which
ninety million people are crowded into two rooms to consider what to do,
and in which ninety million people are made to sit in one chair to see that it
is done. In Athens every man represented himself.
It may be said to be a good working distinction between modern and
classic art that in modern art words and colours and sounds stand for things,
and in classic art they said them. In the art of the Greek, things were what
they seemed, and they were all there. Hence simplicity. It is a quality of the
art of to-day that things are not what they seem in it. If they were, we
should not call it art at all. Everything stands not only for itself and for what
it says, but for an immeasurable something that cannot be said. Every sound
in music is the senator of a thousand sounds, thoughts, and associations, and
in literature every word that is allowed to appear is the representative in
three syllables of three pages of a dictionary. The whistle of the locomotive,
and the ring of the telephone, and the still, swift rush of the elevator are
making themselves felt in the ideal world. They are proclaiming to the ideal
world that the real world is outstripping it. The twelve thousand horsepower
steamer does not find itself accurately expressed in iambics on the leisurely
fleet of Ulysses. It is seeking new expression. The command has gone forth
over all the beauty and over all the art of the present world, crowded for
time and crowded for space. "Telegraph!" To the nine Muses the order flies.
One can hear it on every side. "Telegraph!" The result is symbolism, the
Morse alphabet of art and "types," the epigrams of human nature, crowding
us all into ten or twelve people. The epic is telescoped into the sonnet, and
the sonnet is compressed into quatrains or Tabbs of poetry, and couplets are
signed as masterpieces. The novel has come into being—several hundred
pages of crowded people in crowded sentences, jostling each other to
oblivion; and now the novel, jostled into oblivion by the next novel, is
becoming the short story. Kipling's short stories sum the situation up. So far
as skeleton or plot is concerned, they are built up out of a bit of nothing put
with an infinity of Kipling; so far as meat is concerned, they are the Liebig
Beef Extract of fiction. A single jar of Kipling contains a whole herd of old-
time novels lowing on a hundred hills.
The classic of any given world is a work of art that has passed through
the same process in being a work of art that that world has passed through
in being a world. Mr. Kipling represents a crowd age, because he is
crowded with it; because, above all others, he is the man who produces art
in the way the age he lives in is producing everything else.
This is no mere circumstance of democracy. It is its manifest destiny
that it shall produce art for crowded conditions, that it shall have crowd art.
The kind of beauty that can be indefinitely multiplied is the kind of beauty
in which, in the nature of things, we have made our most characteristic and
most important progress. Our most considerable success in pictures could
not be otherwise than in black and white. Black-and-white art is printing-
press art; and art that can be produced in endless copies, that can be
subscribed for by crowds, finds an extraordinary demand, and artists have
applied themselves to supplying it. All the improvements, moving on
through the use of wood and steel and copper, and the process of etching, to
the photogravure, the lithograph, the moving picture, and the latest
photograph in colour, whatever else may be said of them from the point of
view of Titian or Michael Angelo, constitute a most amazing and
triumphant advance from the point of view of making art a democracy, of
making the rare and the beautiful minister day and night to crowds. The fact
that the mechanical arts are so prominent in their relation to the fine arts
may not seem to argue a high ideal amongst us; but as the mechanical arts
are the body of beauty, and the fine arts are the soul of it, it is a necessary
part of the ideal to keep body and soul together until we can do better.
Mourning with Ruskin is not so much to the point as going to work with
William Morris. If we have deeper feelings about wall-papers than we have
about other things, it is going to the root of the matter to begin with wall-
papers, to make machinery say something as beautiful as possible,
inasmuch as it is bound to have, for a long time at least, about all the say
there is. The photograph does not go about the world doing Murillos
everywhere by pressing a button, but the camera habit is doing more in the
way of steady daily hydraulic lifting of great masses of men to where they
enjoy beauty in the world than Leonardo da Vinci would have dared to
dream in his far-off day; and Leonardo's pictures, thanks to the same
photograph, and everybody's pictures, films of paper, countless spirits of
themselves, pass around the world to every home in Christendom. The
printing press made literature a democracy, and machinery is making all the
arts democracies. The symphony piano, an invention for making vast
numbers of people who can play only a few very poor things play very
poorly a great many good ones, is a consummate instance both of the
limitation and the value of our contemporary tendency in the arts. The pipe
organ, though on a much higher plane, is an equally characteristic
contrivance making it possible for a man to be a complete orchestra and a
conductor all by himself, playing on a crowd of instruments, to a crowd of
people, with two hands and one pair of feet. It is a crowd invention. The
orchestra—a most distinctively modern institution, a kind of republic of
sound, the unseen spirit of the many in one—is the sublimest expression yet
attained of the crowd music, which is, and must be, the supreme music of
this modern day, the symphony. Richard Wagner comes to his triumph
because his music is the voice of multitudes. The opera, a crowd of sounds
accompanied by a crowd of sights, presented by one crowd of people on the
stage to another crowd of people in the galleries, stands for the same
tendency in art that the syndicate stands for in commerce. It is syndicate
music; and in proportion as a musical composition in this present day is an
aggregation of multitudinous moods, in proportion as it is suggestive,
complex, paradoxical, the way a crowd is complex, suggestive, and
paradoxical—provided it be wrought at the same time into some vast and
splendid unity—just in this proportion is it modern music. It gives itself to
the counterpoints of the spirit, the passion of variety in modern life. The
legacy of all the ages, is it not descended upon us?—the spirit of a thousand
nations? All our arts are thousand-nation arts, shadows and echoes of dead
worlds playing upon our own. Italian music, out of its feudal kingdoms,
comes to us as essentially solo music—melody; and the civilization of
Greece, being a civilization of heroes, individuals, comes to us in its noble
array with its solo arts, its striding heroes everywhere in front of all, and
with nothing nearer to the people in it than the Greek Chorus, which, out of
limbo, pale and featureless across all ages, sounds to us as the first far faint
coming of the crowd to the arts of this groping world. Modern art,
inheriting each of these and each of all things, is revealed to us as the
struggle to express all things at once. Democracy is democracy for this very
reason, and for no other: that all things may be expressed at once in it, and
that all things may be given a chance to be expressed at once in it. Being a
race of hero-worshippers, the Greeks said the best, perhaps, what could be
said in sculpture; but the marbles and bronzes of a democracy, having
average men for subjects, and being done by average men, are average
marbles and bronzes. We express what we have. We are in a transition
stage. It is not without its significance, however, that we have perfected the
plaster cast—the establishment of democracy among statues, and mobs of
Greek gods mingling with the people can be seen almost any day in every
considerable city of the world. The same principle is working itself out in
our architecture. It is idle to contend against the principle. The way out is
the way through. However eagerly we gaze at Parthenons on their ruined
hills, if thirty-one-story blocks are in our souls thirty-one-story blocks will
be our masterpieces, whether we like it or not. They will be our
masterpieces because they tell the truth about us; and while truth may not
be beautiful, it is the thing that must be told first before beauty can begin.
The beauty we are to have shall only be worked out from the truth we have.
Living as we do in a new era, not to see that the thirty-one-story block is the
expression of a new truth is to turn ourselves away from the one way that
beauty can ever be found by men, in this era or in any other.
What is it that the thirty-one-story block is trying to say about us? The
thirty-one-story block is the masterpiece of mass, of immensity, of
numbers; with its 2427 windows and its 779 offices, and its crowds of lives
piled upon lives, it is expressing the one supreme and characteristic thing
that is taking place in the era in which we live. The city is the main fact that
modern civilization stands for, and crowding is the logical architectural
form of the city idea. The thirty-one-story block is the statue of a crowd. It
stands for a spiritual fact, and it will never be beautiful until that fact is
beautiful. The only way to make the thirty-one-story block beautiful (the
crowd expressed by the crowd) is to make the crowd beautiful. The most
artistic, the only artistic, thing the world can do next is to make the crowd
beautiful.
The typical city blocks, with their garrets in the lower stories of the sky,
were not possible in the ancient world, because steel had not been invented;
and the invention of steel, which is not the least of our triumphs in the
mechanical arts, is in many ways the most characteristic. Steel is republican
for stone. Putting whole quarries into a single girder, it makes room for
crowds; and what is more significant than this, inasmuch as the steel pillar
is an invention that makes it possible to put floors up first, and build the
walls around the floors, instead of putting the walls up first and supporting
the floors upon the walls, as in the ancient world, it has come to pass that
the modern world being the ancient world turned upside down, modern
architecture is ancient architecture turned inside out, a symbol of many
things. The ancient world was a wall of individuals, supporting floor after
floor and stage after stage of society, from the lowest to the highest; and it
is a typical fact in this modern democratic world that it grows from the
inside, and that it supports itself from the inside. When the mass in the
centre has been finished, an ornamental stone facing of great individuals
will be built around it and supported by it, and the work will be considered
done.
The modern spirit has much to boast of in its mechanical arts, and in its
fine arts almost nothing, because the mechanical arts are studying what men
are needing to-day, and the fine arts are studying what the Greeks needed
three thousand years ago. To be a real classic is, first, to be a contemporary
of one's own time; second, to be a contemporary of one's own time so
deeply and widely as to be a contemporary of all time. The true Greek is a
man who is doing with his own age what the Greeks did with theirs,
bringing all ages to bear upon it, and interpreting it. As long as the fine arts
miss the fundamental principle of this present age—the crowd principle,
and the mechanical arts do not, the mechanical arts are bound to have their
way with us. And it were vastly better that they should. Sincere and
straightforward mechanical arts are not only more beautiful than affected
fine ones, but they are more to the point: they are the one sure sign we have
of where we are going to be beautiful next. It is impossible to love the fine
arts in the year 1913 without studying the mechanical ones; without finding
one's self looking for artistic material in the things that people are using,
and that they are obliged to use. The determining law of a thing of beauty
being, in the nature of things, what it is for, the very essence of the classic
attitude in a utilitarian age is to make the beautiful follow the useful and
inspire the useful with its spirit. The fine art of the next thousand years shall
be the transfiguring of the mechanical arts. The modern hotel, having been
made necessary by great natural forces in modern life, and having been
made possible by new mechanical arts, now puts itself forward as the next
great opportunity of the fine arts. One of the characteristic achievements of
the immediate future shall be the twentieth-century Parthenon—a Parthenon
not of the great and of the few and of the gods, but of the great many,
where, through mighty corridors, day and night, democracy wanders and
sleeps and chatters and is sad and lives and dies, streets rumbling below.
The hotel—the crowd fireside—being more than any other one thing,
perhaps, the thing that this civilization is about, the token of what it loves
and of how it lives, is bound to be a masterpiece sooner or later that shall
express democracy. The hotel rotunda, the parlour for multitudes, is bound
to be made beautiful in ways we do not guess. Why should we guess?
Multitudes have never wanted parlours before. The idea of a parlour has
been to get out of a multitude. All the inevitable problems that come of
having a whole city of families live in one house have yet to be solved by
the fine arts as well as by the mechanical ones. We have barely begun. The
time is bound to come when the radiator, the crowd's fireplace-in-a-pipe,
shall be made beautiful; and when the electric light shall be taught the
secret of the candle; and when the especial problem of modern life—of how
to make two rooms as good as twelve—shall be mastered æsthetically as
well as mathematically; and when even the piano-folding, bed-bookcase-
toilet-stand-writing-desk—a crowd invention for living in a crowd—shall
either take beauty to itself or lead to beauty that serves the same end.
While for the time being it seems to be true that the fine arts are looking
to the past, the mechanical arts are producing conditions in the future that
will bring the fine arts to terms, whether they want to be brought to terms or
not. The mechanical arts hold the situation in their hands. It is decreed that
people who cannot begin by making the things they use beautiful shall be
allowed no beauty in other things. We may wish that Parthenons and
cathedrals were within our souls; but what the cathedral said of an age that
had the cathedral mood, that had a cathedral civilization and thrones and
popes in it, we are bound to say in some stupendous fashion of our own—
something which, when it is built at last, will be left worshipping upon the
ground beneath the sky when we are dead, as a memorial that we too have
lived. The great cathedrals, with the feet of the huddled and dreary poor
upon their floors, and saints and heroes shining on their pillars, and priests
behind the chancel with God to themselves, and the vast and vacant nave,
symbol of the heaven glimmering above that few could reach—it is not to
these that we shall look to get ourselves said to the nations that are now
unborn; rather, though it be strange to say it, we shall look to something like
the ocean steamship—cathedral of this huge unresting modern world—
under the wide heaven, on the infinite seas, with spars for towers and the
empty nave reversed filled with human beings' souls—the cathedral of
crowds hurrying to crowds. There are hundreds of them throbbing and
gleaming in the night—this very moment—lonely cities in the hollow of the
stars, bringing together the nations of the earth.
When the spirit of our modern way of living, the idea in it, the bare facts
about our modern human nature have been noticed at last by our modern
artists, masterpieces shall come to us out of every great and living activity
in our lives. Art shall tell the things these lives are about. When this is once
realized in America as it was in Greece, the fine arts shall cover the other
arts as the waters cover the sea. The Brooklyn Bridge, swinging its web for
immortal souls across sky and sea, comes nearer to being a work of art than
almost anything we possess to-day, because it tells the truth, because it is
the material form of a spiritual idea, because it is a sublime and beautiful
expression of New York in the way that the Acropolis was a sublime and
beautiful expression of Athens. The Acropolis was beautiful because it was
the abode of heroes, of great individuals; and the Brooklyn Bridge, because
it expresses the bringing together of millions of men. It is the architecture of
crowds—this Brooklyn Bridge—with winds and sunsets and the dark and
the tides of souls upon it; it is the type and symbol of the kind of thing that
our modern genius is bound to make beautiful and immortal before it dies.
The very word "bridge" is the symbol of the future of art and of everything
else, the bringing together of things that are apart—democracy. The bridge,
which makes land across the water, and the boat, which makes land on the
water, and the cable, which makes land and water alike—these are the
physical forms of the spirit of modern life, the democracy of matter. But the
spirit has countless forms. They are all new and they are all waiting to be
made beautiful. The dumb crowd waits in them. We have electricity—the
life current of the republican idea—characteristically our foremost
invention, because it takes all power that belongs to individual places and
puts it on a wire and carries it to all places. We have the telephone, an
invention which makes it possible for a man to live on a back street and be
a next-door neighbour to boulevards; and we have the trolley, the modern
reduction of the private carriage to its lowest terms, so that any man for five
cents can have as much carriage power as Napoleon with all his chariots.
We have the phonograph, an invention which gives a man a thousand
voices; which sets him to singing a thousand songs at the same time to a
thousand crowds; which makes it possible for the commonest man to hear
the whisper of Bismarck or Gladstone, to unwind crowds of great men by
the firelight of his own house. We have the elevator, an invention for
making the many as well off as the few, an approximate arrangement for
giving first floors to everybody, and putting all men on a level at the same
price—one more of a thousand instances of the extraordinary manner in
which the mechanical arts have devoted themselves from first to last to the
Constitution of the United States. While it cannot be said of many of these
tools of existence that they are beautiful now, it is enough to affirm that
when they are perfected they will be beautiful; and that if we cannot make
beautiful the things that we need, we cannot expect to make beautiful the
things that we merely want. When the beauty of these things is at last
brought out, we shall have attained the most characteristic and original and
expressive and beautiful art that is in our power. It will be unprecedented
because it will tell unprecedented truths. It was the mission of ancient art to
express states of being and individuals, and it may be said to be in a general
way the mission of our modern art to express the beautiful in endless
change, the movement of masses, coming to its sublimity and immortality
at last by revealing the beauty of the things that move and that have to do
with motion, the bringing of all things and of all souls together on the earth.
The fulfillment of the word that has been written, "Your valleys shall be
exalted, and your mountains shall be made low," is by no means a beautiful
process. Democracy is the grading principle of the beautiful. The natural
tendency the arts have had from the first to rise from the level of the world,
to make themselves into Switzerlands in it, is finding itself confronted with
the Constitution of the United States—a Constitution which, whatever it
may be said to mean in the years to come, has placed itself on record up to
the present time, at least, as standing for the tableland.
The very least that can be granted to this Constitution is that it is so
consummate a political document that it has made itself the creed of our
theology, philosophy, and sociology; the principle of our commerce and
industry; the law of production, education, and journalism; the method of
our life; the controlling characteristic and the significant force in our
literature; and the thing our religion and our arts are about.
Part Three.
People-Machines
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Now!
Table of Contents
This outlook or glimmer of vision I have tried to trace, for the art of crowds
is something we want, and want daily, in the future. We want daily a future.
But, after all, it is a future.
I speak in this present chapter as one of the crowd who wants something
now.
I find myself in a world in which apparently some vast anonymous
arrangement was made about me and about my life, before I was born. This
arrangement seems to be, as I understand it, that if I want to live while I am
on this planet a certain sort of life or be a certain sort of person, I am
expected practically to take out a permit for it from the proper authorities.
In the previous chapter I made a request of the authorities, as perhaps
the reader will remember. I said, "I want to be good now."
In this one I have a further request to make of the authorities: "I want to
be beautiful."
I want to be beautiful now.
I find thousands of other people about me on every hand making these
same two requests. I find that the authorities do not seem to notice their
requests any more than they have noticed mine.
Some of us have begun to suspect that we must have made the request
in the wrong way. Perhaps we should not ask a world—a great, vague thing
like the world in general—to make any slight arrangement we may need for
being beautiful. We have come to feel that we must ask somebody in
particular, and do something in particular, and find some one in particular
with whom we can do it. There is getting to be but one course open to a
man if he wants to be beautiful. He must bone down and work hard with his
soul, make himself see precisely what it is and who it is standing between
him and a beautiful world. He must ask particular persons in particular
positions if they do not think he ought to be allowed to be beautiful. He
must ask some millionaire probably first—his employer, for instance—to
stop getting in his way, and at least to step one side and let him reason with
him. And when he cannot ask his millionaire—his own particular humdrum
millionaire—to step one side and reason with him, he must ask iron-
machines to step one side and reason with him. After this he must ask
crowds to please to step one side and reason with him.
Whatever happens, he is sure to find always these same three great,
imponderable obstructions in the way of his being beautiful—the humdrum
millionaires, the iron-machines, and crowds.
In the old days when any one wanted to be beautiful he found it more
convenient. There was very likely some one who was more beautiful than
he was nearby, some one who found him craving the same thing that he had
craved, and who recognized it and delighted in it, and who could make
room and help.
Nowadays, if one wants to be beautiful one must ask everybody. Every
man finds it the same. He must ask millions of people to let him be
something, one after the other in rows, that they do not want him to be or do
not care whether he is or not. He has to ask more people than he could
count, before he dies, to let him be beautiful. Many of them that he has to
ask, sometimes most of them, are his inferiors.
I have tried to deal with how it is going to be possible for a man to
break through to being beautiful, past millionaires and past iron-machines. I
would like now to deal with the people-machines or crowds, and how
perhaps to break past them and be beautiful in behalf of them, in spite of
them.
Chapter II.
Committees and Committees
Table of Contents
The problem seems to be something like this. One finds one has been born
and put here whether or no, and that one is inextricably alive in a state of
society in which men are coming to live in a kind of vast disease of being
obliged to do everything together.
We are still old-fashioned enough to be born one at a time, but we are
educated in litters and we do our work in the world in herds and gangs.
Even the upper classes do their work in gangs, and with overseers and little
crowds called committees. Our latest idea consists in putting parts of a great
many different men together to make one great one—forming a committee
to make a man of genius.
There is no denying that, in a way, a committee does things; but what
becomes of the committee?
And the lower in the scale of life we go the more committees it takes to
do the work of one man and the more impossible it becomes to find
anything but parts of men to do things. I put it frankly to the reader. The
chances are nine out of ten that when you meet a man nowadays and look at
him hard or try to do something with him you find he is not a man at all but
is some subsection of a committee. You cannot even talk with such a man
without selecting some subsection of some subject which interests him; and
if you select any other subsection than his subsection he will think you a
bore; and if you select his subsection he will think that you do not know
anything.
And if you want to get anything done that is different, or that is the least
bit interesting, and want to get some one to do it, how will you go about it?
You will find yourself being sent from one person to another; and before
you know it you find yourself mixed up with nine or ten subdivisions of
nine or ten committees; and after you have got your nine or ten subsections
of nine or ten committees to get together to consider what it is you want
done, they will tell you, after due deliberation, that it is not worth doing, or
that you had better do it yourself. Then every subsection of every
committee will go home muttering under its breath to every other
subsection that a man who wants slightly different and interesting things
done in society is a public nuisance; and that the man who does not know
what subsection he is in and what subsection of a man he was intended to
be, and who tries to do things, carries dismay and anger on every side
around him. Drop into your pigeonhole and be filed away, O Gentle
Reader! Do you think you are a soul? No; you are Series B. No. 2574, top
row on the left.
In my morning paper the other day I read that in a factory whose long
windows I often pass in the train, they have their machinery so perfected
that it takes sixty-four machines to make one shoe.
Query—If it takes sixty-four machines run by sixty-four men who do
nothing else to make one shoe, how many machines would it take, and how
many shoes, to make one man?
Query—And when an employer in a shoe factory deals with his
employee, can it really be said, after all, that he is dealing with him? He is
dealing with It—with Nine Hours a Day, of one sixty-fourth of a man.
The natural effect of crowds and of machines is to make a man feel that
he is, and always was, and always will be, immemorially, unanimously,
innumerably nobody.
Sometimes we are allowed a little faint numeral to dangle up over our
oblivion. Not long ago I saw a notice or letter in the West Bulletin—
probably from a member of something—ending like this: "... I hope the
readers of the Bulletin will ponder over this suggestion of Number 29,619.
—Sincerely yours, No. 11, 175."
Chapter III.
The Inconvenience of Being Human
Table of Contents
I shall never forget one day I spent in New York some years ago—more
years than I thought at first. It was a wrong-headed day, but I cannot help
remembering it as a symbol of a dread I still feel at times in New York—a
feeling of being suddenly lifted, of being swept out under (it is like the
undertow of the sea) into a kind of vast deep of impersonality—swept out
of myself into a wide, imperious waste or emptiness of people. I had come
fresh from my still country meadow and mountain, my own trees and my
own bobolinks and my own little island of sky up over me, and in the vast
and desolate solitude of men and women I wandered about up and down the
streets. Every block I saw, every window, skyline, engine, street-car, every
human face, made me feel as if I belonged to another world. Here was a
great conspiracy in stone and iron against my own life with myself. Was
there a soul in all this huge roar and spectacle of glass and stone and
passion that cared for the things that I cared for, or the things that I loved, or
that would care one shuffle of all the feet upon the stones for any thought or
word or desire of mine? The rain swept in my face, and I spent the day
walking up and down the streets looking at stones and glass and people.
"Here we are!" say the great buildings crowding on the sky. "Who are
you?"....all the stone and the glass and the walls, the mighty syndicate of
matter everywhere, surrounded me—one little, shivering, foolish mote of
being fighting foolishly for its own little foolish mote of identity!
And I do not believe that I was all wrong. New York, like some vast,
implacable cone of ether, some merciless anæsthetic, was thrust down over
me and my breathing, and I still had a kind of left-over prejudice that I
wanted to be myself, with my own private self-respect, with my own
private, temporarily finished-off, provisionally complete personality. I felt
then, and I still feel to-day, that every man, as he fights for his breath, must
stand out at least part of his time for the right of being self-contained. It is,
and always will be, one of the appalling sights of New York to me—the
spectacle of the helplessness, the wistfulness, of all those poor New York
people without one another. Sometimes the city seems to be a kind of huge
monument or idol or shrine of crowds. It seems to be a part of the ceaseless
crowd action or crowd corrosion on the sense of identity in the human spirit
that the man who lives in crowds should grow more dull and more literal
about himself every day. He becomes a mere millionth of something. All
these other people he sees about him hurrying to and fro are mere millionths
too. He grows more and more obliged to live with a vast bulk of people if
he is to notice people at all. Unless he sees all the different kinds of people
and forms of life with his own eye, and feels human beings with his hands,
as it were, he does not know and sympathize with them. The crowd-craving
or love of continual city life on the part of many people comes to be a sheer
lack of imagination, an inability to live in qualities instead of quantities in
men. To live merely in a city is not to know the real flavour of life any more
than the daily paper knows it—the daily paper, the huge dull monster of
observation, the seer of outsides. The whole effect of crowds on the
individual 
man 
is 
to 
emphasize 
scareheads 
and 
appearances,
advertisements, and the huge general showing off. The ride in the train from
New Haven to New York is the true portrait of a crowd. Crowds of soaps
and patent medicines straining on trees and signboard out of the gentle
fields toward crowds of men, culminating at last in Woodlawn Cemetery,
where the marble signposts of death flaunt themselves. Oblivion itself is
advertised, and the end of the show of a show world is placarded on our
graves. Men buy space in papers for cards, and bits of country scenery by
the great railroads to put up signboards, and they spend money and make
constant efforts to advertise that they are alive, and then they build
expensive monuments to advertise that they are dead....
The same craving for piled-up appearances is brought to bear by crowds
upon their arts. Even a gentle soul like Paderewski, full of a personal and
strange beauty that he could lend to everything he touched, finds himself
swept out of himself at last by the huge undertow of crowds. Scarcely a
season but his playing has become worn down at the end of it into shrieks
and hushes. Have I not watched him at the end of a tour, when, one
audience after the other, those huge Svengalis had hypnotized him—
thundering his very subtleties at them, hour after hour, in Carnegie Hall?
One could only wonder what had happened, sit by helplessly, watch the
crowd—thousands of headlong human beings lunging their souls and their
bodies through the music, weeping, gasping, huzzaing, and clapping to one
another. After every crash of new crescendo, after every precipice of
silence, they seemed to be crying, "This is Soul! Oh, this is Soul!" The
feeling of a vast audience holding its breath, no matter why it does it or
whether it ought to do it or not, seems to have become almost a religious
rite of itself. Vistas of faces gallery after gallery hanging on a note, two or
three thousand souls suspended in space all on one tiny little ivory lever at
the end of one man's forefinger ... dim lights shining on them and soft
vibrations floating round them ... going to hear Paderewski play at the end
of his season was going to hear a crowd at a piano singing with its own
hands and having a kind of orgy with itself. One could only remember that
there had been a Paderewski once who hypnotized and possessed his
audience by being hypnotized and possessed by his own music. One liked
to remember him—the Paderewski who was really an artist and who
performed the function of the artist showering imperiously his own visions
on the hearts of the people.
And what is true in music one finds still truer in the other arts. One
keeps coming on it everywhere—the egotism of cities, the self-
complacency of the crowds swerving the finer and the truer artists from
their functions, making them sing in hoarse crowd-voices instead of singing
in their own and giving us themselves. Nearly all our acting has been
corroded by crowds. Some of us have been obliged almost to give up going
to the theatre except to very little ones, and we are wondering if churches
cannot possibly be made small enough to believe great things, or if galleries
cannot be arranged with few enough people in them to allow us great
paintings, or if there will not be an author so well known to a few men that
he will live forever, or if some newspaper will not yet be great enough to
advertise that it has a circulation small enough to tell the truth.
Chapter IV.
Letting the Crowd Have People in It
Table of Contents
So we face the issue.
Nothing beautiful can be accomplished in a crowd civilization, by the
crowd for the crowd, unless the crowd is beautiful. No man who is engaged
in looking under the lives about him, who wishes to face the facts of these
lives as they are lived to-day, will find himself able to avoid this last and
most important fact in the history of the world—the fact that, whatever it
may mean, or whether it is for better or worse, the world has staked all that
it is and has been, and all that it is capable of being, on the one supreme
issue, "How can the crowd be made beautiful?"
The answer to this question involves two difficulties: (1) A crowd
cannot make itself beautiful. (2) A crowd will not let any one else make it
beautiful.
The men who have been on the whole the most eager democrats of
history—the real-idealists—the men who love the crowd and the beautiful
too, and who can have no honest or human pleasure in either of them except
as they are being drawn together, are obliged to admit that living in a
democratic country, a country where politics and æsthetics can no longer be
kept apart, is an ordeal that can only be faced a large part of the time with
heavy hearts. We are obliged to admit that it is a country where paintings
have little but the Constitution of the United States wrought into them;
where sculpture is voted and paid for by the common people; where music
is composed for majorities; where poetry is sung to a circulation; where
literature itself is scaled to subscription lists; where all the creators of the
True and the Beautiful and the Good may be seen almost any day tramping
the tableland of the average man, fed by the average man, allowed to live
by the average man, plodding along with weary and dusty steps to the
average man's forgetfulness. And, indeed, it is not the least trait of this same
average man that he forgets, that he is forgotten, that his slaves are
forgotten, that the world remembers only those who have been his masters.
On the other hand, the literature of finding fault with the average man
(which is what the larger part of our more ambitious literature really is) is
not a kind of literature that can do anything to mend matters. The art of
finding fault with the average man, with the fact that the world is made
convenient for him, is inferior art because it is helpless art. The world is
made convenient for the average man because it has to be, to get him to live
in it; and if the world were not made convenient for him, the man of genius
would find living with him a great deal more uncomfortable than he does.
He would not even be allowed the comfort of saying how uncomfortable.
The world belongs to the average man, and, excepting the stars and other
things that are too big to belong to him, the moment the average man
deserves anything better in it or more beautiful in it than he is getting, some
man of genius rises by his side, in spite of him, and claims it for him. Then
he slowly claims it for himself. The last thing to do, to make the world a
good place for the average man, would be to make it a world with nothing
but average men in it. If it is the ideal of democracy that there shall be a
slow massive lifting, a grading up of all things at once; that whatever is
highest in the true and the beautiful, and whatever is lowest in them shall be
graded down and graded up to the middle height of human life, where the
greatest numbers shall make their home and live upon it; if the ideal of
democracy is tableland—that is—mountains for everybody—a few
mountains must be kept on hand to make tableland out of.
Two solutions, then, of a crowd civilization—having the extraordinary
men crowded out of it as a convenience to the average ones, and having the
average men crowded out of it as a convenience to the extraordinary ones—
are equally impracticable.
This brings us to the horns of our dilemma. If the crowd cannot be made
beautiful by itself, and if the crowd will not allow itself to be made
beautiful by any one else, the crowd can only be made beautiful by a man
who lives so great a life in it that he can make a crowd beautiful whether it
allows him to or not.
When this man is born to us and looks out on the conditions around
him, he will find that to be born in a crowd civilization is to be born in a
civilization, first, in which every man can do as he pleases; second, in
which nobody does. Every man is given by the Government absolute
freedom; and when it has given him absolute freedom the Government says
to him, "Now if you can get enough other men, with their absolute freedom,
to put their absolute freedom with your absolute freedom, you can use your
absolute freedom in any way you want." Democracy, seeking to free a man
from being a slave to one master, has simply increased the number of
masters a man shall have. He is hemmed in with crowds of masters. He
cannot see his master's huge amorphous face. He cannot go to his master
and reason with him. He cannot even plead with him. You can cry your
heart out to one of these modern ballot-boxes. You have but one ballot.
They will not count tears. The ultimate question in a crowd civilization
becomes, not "What does a thing mean?" or "What is it worth?" but "How
much is there of it?" "If thou art a great man," says civilization, "get thou a
crowd for thy greatness. Then come with thy crowd and we will deal with
thee. It shall be even as thou wilt." The pressure has become so great, as is
obvious on every side, that men who are of small or ordinary calibre can
only be more pressed by it. They are pressed smaller and smaller—the more
they are civilized, the smaller they are pressed; and we are being daily
brought face to face with the fact that the one solution a crowd civilization
can have for the evil of being a crowd civilization is the man in the crowd
who can withstand the pressure of the crowd; that is to say, the one solution
of a crowd civilization is the great-man solution—a solution which is none
the less true because by name, at least, it leaves most of us out or because it
is so familiar that we have forgotten it. The one method by which a crowd
can be freed and can be made to realize itself is the great-man method—the
method of crucifying and worshipping great men, until by crucifying and
worshipping great men enough, inch by inch, and era by era, it is lifted to
greatness itself.
Not very many years ago, certain great and good men, who, at the cost
of infinite pains, were standing at the time on a safe and lofty rock protected
from the fury of their kind by the fury of the sea, contrived to say to the
older nations of the earth, "All men are created equal." It is a thing to be
borne in mind, that if these men, who declared that all men were created
equal, had not been some several hundred per cent. better men than the men
they said they were created equal to, it would not have made any difference
to us or to any one else whether they had said that all men were created
equal or not, or whether the Republic had ever been started or not, in which
every man, for hundreds of years, should look up to these men and worship
them as the kind of men that every man in America was free to try to be
equal to. A civilization by numbers, a crowd civilization, if it had not been
started by heroes, could never have been started at all. Shall this civilization
attempt to live by the crowd principle, without men in it who are living by
the hero principle? On our answer to this question hangs the question
whether this civilization, with all its crowds, shall stand or fall among the
civilizations of the earth. The main difference between the heroes of
Plymouth Rock, the heroes who proclaimed freedom in 1776, and the
heroes who must contrive to proclaim freedom now, is that tyranny now is
crowding around the Rock, and climbing up on the Rock, eighty-seven
million strong, and that tyranny then was a half-idiot king three thousand
miles away.
We know or think we know, some of us—at least we have taken a certain
joy in working it out in our minds, and live with it every day—how people
in crowds are going to be beautiful by and by.
The difficulty of being beautiful now, I have tried to express. It seems
better to express, if possible, what a difficulty is before trying to meet it.
And now we would like to try to meet it. How can we determine what is
the most practical and natural way for crowds of people to try to be
beautiful now?
It would seem to be a matter of crowd psychology, of crowd technique,
and of determining how human nature works.
All thoughtful people are agreed as to the aim.
Everything turns on the method.
In the following chapters we will try to consider the technique of being
beautiful in crowds.
Book Four.
Crowds and Heroes
Table of Contents
TO WALT WHITMAN
 
"And I saw the free souls of poets,
The loftiest bards of all ages strode before me
Strange large men, long unwaked, undisclosed, were disclosed to me
... O my rapt verse, my call, mock me not!
... I will not be outfaced by irrational things,
I will penetrate what is sarcastic upon me,
I will make cities and civilizations defer to me
This is what I have learnt from America—
I will confront these shows of the day and night
I will know if I am to be less than they,
I will see if I am not as majestic as they,
I will see if I am not as subtle and real as they,
I will see if I have no meaning while the houses and
ships have meaning,
... I am for those that have never been mastered,
For men and women whose tempers have never been mastered,
For those whom laws, theories, conventions can never master.
I am for those who walk abreast of the whole earth
Who inaugurate one to inaugurate all."
Chapter I.
The Socialist and the Hero
Table of Contents
I was spending a little time not long ago with a man of singularly devoted
and noble spirit who had dedicated his life and his fortune to the Socialist
movement. We had had several talks before, and always with a little flurry
at first of hopefulness toward one another's ideas. We both felt that the
other, for a mere Socialist or for a mere Individualist, was really rather
reasonable. We admitted great tracts of things to one another, and we
always felt as if by this one next argument, perchance, or by one further
illustration, we would convince the other and rescue him like a brand from
the burning.
The last time I saw him he started in at once at the station as we climbed
up into the car by telling me what he was doing. He was studying up the
heroes of the American Revolution, and was writing something to show that
they were not really heroes after all. All manner of things were the matter
with them. They had always troubled him, he said. He knew there was
something wrong, and he was glad to have the matter settled. He said he did
not, and never had believed in heroes, and thought they did a great deal of
harm—even dead ones. Heroes, he said, always deceived the people. They
kept people from seeing that nothing could be done in our modern society
by any one man. Only crowds could do things, he intimated—each man,
like one little wave on the world, wavering up to the shore and dying away.
As the evening wore on our conversation became more concrete, and I
began to drag in, of course, every now and then, naturally, an inspired or
semi-inspired millionaire or so.
I cannot say that these gentlemen were received with enthusiasm.
Finally, I turned on him. "What is it that makes you so angry (and nearly
all the Socialists) every time you hear something good, something you
cannot deny is good, about a successful business man? If I brought a row of
inspired millionaires, say ten or twelve of them one after the other, into your
library this minute, you would get hotter and hotter with every one,
wouldn't you? You would scarcely speak to me."
—— intimated that he was afraid I was deceived; he was afraid that I
was going about deceiving other people about its being possible for mere
individual men to be good; he was afraid I was doing a great deal of
damage.
He then confided to me that not so very long ago he dropped in one
Monday morning into his guest-chamber just after his guest had gone and
found a copy of "Inspired Millionaires," which his guest had obviously been
reading over Sunday, lying on the little reading-table at the head of the bed.
He said that he took the book back to his library, took out two or three
encyclopædias from the shelf in the corner, put my inspired millionaires in
behind them, put the encyclopædias back, and that they had been there to
this day.
With this very generous and kindly introduction we went on to a frank
talk on the general attitude of Socialists toward the instinct of hero-worship
in human nature.
A Socialist had said only a few days before, speaking of a certain
municipal movement in which the people were interested, that he thought it
really had a very good chance to succeed "if only the heroes could be staved
off a little longer." He deprecated the almost incurable idea people seemed
to have that nothing could ever be done in this world without being all
mixed up with heroes.
My mind kept recurring in a perplexed way to this remark for a few
days after I had heard it, and I soon came on the following letter from a
prominent Socialist which had been read at a dinner the night before:
"I am glad to join with others of my comrades in conveying greetings
to Comrade Cahan on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of his
birth and in recognition of the eminent services that he has rendered in
the Socialist movement.
"Yet my gladness is not untinged with a certain note of
apprehension lest in expressing so conspicuously our esteem of an
honoured comrade we obscure the broader scene which, if equally
illumined, would disclose tens of thousands of other comrades,
labouring with equal devotion, and each no less worthy of praise....
"In our rejoicing over the services of Comrade Cahan let us not
forget that the facilities that he and that each of us enjoy are the
products of thousands of other men and women, and sometimes of
children too.
"In our rejoicing let us recall that we cannot safely assume that any
comrade's services to the movement have been greater than the
movement's services to him; that we are but fellow-workers together,
deriving help and perhaps inspiration one from another and each from
all.
"In our rejoicing let us place the emphasis rather upon the services
of the many to each, than upon the services of any one of the many."
I have not quoted from this letter because I disagree with the idea in it. I
am ready to admit that though the idea is a somewhat dampening one
perhaps for a banquet, that it is true and important.
What I object to in the letter is the Fear in it.
In spite of the fineness and truth of the motive that lies, I know,
underneath every line, the letter is baleful, sinister, and weary.
I accuse the letter of being, in a kind of nobly sick way, visionary,
unpractical, and socially destructive.
I would heartily agree with the writer of the letter about the quality of
many heroes, possibly about most heroes. I would agree in a large measure
that the heroes the crowds choose are the wrong ones.
But there is a great difference between his belief and mine as to our
practical working policy in getting the things for crowds that we both want
for them. It seems to me that he does not believe in crowds. He is filled
with fear that they would select the wrong heroes. He says they must not
have heroes, or must be allowed as few as possible.
I believe in crowds, and I believe that the more they have the hero-habit,
the more heroes they have to compare and select from, the finer, longer, and
truer heroes they will select, the more deeply, truly, and concretely the
crowds will think, and the more nobly they will express themselves.
But the great argument for the hero as a social method is that the crowd
in a clumsy, wistful way, deep down in its heart, in the long run, loves the
beautiful. Appealing to the crowd's ideal of the beautiful in conduct, its
sense of the heroic, or semi-heroic, is the only practical, hard-headed
understanding way of getting out of the crowd, for the crowd, what the
crowd wants.
I saw the other day in Boston several thousand schoolboys in the street
keeping step. It was a band that held them together. A band is a practical
thing.
Is it not about time, in our dreary, drab, listless procession of
economics, stringing helplessly across the world, that we have a band of
music? What economics needs now is a march.
We have to-day a thousand men who can tell people what to do where
we have one who can touch the music, the dance, the hurrah, the cry, the
worship in them, and make them want to do something. The hero is the man
who makes people want to do something, and strangely and subtly, all
through the blood, while they watch him, he makes them believe they can.
It is socially destructive to throw away the overpowering instinct of
human nature which we have called hero-worship.
Chapter II.
The Crowd and the Hero
Table of Contents
But it is not only socially destructive. It is dumb and helpless for crowds to
try to get on without heroes. Big events and big men are crowd expressions.
Heroes, World Fairs, and Titanic disasters are crowd words, the crowd's
way of seeing and saying things.
Crowds think in great men, or they think in simple, big, broadly drawn
events, or words of one syllable, like coal strikes.
A whole world works through to an entirely new idea, the idea that
England is not necessarily impregnable, in the Boer war. And we see
England, by way of South Africa, searching her own heart. The Meat Trust,
by raising prices for a few trial weeks, makes half a nation think its way
over into vegetarianism or semi-vegetarianism.
In the American war with Spain modern thought attacked the last
pathetic citadel in modern life of polite illusion, of lie-poetry, and in that
one little flash of war between the Spain spirit and the American spirit, in
our modern world, the nations got their final and conclusive sense of what
the Spanish civilization really was, of the old Don Quixote thinking, of the
delightful, brave, courtly blindness, of the world's last stronghold of
pomposity, of vague, empty prettiness, of talking grand and shooting
crooked.
Japan and Russia fight with guns, but the real fight is not between their
guns, but between two great national conceptions of human life. Like two
vast national searchlights we saw them turned on each other, two huge,
grim, naked civilizations, and now in an awful light and roar, and now in
stately sudden silence, while we all looked on, all breathless and
concentrated, we saw them, as on some strange vast stage of the world, all
lit up, exposed, penetrated by the minds of men forever. While they fought
before us we saw the last two thousand years flash up once more and fade
away, and then the next two thousand years on its slide, with one click
before our faces was fastened into place.
Men see great spiritual conceptions or ideals for a world when the great
ideals are dramatized, when they stalk out before us, are acted out before
our eyes by mighty nations. Before the stage we sit silently and think and
watch the ideals of a world, the souls of the nations struggling together, and
as we watch we discover our souls for ourselves, we define our ideals for
ourselves. We make up our minds. We see what we want. We begin to live.
I have come to believe that the hero, in the same way, is the common
man's desire and prayer writ large. It is his way of keeping it refreshed
before him so that he sees it, recalls it, suns himself in it, lifts up his life to
it, every day.
Chapter III.
The Crowd and the Average Person
Table of Contents
To state still further my difference with the typical Socialist point of view,
as expressed in the letter from which I have quoted, I am obliged to confess
that I not only believe in having heroes on behalf of crowds, but in having
as a regular method of democracy little crowds of heroes, or an aristocracy.
In other words, I am a democrat. I believe that crowds can produce, and are
bound to produce by a natural crowd-process, a real aristocracy—an
aristocracy which will be truly aristocratic and noble in spirit and action,
and which will express the best ideas in the best way that a crowd can have.
The main business of a democracy is to find out which these people are
in it and put them where they will represent it. The trouble seems to have
been in democracies so far, that we find out who these people are a
generation too late. The great and rare moments of history have been those
in which we have found out who they were in time, as when we found in
America Abraham Lincoln, an unaristocratic-looking and ungainly man,
and saw suddenly that he was the first gentleman in the United States.
The next great task of democracy is to determine the best means it can
of finding out who its aristocrats are, its all-men, and determining who they
are in time, men who have vision, courage, individuality, imagination
enough to face real things, and to know real people, and to put real things
and real people together.
It is what an aristocracy in a democratic form of government is for, to
furnish imagination to crowds. A real aristocracy is the only clear-headed,
practical means a great nation can have of distributing, classifying, and
digesting and evoking hordes of men and women. People do not have
imagination in hordes, and imagination is latent and unorganized in masses
of people. The crowd problem is the problem of having leaders who can
fertilize the imagination and organize the will of crowds. Nothing but
worship or great desire has ever been able to focus a crowd, and only the
great man, rich and various in his elements, abounding, great as the crowd
is great, can ever hope to do it.
Every man in a crowd knows that he is or is in danger of being a mere
Me-man, or a mere class-man, and he knows that his neighbour is, and he
wishes to be in a world that is saved from his own mere me-ness and his
own mere classness. His hero-worship is his way of worshipping his larger
self. He communes with his possible or completed self, his self of the best
moments in the official great man or crowd man.
The average man in a crowd does not want to be an average man, and
the last thing he wants is to have an average man to represent him. He
wants a man to represent him as he would like to be.
He cannot express himself—his best self, in the State, to all the others in
the State, without a lifted-up man or crowd man to do it.
It is as if he said—as if the average man said, "I want a certain sort of
world, I want to be able to point to a man, to a particular man, and say, as I
look at him and ask others to look at him, 'This is the sort of world I want.'"
Then everybody knows.
The great world that lies in all men's hearts is expressed in miniature, in
the great man.
Crowds speak in heroes.
I have often heard Socialists wondering among themselves why a
movement that had so many fine insights and so many noble motives
behind it had produced so few artists.
It has seemed to me that it might be because Socialists as a class,
speaking roughly, are generalizers. They do not see vividly and deeply the
universal in the particular, the universal in the individual, the national in the
local. They are convinced by counting, and are moved by masses, and are
prone to overlook the Spirit of the Little, the immensity of the seed and of
the individual. They are prone to look past the next single thing to be done.
They look past the next single man to be fulfilled.
They feel a bit superior to Individualists for the way they have of seeing
the universal in the particular, and of being picturesque and personal.
Socialists are not picturesque and personal. They do not think in
pictures.
Then they wonder why they do not make more headway.
Crowds and great men and children think in pictures.
A hero pictures greatness to them. Then they want it for themselves.
From the practical, political point of view of getting things for crowds,
perhaps the trouble lies, not in our common popular idea of having heroes,
but in the heroes. And perhaps the cure lies not in abolishing heroes, but in
making our heroes move on and in insisting on more and better ones.
Any man who looks may watch the crowd to-day making its heroes
move on.
If they do not move on, the crowd picks up the next hero at hand who is
moving—and drops them.
One can watch in every civilized country to-day crowds picking up
heroes, comparing, sorting, selecting, seeing the ones that wear the longest,
and one by one taking the old ones down.
The crowd takes a hero up in its huge rough hand, gazes through him at
the world, sees what it wants through him. Then it takes up another, and
then another.
Heroes are crowd spy-glasses.
Pierpont Morgan and Tom Mann for example.
Pierpont Morgan is a typical American business man raised to the nth or
hero power.
The crowd thinks it is interesting to take up Pierpont Morgan, the Tom
Mann of the banks. It will see what it wants, through him.
And the crowd thinks it is interesting to take up Tom Mann, too, the
Pierpont Morgan of the Trades Unions. It will see what it wants, through
him.
Chapter IV.
The Crowd and Pierpont Morgan
Table of Contents
One keeps turning back every now and then, in reading the "Life of
Pierpont Morgan," to the portrait which Carl Hovey has placed at the
beginning of the book. If one were to look at the portrait long enough, one
would not need to read the book. The portrait puts into a few square inches
of space what Mr. Hovey takes half an acre of paper for. And all that he
really does on the half-acre of paper is to bring back to one again and again
that set and focused look one sees in Mr. Morgan's eyes—the remoteness,
the silence, the amazing, dogged, implacable concentration, and, when all is
said, a certain terrible, inexplicable blindness.
The blindness keeps one looking again. One cannot quite believe it. The
portrait has something so strong, so almost noble and commanding, about it
that one cannot but stand back with one's little judgments and give the man
who can hurl together out of the bewilderment of the world a personality
like this, and fix it here—all in one small human face—the benefit of the
doubt. This is the way the crowd has always taken Pierpont Morgan at first.
The bare spectacle of a man so magnificently set, so imperiously
preoccupied, silences our judgments. It seems as if, of course, he must be
seeing things—things that we and others possibly do not and cannot see.
The blindness in the eyes is so complete and set in such a full array that it
acts at first on one almost like a kind of vision. The eyes hold themselves
like pictures of eyes, like little walls, as if real eyes were in behind them.
One wonders if there is any one who could ever manage to break through
them, fleck up little ordinary human things—personality, for instance,
atmosphere, or light—against them. If Shakespeare, whose folios he has,
and Keats, whose "Endymion" he owns, or Milton, whose "Paradise Lost"
he keeps in his safe, were all to assail him at once, were to bear down upon
that set look in Pierpont Morgan's eyes—try to get them to turn one side a
second and notice that they—Shakespeare and Milton and Keats—were
there, there would not be a flicker or shadow of movement. They are eyes
that are set like jaws, like magnificent spiritual muscles, on Something.
Neither do they reveal light or receive it.
It will be some time before the crowd will find it possible to hand in an
account and render a full estimate of the value of the service that Pierpont
Morgan has rendered to our modern world; but the service has been for the
most part rendered now and while the world, in its mingled dismay and
gratitude at the way he has hammered it together, is distributing its praise
and blame, there are some of us who would like to step one side a little and
think quietly, if we may, not about what Pierpont Morgan has done, which
we admit duly, but about the blindness in his eyes. It is Pierpont Morgan's
blindness that interests the crowd more than anything else about him
interests them now. It is his blindness—and the chance to find out just what
it is that is making people read his book. His blindness (if we can fix just
what it is) is the thing that we are going to make our next Pierpont Morgan
out of. The next Pierpont Morgan—the one the crowd is getting ready now
—will be made out of the things that this Pierpont Morgan did not see.
What are these things? We have been looking for the things in Carl Hovey's
book, peering in between the lines on every page, and turning up his
adjectives and looking under them, his adverbs and qualifications, his
shrewdness and carefulness for the things that Pierpont Morgan did not see.
Pierpont Morgan himself would not have tried to hide them, and neither has
his biographer. His whole book breathes throughout with a just-mindedness,
a spirit of truth, a necessary and inevitable honesty, which of itself is not the
least testimony to the essential validity and soundness of Morgan's career.
Pierpont Morgan's attitude toward his biography (if, in spite of his
reticence, it became one of the necessities—even one of the industrial
necessities, of the world that he should have one) was probably a good deal
the attitude of Walt Whitman when he told Traubel, "Whatever you do with
me, don't prettify me"; and if there were things in Mr. Morgan's career
which he imperturbably failed to see, Mr. Morgan himself would be the last
man not to try to help people to find out what they are. But living has been
to Mr. Morgan as it is to us (as I write these lines he is seventy-four years
old) a serious, bottomless business. He does not know which the things are
he has not seen. His eyes are magnificently set. They cannot help us. We
must do our own looking.
If I were called upon to speak very quickly and without warning; if any one
suddenly expected me in my first sentence to hit the bull's-eye of Mr.
Morgan's blindness, I think I would try socialism. When the Emperor
William was giving himself the treat of talking with the man who runs, or is
supposed to run, the economics of a world, he found that he was talking
with a man who had not noticed socialism yet, and who was not interested
in it. Most people would probably have said that Morgan was not interested
in socialism enough; but there are very few people who would not be as
surprised as Emperor William was to know that he, Pierpont Morgan, was
not informed about the greatest and, to some of us, the most threatening,
omnipresent, and significant spectre in modern industrial life.
But when one thinks of it, and, when more particularly, one looks again
at that set look in his eyes, I cannot see how it could possibly have been
otherwise. If Morgan's eyes had suddenly begun seeing all sorts of human
things—the bewildering welter of the individual minds, the tragedy of the
individual interests around him; if he had lost his imperious sense of a
whole—had tried to potter over and piece together, like the good people and
the wonderers, the innumerable entangled wires of the world, his eyes
might have been filled perhaps with the beautiful and helpless light of the
philosophers, with the fire of the prophets, or with the gentle paralysis of
the poets, but he never would have had the courage to do the great work of
his life—to turn down forever those iron shutters on his eyes and smite a
world together.
There was one thing this poor, dizzied, scattered planet needed. With its
quarrelling and its peevish industries, its sick poets and its tired religions,
the one thing this planet needed was a Blow; it needed a man that could
hammer it together. To find fault with this man for not being a seer, or to
feel superior to him for not being an idealist, or to heckle him for not being
a sociologist, when here he was all the time with this mighty frenzy or heat
in him that could melt down the chaos of a world while we looked, weld it
to his will, and then lift his arm and smite it, though all men said him nay—
back into a world again—to heckle over this man's not being a complete
sociologist or professor is not worthy of thoughtful and manful men.
I cannot express it, but I can only declare, living as I do in a day like
this, that to me there is a kind of colossal naked poetry in what Pierpont
Morgan has done which I cannot but acknowledge with gratitude and hope.
Though there be in it, as in all massive things, a brutality perhaps like that
of the moving glaciers, like the making and boiling of coal in the earth, like
death, like childbirth, like the impersonality of the sea, my imagination can
never get past a kind of elemental, almost heathen poetry or heathen-god
poetry in Pierpont Morgan's Blow or shock upon our world. There may be
reason to doubt as to whether it is to be called a heaven-poetry or a hell-
poetry—something so gaunt and simple is there about it; but here we are
with all our machines around us, with our young, rough, fresh nations in the
act of starting a great civilization once more on this old and gentle earth,
and I can only say that poetry (though it be new, or different, or even a little
terrible) is the one thing that now, or in any other age, men begin great
civilizations with.
I have tried to express the spirit of what Morgan's genius seized
unconsciously by the grim, resistless will of his age, has wrought into his
career.
But in the background of my mind as I see Pierpont Morgan, there is
always the man who will take his place, and if I did not see the man
coming, and coming rapidly, who is to take Mr. Morgan's place, I admit that
Mr. Morgan himself would be a failure, a disaster, a closed wall at the end
of the world.
No one man will take Mr. Morgan's place, but the typical man in the
group of men that will take his place will justify Mr. Morgan's work, by
taking this world in his hand and riveting his vision on where Morgan's
vision leaves off. As Morgan has fused railroads, iron, coal, steamships,
seas, and cities, the next industrial genius shall fuse the spirits and the wills
of men. The Individualists and the Socialists, the aristocracies and
democracies, the capitalists and the labourers shall be welded together, shall
be fused and transfused by the next Morgan into their ultimate, inevitable,
inextricable, mutual interests.
The chief characteristic of the new industrial leader is coming to be
social imagination or the power of seeing the larger industrial values in
human gifts and efficiencies, the more human and intellectual energies of
workmen, the market value of their spirits, their imaginations, and their
good-will. The underpinning and Morganizing work has been done; the
power of instant decision which Mr. Morgan has had, has been very often
based on a lack of imagination about the things that got in his way; but the
things that get in the way now, the big, little-looking things—are the things
on which the new and inspired millionaires' imagination will find its skill
and accumulate its power. It is men's spirits that are now in the way; they
have been piling up and accumulating under Morgan's régime long enough,
and it is now their turn. Perhaps men's spirits have always been beyond Mr.
Morgan, and perhaps his imagination has been worked largely as a kind of
cerebellum imagination: it is a kind of imagination that sees related and
articulated the physical body of things, the grip on the material tools, on the
gigantic limbs of a world. The man who succeeds Mr. Morgan, and for
whom Mr. Morgan has made the world ready, is the man who has his
imagination in the upper part of his brain, and instead of doing things by not
seeing, and by not being seen, he will swing a light. He will be himself in
his own personality, a little of the nature of a searchlight, and he will work
the way a searchlight works, and will have his will with things by seeing
and lighting, by X-raying his way through them and not by a kind of
colossal world-butting, which is Morgan's way, both eyes imperiously,
implacably shut, his whole being all bent, all crowded into his vast machine
of men, his huge will lifted ... and excavating blindly, furiously, as through
some groping force he knew not, great sub-cellars for a new heaven and
new earth.
The Crowd gets its heroes one at a time. Heroes are the Crowd's tools.
Some are dredges, some are telescopes. The Crowd, by a kind of instinct—
an oversoul or undersoul of which it knows not until afterward, takes up
each tool gropingly—sometimes even against its will and against its
conscience, uses it and drops it.
Then it sees why, suddenly, it has used it.
Then God hands it Another One.
Chapter V.
The Crowd and Tom Mann
Table of Contents
I dropped into the London Opera House the other night to see Tom Mann
(the English Bill Heywood), another hero or crowd spy-glass that people
have taken up awhile—thousands of them—to see through to what they
really want. I wanted to hear him speak, and see, if I could, why the crowd
had taken him up, and what it was they were seeing through him.
I am apt to take a dead set at liking a man I do not agree with, if I can. It
gives one a better start in understanding him and in not agreeing with him
to some purpose.
But it was not necessary to try to like Tom Mann or to make
arrangements for being fair to him. He came up on the platform (it was at
Mr. Hyndmann's Socialist rally) in that fine manly glow of his of having
just come out of jail (and a jail, whatever else may be said about it, is
certainly a fine taking place to come out of—to blossom up out of, like a
night-blooming cereus before a vast, lighted-up, uproarious audience). It is
wonderful how becoming a jail is to some people! Had I not seen Mrs.
Pethick Lawrence with the flush of Old Bailey on her cheek only a little
while before in Albert Hall?
If Tom Mann had had, like Elisha, that night, a fiery chariot at his
disposal, and had come down, landed plump out of heaven on his audience,
he could not have done half as well with it as he did with that little gray,
modest, demure Salford Jail the kind Home Secretary gave him.
He tucked the jail under his arm, stood there silently before us in a blaze
of light. Everybody clapped for five minutes.
Then he waved the air into silence and began to speak. I found I had
come to hear a simple-minded, thoughtless, whole-hearted, noisy, self-
deceived, hopelessly sincere person. He was a mere huge pulse or muscle of
a man. All we could do was to watch him up there on the platform (it was
all so simple!) taking up the world before everybody in his big hands and
whacking on it with a great rapping and sounding before us all, as if it were
Tommy's own little drum mother gave him. He stood there for some fifteen
minutes, I should think, making it—making the whole world rat-a-tat-tat to
his music, to Tommy's own music, as if it were the music of the spheres.
Mr. Mann's gospel of hope for mankind seemed to be to have all the
workers of the world all at once refuse to work. Have the workers starve
and silence a planet, and take over and confiscate the properties and plants
of capital, dismiss the employers of all nations and run the earth
themselves.
I sat in silence. The audience about me broke out into wild, happy
appreciation.
It acted as if it had been in the presence of a vision. It was as if, while
they sat there before Tom Mann, they had seen being made, being
hammered out before them, a new world.
I rubbed my eyes.
It seemed to me precisely like the old one. And all the trouble for
nothing. All the disaster, the proposed starvation, and panic for nothing.
There was one single possible difference in it.
We had had before, Pierpont Morgan, the Tom Mann of the banks,
riding astride the planet, riding it out with us—with all the rest of us
helpless on it, holding on for dear life, riding out into the Blackness.
And now we were having instead, Tom Mann, the Pierpont Morgan of
the Trades Unions, riding astride the planet, riding it out with us, with all
the rest of us helpless on it, holding on for dear life, riding out into the
Blackness.
Of course Pierpont Morgan and Tom Mann are both very useful as
crowd spy-glasses for us all to see what we want through.
But is this what we want?
Is it worth while to us, to the crowd, to all classes of us, to have our
world turned upside down so that we can be bullied on it by one set of men
instead of being bullied on it by another?
This is the thing that the Crowd, as it takes up one hero after the other,
and looks at the world through him, is seeing next.
Some of us have seen sooner than the others. But we are nearly all of us
seeing to-day. We have stood by now these many years through strikes and
rumours of strikes, and we have watched the railway hold-ups, the
Lawrence Mill strike, and the great English coal strike. We have seen, in a
kind of dumb, hopeful astonishment, everybody about us piling into the
fray, some fighting for the rights of labour and some for the rights of
capital, and we have kept wondering if possibly a little something could not
be done before long, possibly next year, in behalf of the huge, battered,
helpless Public, that dear amorphous old ladylike Person doddering along
the Main Street of the World, now being knocked down by one side and
now by the other. It has almost looked, some days, as if both sides in the
quarrel—Capital and Labour, really thought that the Public ought not to
expect to be allowed to be out in the streets at all. Both sides in the contest
are so sure they are right, and feel so noble and Christian, that we know
they will take care of themselves; but the poor old Lady!—some of us
wonder, in the turmoil of Civilization and the scuffle of Christianity, what is
to become of Her.
Is it not about time that somebody appeared very soon now who will
make a stand once and for all in behalf of this Dear Old Lady-Like Person?
Is it really true that no one has noticed Her and is really going to stand
up for Her—for the old gentle-hearted Planet as a Whole?
We have our Tom Mann for the workers, and we have the Daily
Newspaper—the Tom Mann of Capital, but where is our Tom Mann for
Everybody? Where is the man who shall come boldly out to Her, into the
great crowded highway, where the bullies of wealth have tripped up her
feet, and the bullies of poverty have thrown mud in her face, where all the
little mean herds or classes one after the other hold Her up—the scorners,
and haters, and cowards, and fearers for themselves, fighting as cowards
always have to fight, in herds ... where is the man who is going to climb up
alone before the bullies of wealth and the bullies of poverty, take his stand
against them all—against both sides, and dare them to touch the dear
helpless old Lady again?
When this man arises—this Tom Mann for Everybody—whether he
slips up into immortality out of the crowd at his feet, and stands up against
them in overalls or in a silk hat, he will take his stand in history as a man
beside whom Napoleon and Alexander the Great will look as toys in the
childhood of the world.
We are living in a day when not only all competent-minded students of
affairs, but the crowd itself, the very passers-by in the streets, have come to
see that the very essence of the labour problem is the problem of getting the
classes to work together. And when the crowd watches the labour leader and
sees that he is not thinking correctly and cannot think correctly of the other
classes, of the consumers and the employers, it drops him. Unless a leader
has a class consciousness that is capable of thinking of the other classes—
the consumers and employers, so shrewdly and so close to the facts that the
other classes, the consumers and the employers, will be compelled to take
him seriously, tolerate him, welcome him, and coöperate with him, the
crowd has come at last to recognize promptly that he is only of temporary
importance as a leader. He is the by-product of one of the illusions of
labour. When the illusion goes he goes.
Capital has been for some time developing its class consciousness.
Labour has lately been developing in a large degree a class consciousness.
The most striking aspect of the present moment is that at last, in the
history of the world, the Public is developing a class consciousness.
The Crowd thinks.
And as from day to day the Crowd thinks—holds up its little class
heroes, its Tom Manns and Pierpont Morgans, and sees its world through
them—it comes more and more to see implacably what it wants.
It has been watching the Tom Mann, or Bill Heywood type of Labour
leader, for some time.
There are certain general principles with regard to labour leaders that
the crowd has come to see by holding up its heroes and looking through
them, at what it wants. The first great principle is that no man needs to be
taken very seriously, as a competent leader of a great labour movement who
is merely thinking of the interest of his own class.
The second general principle the Crowd has come to see, and to insist
upon—when it is appealed to (as it always is, in the long run) is that no
labour leader needs to be taken very seriously or regarded as very
dangerous or very useful—who believes in force.
A labour leader who has such a poor idea that a hold-up is the only way
he can express it—the Crowd suspects. The only labour leaders that the
Crowd, or people as a whole, take seriously are those that get things by
thinking and by making other people think.
The Crowd wants to think.
The Crowd wants to decide.
And It has decided to decide by being made to think and not by being
knocked down.
It is not precisely because the Crowd is not willing to be knocked down,
and has not shown itself to be over and over again, when it thought its being
knocked down might possibly help in a just cause.
But it has not been through coal strikes, Industrial Workers of the
World, and syndicalist outbreaks for nothing.
It is not the knocking down indulged in by labour and by capital that the
Crowd fears.
It is the not-thinking.
The Crowd has noticed that the knocking-down disposition and the not-
thinking disposition go together.
The Crowd has watched Force and Force-people, and has seen what
always happens after a time.
It has come to see that people who have to get things by force and not
by thinking will not be able to think of anything to do with the things when
they get them.
So the Crowd does not want them to get them.
The Crowd has learned all this even from the present owners of things.
It does not want to learn them all over again from new ones. The present
owners of things have got them half by force, and that is why they only half
understand how to run them.
But they do half understand because they only half believe in force. The
crowd has seen them get their supremacy by the use of the employment-
hold-up, or by starving or threatening to starve the workers. And now it sees
the Syndicalist workers proposing to get control by starving or threatening
to starve everybody. Of the two, those who propose to starve all the people
to get their own way, and those who threaten to starve part of the people, it
has seemed to the Crowd, naturally, that those who only half believe in
starving, and who only starve a part of us, would be likely to be more
intelligent as world-runners.
In other words (accepting for the sake of argument the worst possible
interpretation of the capitalist class), they have spent several years in
learning, and have already half learned that force in industry is inefficient
and cannot be made to work.
Now when the Crowd sees the Syndicalists swinging their hats in a
hundred nations, with one big hoarse hurrah around a world, with five
minutes' experience, come rushing in, and propose to take up the world—
the whole world in two minutes more and run it in the same old bygone way
—the way that the capitalists are just giving up—by force—it knows what
it thinks.
It thinks it will fight Class Syndicalism. It makes up its mind it will
fight Class Syndicalism with Crowd Syndicalism. It has decided that, in the
interests of all of us, of a crowd civilization, of what we call the world or
Crowd Syndicate, its industries should be controlled, not by the owners and
not by the workers, but by those men, whoever they are, who can control
them with the most skill and efficiency.
The Crowd has come to see that the present owners—judging from
current events, and taking them as a whole, and speaking impersonally and
historically—have proved themselves, on the whole, incompetent to control
industries with skill and efficiency, because they have treated labour as the
natural enemy of capital and have quarrelled with it. It sees that the present
workers, acting as syndicates or otherwise, are incompetent to own and
control and manage industry because they propose to treat capital as the
natural enemy of the workers. There has been but one conclusion possible.
If Civilization or the Crowd Syndicate has a right to have its industries
managed in the interests of all, and if the present owners have proved
themselves to be mentally incompetent to control industry because they
fight labour, and if the present labourers as a class have proved themselves
to be mentally incompetent because they propose to fight capital, there is
naturally but one question the crowd syndicate is asking to-day, namely,
"Are there any mentally competent business firms at all in the world, any
firms whose owners and labourers have thought out a way of not fighting?"
From the point of view of the Crowd, the men who are competent, who
know how to do their work, do not have to lay down their tools and find out
all over again how to do their work. They know it and keep doing it.
So the Crowd keeps coming back with the question, "Are there or are
there not any competent business establishments in our modern life? Which
are they, and where are they?" We want to know about them. We want to
study them. We want to focus the thought of the world on them and see how
they do it.
The answering of this question is what the next Pierpont Morgan and
the next Tom Mann are for.
What the next Pierpont Morgan is for is to find out for us who the
competent employers are—the employers who can get twice as much work
out of their labour as other employers do—recognize them, stand by them
and put up money on them. The next Pierpont Morgan will find out also
who the incompetent employers are, recognize them, stand out against
them, and unless they have brains enough or can get brains enough to
coöperate with their own workmen, refuse to lend money to them.
This would make a banker a statesman, would make banking a great and
creative profession, shaping the destinies of civilizations, determining with
coins back and forth over a counter the prayers and the songs, the very
religions of nations, and swinging like a pendulum the fate of the world.
The first Pierpont Morgan has made himself, in a necessary transitional
movement, a hero in the business world because of a certain moral energy
there is in him. He has insisted in expressing his own character in business.
He would not send money to capitalists fighting capitalists, and in a general
way he has compelled capitalists to coöperate. The new hero of the business
world is going to compel capital not merely to coöperate with capital, but to
coöperate with labour and with the public. And as Morgan compelled the
railroads of the United States to coöperate with one another by getting
money for those that showed the most genius for coöperation, and by not
getting money for railroads that showed less genius for it, so the next
Pierpont Morgan will throw the weight of his capital at critical times in
favour of companies that show the largest genius for building the mutual
interests of capitalists, employees, and the public inextricably into one
body. He is going to recognize as a banker that the most permanent, long-
headed, practical, and competent employers are those whose business
genius is essentially social genius, the genius for being human, for
discovering the mutual interests of men, and for making human machinery
work.
There is a great position ahead for this hero when he comes. And I have
seen in my mind to-day thousands of men, young and old in every business,
in every country of the world, pressing forward to get the place.
It is what the next Tom Mann is for—to find out for the Trades Unions
and for the public who the most competent workmen are in every line of
business, the workmen who are the least mechanical-minded, who have
shown the most brains in educating and being educated by their employers,
the most power in touching the imaginations of their employers with their
lives and with their work, and in coöperating with them.
When the next Tom Mann has searched out and found the workmen in
every line of business who are capable of working with their superiors, and
of becoming more and more like them, he will make known to all other
workmen and to all other Trades Unions who these workmen are, and how
they have managed to do it. He will see that all Trades Unions are informed,
in night-schools and otherwise, how they have done it. He will see that the
principles, motives, and conditions that these men have employed in
making themselves more like their superiors, in making themselves more
and more fit to take the place of their superiors, in making their work a
daily, creative, spirited part of a great business, are made so familiar to all
Trades Unions that the policies of all our labour organizations everywhere
shall change and shall be infected with a new spirit; and labouring men,
instead of going to their shops the world over, to spend nine hours a day in
fighting the business in which they are engaged, to spend nine hours a day
in trying to get themselves nothing to do, nine hours a day in getting
nobody to want to employ them, will work the way they would like to
work, and the way they would all work to-morrow morning if they knew
the things about capital and about labour that they have a right to know, and
that only incompetent employers and incompetent labor leaders year by
year have kept them from knowing.
Chapter VI.
An Opening for the Next Pierpont Morgan
Table of Contents
Christ said once, "He that is greatest among you let him be your servant."
Most people have taken it as if He had said:
"He that is greatest among you let him be your valet.
"He that is greatest among you let him be your butler.
"He that is greatest among you let him be your hostler, porter, footman."
They cling to a mediæval Morality-Play, Servant-in-the-House idea, a
kind of head-waiter idea of what Christ meant.
This seems to some of us a literal-minded, Western way of interpreting
an Oriental metaphor. We do not believe that Christ meant servanthood. It
seems to us that He meant something deeper, that He meant service; that He
might have said as well: "He that is greatest among you let him be your
Duke of Wellington.
"He that is greatest among you let him be your Lincoln.
"He that is greatest among you let him be your Edison, your Marconi."
At all events, it is extremely unlikely that He meant looking and acting
like a servant.
He meant really being one, whether one looked like a servant or not. If
looking independent and being independent makes the service better, if
defying the appearance of a servant makes the service more efficient, we
believe the appearance should be defied.
It troubles us when we see the Czar of Russia in the presence of the
civilized world, once a year taking such great pains to look like a servant
and to wash his peasants' feet.
We are not willing, if we ever have any relations with the public, to be
Czars and look like servants.
We would prefer to look like czars and be servants.
We are inclined to believe that no man who is rendering his utmost
service to the crowd ever thinks in the ordinary servant sense of being
obedient to it. He is thinking of his service, and of its being the most high
and perfect and most complete thing that he can render—the thing that he,
out of all men, could think of and do, and that the crowd would want him to
do. He is busy in being obedient to the crowd, in fulfilling daily its spirit,
and not in taking orders from it.
The reason that the larger number of men who go into politics to-day
are inefficient and do not get the things done that crowds want, is that they
are the kind of men who feel that they must talk and act like servants. Even
the most independent-looking and efficient men, who look as if they really
saw something and had something to give, often prove disappointing. When
one comes to know a man of this type more intimately, one is apt to find
that he is really a flunkey in his thoughts; that he feels hired in his mind;
that he is the valet of a crowd, and often, too, the valet of some particular
crowd—some little, safe, shut-in crowd, party, or special interest that wants
to own, or to keep, or to take away a world.
Whichever way to-day one looks, one finds this illusion as to what a
public servant really is, for the moment, corrupting our public life.
But Christ did not say, "He that is greatest among you, let him be your
valet."
The man who is greatest among us, neither in this age nor in any other,
ever will or ever can be a valet. He faces the crowd the way Christ did—
with his life, with his soul, with his God.
He will not be afraid of the Crowd....
He will be the Greatest, he will be a Servant.
In the meantime—in the hour of the valets, only the little crowds, speak.
The People wait.
The Crowd is dumb, massive, and silent. There seems to be no one in
the world to express it, to express its indomitable desire, its prayer, to lay at
last its huge, terrible, beautiful will upon the earth.
It is the classes or little crowds—the little pulling and pushing, helpless,
lonely, mean, separated crowds—blind, hateful, and afraid, who are running
about trying to lay their little wills upon the earth.
The Crowd waits and is not afraid.
The little, separated crowds are afraid.
The world, for the moment, is being interpreted, expressed, and
managed by People Who Are Afraid.
It is the same in all the nations. In the coal strike in England one finds
the miners in the trades unions afraid to vote except in secret because they
are afraid of one another. One finds the miners' leaders afraid of the men
under them and of what they might do, so that they have no policy except to
fight. One finds the miners' leaders afraid of the mine-managers and of what
they might do, so that they have no policy except to fight. One finds the
mine-managers afraid of one another, afraid of their stockholders, afraid of
the miners' leaders, and afraid of the newspapers and afraid of the
Government.
One finds the Government afraid of everybody.
Everybody is afraid of the Government.
Everybody fights because everybody is afraid.
And everybody is afraid because everybody sees that it is mere crowds
that are running the world.
There is another reason why everybody is afraid. Everybody is afraid
because everybody is shut in with some little separated crowd.
People who are never Outside, who only see a little way out over the
edge of the little crowd in which they are penned up, are naturally afraid.
A world that is run by little shut-in crowds is necessarily a world that is
run by People Who Are Afraid.
And so now we have come to the fulness of the time. The cities and the
nations, the prairies, and the seas and the mines, the very skies about us can
be seen by all to-day to be full of a dull groping and of a great asking, "Who
Are The Men Who Are not Afraid?"
The moment these men appear who are not afraid, and it is seen by all
that they are not afraid, the world (and all the little blind, helpless crowds in
it) will be placed in their hands.
Chapter VII.
An Opening for the Next Tom Mann
Table of Contents
I am aware that Tom Mann is not a world figure. But he is a world type.
And as the editor of the Syndicalist, the leader of the most imposing and
revealing labour rally the world has seen, he is of universal interest. Those
of us who believe in crowds are deeply interested in finding, recognizing,
creating, and in seeing set free out of the ranks of men the labour leaders
who shall express the nobility and dignity of modern labour, who shall
express the bigness of spirit, the brawny-heartedness, the composure, the
common-sense, the patriotism, the faithfulness and courage of the People.
I indict Tom Mann before the bar of the world as not expressing the will
and the spirit of the People.
I do this as a labouring man. I decline, because I spend my time daily
tracing out little crooked lines on paper with a pen, because I have wrought
day and night to make little patterns of ink and little stretches of words
reach men together round a world, because I have sweat blood to believe,
because in weariness and sorrow I have wrought out at last my little faith
for a world ... I decline not to be numbered with the labourers I see in the
streets. I claim my right before all men this day, with my unbent body and
with my unsoiled hands, to be enrolled among the toilers of the earth.
I speak as a labouring man. I say Tom Mann is incompetent as a true
leader of Labour.
The first reason that he is incompetent is that he does not observe facts.
He merely observes facts that everybody can see, that everybody has seen
for years. He does not observe the new and exceptional facts about capital
that only a few can see, the seeing of which, and the seeing of which first,
should alone ever constitute a man a true leader in dealing with capital. He
merely believes facts that nearly everybody has caught up to believing—
facts about human nature, about what works in business. The crowd is not
content with this. It has become accustomed to seeing that the men who
lead in business, and who make others follow them, whether masters or
workmen, are men who do it by observing certain new and exceptional facts
and acting upon them. If these men cannot observe them, we have seen
them create them. It is the men who make new things true wherever they go
that the crowd is coming to recognize and to take seriously and permanently
as the real leaders of Labour and of Capital to-day. Tom Mann is
incompetent as a labour leader in dealing with capital to-day, because the
things that he proposes to do all turn on three facts which, looked at on the
outside, merely have or might be said to have a true look:
First, employers are all alike;
Second, none of them ever work;
Third, they are all the enemies of Labour.
Tom Mann is incompetent to grapple with Capital in behalf of Labour as
any great labour leader would have to do, because he has his facts wrong
about Capital, is simple-minded and rudimentary and undiscriminating
about the men with whom he deals, and sees them all alike.
This is a poor beginning even for fighting with them.
The second reason that Tom Mann is incompetent is, not that he has his
facts wrong and does not think, but that he carries not-thinking about the
employing class still further, has come to make a kind of religion out of not-
thinking about them. And instead of thinking how to make labouring men
think better than their employers think, and making them think so well that
they can crowd their way into their employers' places, he proposes to have
labour get into their places without thinking, and run a world without
thinking. All that is necessary in order to have workmen run the world, is to
get workmen to stop working, to stop thinking, and then as rapidly as
possible to get everybody else to stop thinking. Then the world will fall into
their hands.
The third reason that Tom Mann is incompetent is that he is unpractical
and full of scorn. And scorn, from the point of view of the practical-minded
man, is a sentimental and useless emotion. We have learned that it almost
always has to be used by a man who has his facts wrong, that is, who does
not see what he himself is really like, and who has not noticed what other
people are really like. No man who sees himself as he is, feels at liberty to
use scorn. And no man who sees others as they are, sees any occasion for it.
Tom Mann uses hate also, and hate has been found to be, as directed toward
classes of persons as a means of getting them to do things, archaic and
inefficient. It is not quite bright. It need not be denied that hate and scorn
both impress some people, but they never seem to impress the people that
see things to do and who find ways to do them. And the people who use
scorn are all too narrow, too class-bound, and too self-regarding to do
things in a huge world problem like the present one.
The fourth reason that Tom Mann as a labour leader is incompetent is
that he is afraid; he is afraid of capital, so afraid that he has to fight it
instead of grappling with it and coöperating with it. He is afraid to believe
in labour—so afraid that he takes orders from it instead of seeing for it, and
seeing ahead for it. He is afraid of his employers' brains, of their having
brains enough to understand and to to be convinced as to the position of the
labourer. He is afraid to believe in his own brains, in his own brains being
good enough to convince them.
So he backs down and fights.
If any reader who is interested to do so will kindly turn back at this
point a page or so, and read this chapter we have just gone through together,
over again, and if he will kindly, wherever it occurs, insert for Tom Mann,
labour leader, "D.A. Thomas, leader of mine-owners," he will save much
time for both of us, and he will kindly make one chapter in this book which
is already much too long, as good as two. Tom Mann (unless he is changed)
is about to be dropped as a typical modern leader of Labour because he is
afraid, and what he expresses in the labouring class is its fear of Capital.
And what D.A. Thomas expresses for Capital is its fear of Labour.
There are thousands of capitalists and hundreds of thousands of labour
men who have something better they want expressed by their leaders, than
their Fear.
Out of these men the new leaders will be chosen.
Chapter VIII.
The Men Who Look
Table of Contents
During the recent coal strike in England, as at all times in the world, heroes
abounded.
The trouble with most of us during the coal strike was not in our not
having heroes, but in our not being quite sure which they were.
Davy McEwen, a miner who stood out against the whole countryside,
and went to his work every day in defiance of thousands of men on the hills
about him trying to stop him, and hundreds of thousands of men all over
England trying to scare him, was not a hero to Mr. Josiah Wedgewood. Mr.
Josiah Wedgewood one day in the height of the conflict, from his seat in the
House of Commons, rose in his might—and before the face of the nation
called Davy McEwen a traitor to his class.
Sir Arthur Markham, one of the largest of the mine-owners, in the
height of the conflict between the mine-owners and the miners over wages,
rose in the House and declared that, in his opinion as a mine-owner, the
mine-owners were wrong and the miners were right, and that the mine-
owners could afford to pay better wages, and should yield to the men.
He was called a traitor to his class.
At the last moment in the coal strike, when the Government had done its
best, and when the labour leaders still proposed to hold up England and
defy the Government until they got their way, Stephen Walsh, one of the
leaders of the miners, stood up in the face of a million miners and said he
would not go on with the others against the Government. "It is now time for
the trades union men to return to work. We have done what we could. Our
citizenship should be higher than our trades unionship, and with me, as long
as I am a trades union man, it will be."
He was called a traitor to his class.
I am an unwilling and unfit person, as a sojourner and an American, to
take any position on the merits of the question as to the disestablishment of
the Church in Wales. But when I saw Bishop Gore standing up and looking
unblinkingly at facts or what he thought were facts which he would rather
not have seen and which were not on his side, and when I saw him voting
deliberately for the disestablishment of his own Church, I greeted with joy,
as if I had seen a cathedral, another traitor to his class. I almost believe that
a Church that could produce and supply a man like this for a great nation
looking through every city and county year by year for men to go with it ...
a Church that could produce and keep producing Bishop Gores, would be
entitled, from a great nation to anything it liked.
Men seem to be capable of three stages of courage. Courage is graded to the
man.
There is the man who is so tired, or mechanical-minded, that he can
only think of himself.
There is the man who is so tired that he can only think of his class.
And there is the man that one has watched being moved over slowly
from a Me-man into a Class-man, who has begun to show the first faint
beginnings of being a Crowd-man.
One man has courage for himself because he knows what he wants for
himself. Another has courage for his class because he knows what he wants
for his class. Another has courage for God and for the world because there
are things he sees that he wants for God and for the world, and he sees them
so clearly that he sees ways to get them.
Lack of courage is a lack of vision or clear-headedness about what one
wants. I do not know, but I can only say that it has seemed to me that
Bishop Gore has a vision or clear-headedness about what he wants for
democracy, and that he uses his vision of what he wants for democracy to
true his vision for his class. Perhaps also he has a vision for his class for the
church people that it is for the interest church people to be the class that is,
out of all the world, supremely considerate, big, leisurely, unfretful in its
dealings with others. Perhaps also he has a vision for himself and is clear-
headed for himself, and has seen that though the steeples fall about him, and
though the altars go up in smoke, he will keep the spirit of God still within
his reach. The gentleness, the grim hope for the world and the patience that
built the cathedrals, shall be in his heart day and night.
I hold no brief for Bishop Gore.
I know there must be others like him who voted on the other side.
I know there are hundreds of thousands of employers who in their hearts
are like him. I know there are hundreds of thousands of men in the trades
unions who are like him.
I am not sure that Bishop Gore, on the merits of the case, was right. I
wish this day I knew that he was wrong. I wish that I had spent the last six
months in fighting him, in fighting against his vision, that I might be more
free to-day to point to him with joy when I go up and down the streets with
men and look at the churches with men—the rows of churches—and try to
tell them what they are for. I have seen that the cathedrals scattered about
under the sky in England are but God's little tools to make great cities on
the earth, and to build softly out of the hearts of men and women men who
shall be cathedrals too—men buttressed against the world, men who can
stand alone.
And it has seemed to me that Tom Mann and D.A. Thomas are
incompetent as leaders of industry because they do not see that Labour is
full of men who can do things like this. I am proud, over in my country
across the sea, to be cousin to a nation that is still the headquarters—the
international citadel—of individualism upon the earth. The world knows if
England does not, that this kind of individualism is the most characteristic,
the most mighty and impregnable Dreadnought against that England has
produced.
But England knows it too.
I have seen thousands of men in England in their dull brown clothes
pass by me in the street who know and respond to the spirit that is in Bishop
Gore, and who have the courage to show it themselves. And the vision is in
them, but it is not waked. The moment it is waked we will have a new
world. It is because Tom Mann and D.A. Thomas are not leaders of men
who have this spirit that they are about to be dropped as typical leaders of
Labour and Capital in modern times. No man will be accepted by the
Crowd to-day as a competent leader of his class who is afraid of the other
classes. No man will be said to be a true leader, to be competent to make
things move in the world, who does not have three gears of courage:
courage for himself, courage for his own people, courage for other people;
and who does not dare to deal with other people as if they really might be
dealt with, after all, as fellow human beings capable of acting like fellow
human beings, capable of finer and of truer things, of more manly and
patient, more shrewdly generous, more far-sighted things, than might
appear at first.
Was Mr. Josiah Wedgewood right when he called Davy McEwen a traitor to
his class?
I do not want to judge Davy McEwen. Such things are matters of
personal interpretation, and of standing with a man face to face for a
moment and looking him in the eyes.
Of course, if I had done this, I might have been tempted and despised
him.
And I might now. The thing that I would have tried to look down
through to in him, if I had looked him in the eye, would have been
something like this: "Are you or are you not, Davy McEwen, standing out
day after day against your class because you can see less than your class
sees, because you are a mere me-man? Do you go by here grimly day by
day, past all these people lined up on the hills, sternly thinking of yourself?"
If I found that this was true, as it might well be, and often is, I would
say that Davy McEwen was a traitor to his class. But if I found Davy
McEwen going past hills-ful of workmen because he had a larger, fairer
vision of what his class is than they had, if it proved to be true that the
crowd-man in him was keeping the class-man in place, and holding true his
vision for his class, I would say that it was his class that was being a traitor
to him; I would say that sooner or later his class would see in some quiet
day that it had been a traitor to him and to the world, and a traitor to itself.
If socialism and individualism cannot work together, and if (like the
masculine and feminine in spirit) each cannot make itself the means and the
method of fulfilling the other, there is no reason why either of them should
be fulfilled.
In the meantime, there is a kind of self-will that seems to me, as its
shadow comes across my path, like God himself walking on the earth. And I
have seen it in the rich and I have seen it in the poor, and in people who
were being wrong and in people who were being right.
It is like hearing great bells in the dark, singing in the solemn night to so
much as hear of a man somewhere, I might go and see, who stands alone.
If we want to stand together, let us begin with these men who can stand
alone.
There is a sense in which Christ died on the cross because He could find
at the time no other way of saying this. There is a sense in which the decline
of individualism is what he died for.
Or we might call it the beginning of individualism. He died for the
principle of doing what he thought was right before anybody else did it, and
whether anybody else did it or not. The self-will of Jesus was half the New
Testament. He crucified himself, his mother, and a dozen disciples that His
own vision for all might be fulfilled. Socialism itself, what is good in it,
would not exist to-day if Jesus, the Christ, had not practised socialism, in
the best sense, by being an individualist.
If we are going to get to socialism by giving up individualism, by
abolishing heroes, why get to it?
This more glorious self-will is not, of course, of a kind that all men can
expect to have. Most of us have not the vision that equips us, and that gives
us the right, to have it. But we can exact of our leaders that they shall have
it—that they shall see more for us than we can see for ourselves, that they
shall hold their vision up before us and let us see it, and let us have the use
of it, that they shall be true to us, that they shall be the big brothers of the
people.
Chapter IX.
Rules for Telling a Hero—When One Sees One
Table of Contents
I have sometimes hoped that the modern world was about to produce at last
some man somewhere with a big-hearted, easy powerful mind, who could
protect the French Revolution. What we need most of all just now in our
present crisis is some man who could take up the French Revolution
without half trying, all the world looking on and wondering softly how he
dares to do it, and put it gently but firmly, and once for all, up high
somewhere where no one except geniuses, or at least the very tallest-
minded people, could ever again get at it.
As it is, hardly a day passes but one sees new little nobodies everywhere
all about one reaching up without half thinking to it—to the French
Revolution—grabbing it calmly, and then using it deliberately before our
eyes as a general free-for-all analogy for anything that comes into their
heads. The Syndicalists and Industrial Workers of the World have had the
use of it last. The fact that the French Revolution was French and that it
worked fairly well a hundred years ago and with a Louis Sixteenth sort of
person, and as a kind of first rough sketch, or draft of just what a revolution
might be for once, and what it would have to get over being afterward, as
soon as possible, never seems to have occurred to many people. One sees
them rushing about the world trying to get up exact duplicates, little fussy
replicas of a revolution, and of a kind of revolution that the real world put
quietly away in the attic seventy years ago. The real world, and all the men
in it who are facing real facts to-day, are getting what they want in precisely
the opposite of the violent, theatrical French-Revolution way. The fact that
people are quite different now, and that it is more effective and practical to
get new ideas into their heads by keeping their heads on than it is by taking
their heads off—some of us seem to have passed over. Living as we do in a
world to-day with our new explosives, our new antiseptics, our new
biology, bacteriology, our new storage batteries, our habit of getting
everything we get and changing everything we change by quietly and coolly
looking at facts, the old lumbering fashion of having a beautiful, showy,
emotional revolution now on one side, and then waiting to have another
beautiful, showy, emotional revolution on the other, each oscillating back
and forth year by year until people finally settle down, look at facts
together, become scientific, and see things as they are—has gone by. We
have not time for revolutions nowadays. They may be amusing, but they are
not practical, and evolution or revolution-without-knowing-it, or evolution
all together, suit us better. We are in a world in which we are seeing men
almost being made over before our eyes by the scientific habit of thought—
by the new, slow, imperious way we have come to have of making
ourselves look at things at which we would rather not look, until we see
them as they are. The man of scientific spirit, the quiet-minded, implacable
man who gets what he wants for himself and for others by merely turning
on the light, who makes a new world for us by just showing us more plainly
the one we really have, possesses the earth.
There is no reason why revolutionists should feel that they are
particularly courageous, that they are the particularly high-minded,
romantic, adventurous, uncompromising and superior people. The real
adventure, the abiding emotion and wonder of living in the twentieth
century, lies in the high, patient, slow, quiet, silent enterprise of seeing facts
as they are, and without any fuss, and inexorably and with good cheer,
acting on them. The human race has a new temperament. The way to fight
now is to look, to look first, to look longest, and to look for the most
people. The way we win a revolution or bring the enemy to terms to-day is
by battering the enemy with coöperation, with understanding him and being
understood by him, by being impregnably, obstinately his brother, by piling
up huge happy citadels of good-will, of services rendered, services
deserved, and services returned. We had an idea once that the way to
conquer a man was by hitting the outside of him. We conquer men now by
getting inside of them, and by getting inside first and then dealing with
outside things together.
We see the inside. It is the modern note to see the inside, to attack the
essence, the spirit, and to work everything out from that.
The modern method of being courageous and of defending what we
want is a kind of chemistry.
Hercules is a bust now.
We prefer still little women like Madame Curie, or a man like Sir
Joseph Lister, or like Wilbur Wright—the courage that faces material facts,
that deals with the elements of things, whether in a bottle, or in the heaven
above us, or in the earth, or in a man, or in an enemy.
When the subject-matter is human nature and the courage we have to
have is the courage that can deal with people, we ask ourselves: "What are
the most difficult facts to face in people?"
They are:
The facts about how they are different from us. The facts about their
being like us. The facts as to what we can do about it.
So it has come to seem to me to be the greatest, the most typical and
difficult courage of modern life and of a crowd civilization, the courage to
look at actual facts in people and to see how the people can be made to go
together.
A man's courage is his sense of identity.
A man's courage toward nature, heat, cold, mountains, seas, deserts,
chemistry, geology, is his sense of identity with God and of his right to
share with God in the creating of His world.
His courage toward people is his sense of identity with men who seem
different from him, of all races, all classes, and all nations. He sees the
differences in their big relations alongside the resemblances. Then he fits
the differences into the resemblances and knows what to do.
There is a statue of Sir George Livesey, one of the early presidents of
the South Metropolitan Gas Company, placed at the entrance of the works
where thousands of workmen day and night pass in and pass out.
Sir George Livesey was the man who, in the early days of the South
Metropolitan Gas Company, stood out against all his workmen, for six long
weeks, to get the workmen to believe that they were as good as he was. He
believed that they were capable, or should be capable, of being identified
with him and working with him as partners, of sharing in the direction of
the business, of sharing in the profits, and coöperating all day, every day,
with him and the other partners, to make the business a success.
He did not propose to be locked up in a business, if he could help it,
with men who did not feel identified with him, who were not his partners,
or who did not want to be.
He thought it was not good business to engage five thousand men and
pay them deliberately so much a day to fight his business on the inside of
the works. Being obliged to do his business as a fight against people who
helped him all the time, watching and outwitting them as if he were dealing
with five thousand intelligent gorillas instead of with fellow human beings,
did not interest him.
He did not believe that the men themselves, in spite of the way they
talked, when they came to think of it, really enjoyed being intelligent
gorillas, any more than he did.
The Trades Unions passed a resolution that it was safer for the men in
dealing with Sir George Livesey to keep on being gorillas.
Sir George Livesey proposed that they should all try being fellow
human beings and being in partnership for a little while and see how it
worked.
The Trades Unions were afraid to let them try. Even if it worked very
well, and if it turned out that being men was safer, in this one particular
case, than being gorillas, it would set a bad example, the Trades Unions
thought. They took the ground that it was safer to have all men treated alike,
whether they were gorillas or not.
They instructed the men to strike. The South Metropolitan Gas
Company was almost closed up, but it did not yield.
Sir George Livesey took the ground that if the Trades Unions believed
that his men were not good enough for him, and that he was not good
enough for his men, he would wait until they did.
The bronze statue of Sir George Livesey that the men have raised, and
that thousands of men go by every day, day after day, and look up to at their
work, was raised to a man who had stood out against his workmen for
weeks to prove that they were as good as he was, and could be trusted to be
loyal to him, and that he was as good as they were, and that he could be
trusted to be loyal to them.
He had the courage to insist on being, whether anybody wanted it for
the moment or not, a new kind and new size of man. He preferred being
allowed to be a new kind and new size himself, and he preferred allowing
his men to be new kinds and new sizes of men, and he made a shrewd,
dogged guess that when they tried it they would like it. They were merely
afraid to be new sizes, as we all are at first.
There are possibly three ways in which, in the confusion of our modern
world, one can tell a hero when one sees one.
One knows a hero first by his originality. He invents a new kind and
new size of man. He finishes off one sample. There he is.
The next thing one notices about this man (when he is invented) is his
humility. He never seems to feel—having invented himself—how original
he is. The more original people think he is, and the more they try to set him
one side as an exception, the more he resents it.
And then, of course, the final way one knows a man is a hero is always
by his courage, by his masterful way of driving through, when he meets a
man, to his sense of identity with him.
One always sees a hero going about quietly everywhere, treating every
other man as if he were a hero too.
He gets so in the habit, from day to day (living with himself), of
believing in human nature, that when he finds himself suddenly up against
other people he cannot stop.
It is not that he is deceived about the other people, though it might seem
so sometimes. He merely sees further into them and further for them.
Has he not invented himself? Is he not at this very moment a better kind
of man than he thought he could be once? Is he not going to be a better kind
to-morrow than he is now?
So, quietly, he keeps on year by year and day by day, treating other
people as if they were, or were meant to be, the same kind of man that he is,
until they are.
Chapter X.
Who is Afraid?
Table of Contents
When Christ turned the other cheek, the last thing He would have wanted
any one to think was that He was backing down, or that He was merely
being a sweet, gentle, grieved person. He was inventing before everybody,
and before His enemies, promptly and with great presence of mind, a new
kind and new size of man. It was a more spirited, more original, more
unconquerable and bewildering way of fighting than anybody had thought
of before. To be suddenly in an enemy's presence a new kind and new size
of man—colossal, baffling—to turn into invisibility before him, into
intangibility, into another kind of being before the enemy's eyes, so that he
could not possibly tell what to do, and so that none of the things that he had
thought of to do would work.... This is what Christ was doing, it seems to
some of us, and it is apparently the way He felt about it when He did it.
Turning the other cheek is a kind of moral jiu-jitsu.
The last thing that many of us who are interested in the modern world really
want is to have war, or fighting, stop. We glory in courage, in the power of
facing danger, in adventuresomeness of spirit, in every single one of the
qualities that always have made, and always will make, every true man a
fighter.
We contend that fighting, as at present conducted, is based on fear and
lazy-mindedness; that it is lacking in the manlier qualities, that the biggest
and newest kind of men are not willing to be in it, and that it does not work.
We would rather see the world abolished than to see war abolished.
We want to see war brought up to date.
The best way to fight was invented some two thousand years ago, and
the innocent, conventional persons who still believe in a kind of routine, or
humdrum, of shooting, who have not caught up with this two-thousand-
year-old invention, are about to be irrevocably displaced in our modern life
by men who have a livelier, more far-seeing, more practical, more modern
kind of courage. From this time on we have made up our minds, we, the
people of this world, that the only men we are going to allow to fight for us
are the men who can fight the way Christ did.
Men who have not the courage to fight the way Christ did are about to
be shut up by society; no one will harm them, of course, innocent, afraid
persons, who have to protect themselves with gunpowder, but they will
merely be set one side after this, where they will not be in a position to spoil
the fighting of the men who are not afraid.
And who are the men who are not afraid?
To search your enemy's heart, to amputate, as by a kind of spiritual
surgery, the very desire for fighting in him, to untangle his own life before
his eyes and suddenly make him see what it is he really wants, to have him
standing there quietly, radiantly disarmed, gentle-hearted, and like a child
before you; if you are able, Gentle Reader, or ever have been able, to do
this, you are not afraid! Why should any one ever have supposed that it
takes a backing down, giving up, teary, weak, and grieved person to do this?
Christ expressed His idea of courage very mildly when He said, in
effect: "Blessed are those who dare to be meek, for they shall inherit the
earth."
It takes a bolder front to step up to a man one knows is one's enemy and
coöperate with him than it does to do a little, simple, thoughtless, outside
thing like stepping up to him and knocking him down.
Coöperating with a man in spite of him, moving over to where he is,
winning a victory over him by getting at his most rooted, most protected,
secret, instinctive feelings, literally striking him through to the heart and
making a new kind of man out of him before his own eyes, by being a new
kind of man to him, takes a bigger, stiller courage, is a more exposed and
dangerous thing to do than to fall on him and fight him.
It is also more practical. The one cool, practical, hard-headed way to
win a victory over an enemy is to do the thing that makes him the most
afraid. And there is no man people are more afraid of than the man who
stands up to them, quietly looks at them, and will not fight with them. He is
doing the one thing of all others to them that they would not dare to do.
They wonder what such a man thinks. If he dares stand up before them and
face them with nothing but thinking, what is he thinking?
What he thinks, if it makes him able to do a thing like this, must have
some man-stuff in it. They prefer to wait and see what he thinks.
Courage consists in not being afraid of one's own mind and of other
people's minds. When men become so afraid of one another's minds and of
their own minds that they cannot think, they have to back down and fight.
They are cowards.
They do not know what they think.
They do not know what they want.
Chapter XI.
The Technique of Courage
Table of Contents
I have never known a coward.
I have known men who did cowardly things and who were capable of
cowardly thoughts, but I have never known a man who could be fairly and
finally classified as a coward.
Courage is a process.
If people are cowards it is because they are in a hurry.
They have not taken the pains to see what they think.
The man who has taken the time to think down through to what he
really wants and to what he is bound to get, is always (and sometimes very
suddenly and unexpectedly) a courageous man.
It is the man who is half wondering whether he really wants what he
thinks he wants or not, or whether he can get it or not, who is a coward.
The coward is a half man. He is slovenly minded about himself. He gets
out of the hard work of seeing through himself, of driving on through what
he supposes he wants, to what he knows he wants.
So, after all, it is a long, slow, patient pull, being a courageous man.
Few men have the nerve to take the time to attend to it.
The first part of courage consists in all this hard work one has to put in
on one's soul day after day, and over and over again, doggedly, going back
to it. What is it that I really want?
The second, or more brilliant-looking part of courage, the courageous
act itself (like Roosevelt's when he is shot), which everybody notices, is
easy. The real courage is over then.
Courage consists in seeing so clearly something that one wants to get
that one is more afraid of not getting it than one is of anything that can get
in the way.
The first thing that society is ever able to do with the lowest type of
labouring man seems to be to get him to want something. It has to think out
ways of getting him waked up, of getting him to be decently selfish, and to
want something for himself. He only wants a little at first; he wants
something for himself to-day and he has courage for to-day. Then perhaps
he wants something for himself for to-morrow, or next week, or next year,
and he has courage for next week, or for next year. Then he wants
something for his family, or for his wife, and he has courage for his family,
or for his wife.
Gradually he sees further and wants something for his class. His
courage mounts up by leaps and bounds when he is liberated into his class.
Then he discovers the implacable mutual interest of his class with the other
classes, and he thinks of things he wants for all the classes. He thinks the
classes together into a world, and becomes a man. He has courage for the
world.
When men see, whether they are rich or poor, what they want, what they
believe they can get, they are not afraid.
The next great work of the best employers is to get labour to want
enough. Labour is tired and mechanical-minded. The next work of the
better class of labourer, or the stronger kind of Trades Union, is to get
capital to want enough. Capital is tired, too. It does not see really big,
worth-while things that can be done with capital, and has no courage for
these things.
The larger the range and the larger the variety of social desire the
greater the courage.
The problem in modern industry is the arousing of the imaginations of
capitalists and labourers so that they see something that gives them courage
for themselves and for one another, and courage for the world.
The world belongs to the men of vision—the men who are not afraid—
the men who see things that they have made up their minds to get.
Who are the men to-day, in all walks of life, who want the most things
for the most people, and who have made up their minds to get them?
There is just one man we will follow to-day—those of us who belong to
the crowd—the man who is alive all over, who is deeply and gloriously
covetous, the man who sees things he wants for himself, and who therefore
has courage for himself, and who sees things he wants and is bound to get
for other people, and who therefore has courage for other people.
This is the hardest kind of courage to have—courage for other people.
Chapter XII.
The Men Who Want Things
Table of Contents
During the coal strike I took up my morning paper and read from a speech
by Vernon Hartshorn, the miners' leader: "In a week's time, by tying up the
railways and other means of transportation, we could so paralyze the
country that the government would come to us on their knees and beg us to
go to work on terms they are now flouting as impossible."
During the dockers' strike I took up my morning paper and read Ben
Tillett's speech, at the meeting the day before, to fifty thousand strikers on
Tower Hill. "'I am going to ask you to join me in a prayer,' Tillett said. 'Lord
Devonport has contributed to the murder, by starvation, of your children,
your women, and your men. I am not going to ask you to do it, but I am
going to call on God to strike Lord Devonport dead,' He asked those who
were prepared to repeat the 'prayer' to hold up their hands. Countless hands
were held up, and cries: 'Strike him doubly stone dead!' The men then
repeated the following 'prayer', word for word, after Tillett:
"'O God, strike Lord Devonport dead.'
"Afterward the strikers chanted the words: 'He shall die! He shall die!'"
There are times when it is very hard to have courage for other people.
It is when one watches people doing cowardly things that one finds it
hardest to have courage for them.
I felt the same way both mornings at first when I held my paper in my
hand and thought about what I had read, about the government's going
down on its knees, and about God's striking Lord Devonport dead.
The first feeling was one of profound resentment, shame—a huge,
helpless, muddle-headed anger.
I had not the slightest trace of courage for the miners; I did not see how
the government could have any courage for them. And I had no courage for
the dockers, or for what could be expected of the dockers. I did not see how
Lord Devonport could have any courage for them.
I repeated their prayer to myself.
The dockers were cowards. I was not going to try to sympathize with
them, or try to be reasonable about them. It was nothing that they were
desperate and had prayed. Was I not desperate too? Would not the very
thought that fifty thousand men could pray a prayer like that make any man
desperate? It was as if I had stood and heard fifty thousand beasts roaring to
their god.
"They are desperate," I said to myself: "I will not take what they think
seriously. It does not matter what desperate people think."
Then I waited a minute. "But I am desperate, too," I said; "I must not
take what I think seriously. It does not matter what desperate people think."
I thought about this a little, and drove it in.
"What I think will matter more a little later, perhaps, when I get over
being desperate."
"Perhaps what the dockers think will matter more a little later, too."
In the meantime are not their scared and hateful opinions as good as my
scared and hateful opinions?
The important and final opinions, the ones to be taken seriously, that
can be acted on, will be the opinions of those who get over being scared and
hateful first.
Then I stood up for myself.
I had a reason for being scared and hateful. They and their prayer drove
me to be scared and hateful.
I thought again.
Perhaps they had a reason, too.
Then it all came over me. I became a human being all in a minute when
I thought of it.
I became suddenly full of courage for the hateful dockers.
I thought how much more discouraging it would be if they had not been
hateful at all.
I do not imagine God was sorry when He heard those fifty thousand dockers
asking Him to strike Lord Devonport dead.
Not that He would have approved of it.
It was not the last word of wisdom or reasonableness. It was lacking in
beauty and distinction as a petition, as being just the right form of prayer for
those fifty thousand faultless dockers up on Tower Hill that afternoon (the
whole of London listening, in that shocked and proper way that London
has).
But I have not lost all courage for the dockers who made it.
They still want something! They still are men! They still stand up when
they speak to Heaven! There is some stuff in them yet! They make heaven
and earth ring to get a word with God!
This all means something to God, probably.
Perhaps it might mean something to us.
We are superior persons, it is true. We do not pray the way they pray.
We believe in being more self-controlled. We take our breakfasts
quietly, and with high collars and silk hats, and with gilt prayer-books we
go into the presence of our Maker. We believe in being calm and
reasonable.
But if men who have not enough to eat are so half-dead and so
worthless that they can feel calm and reasonable about it, and can always be
precisely right and always say precisely the right thing—if, with their wives
fainting in their arms and their babies crying for food, all that those dockers
had character enough to do, up on Tower Hill, was to make a polite,
smooth, Anglican prayer to God—a prayer like a kind of blessing before not
having any meat, and not that awful, fateful, husky cry to Heaven, a roar or
rending of their hearts up to the black and empty sky—what would such
men have been good for? What hope or courage could any one have for
them, for such men at such a time, if they would not, if they could not,
come thundering and breaking into His presence, fifty thousand strong, to
get what they want?
I may not know God, but whatever else He is, I feel sure that He is not a
precise stickler-god, that He is not pompous about spiritual manners, a
huge, literal-minded, Proper Person, who cannot make allowances for
human nature, who cannot hear what humble, rough men like these, hewing
their vast desires for Him out of darkness, and out of little foolish words,
are trying to say to Him.
And perhaps we, too, do not need to be literal-minded about a prayer
that we may hear, or that we may overhear, roaring its way up past our
smooth, beautiful lives rudely to Heaven.
What is the gist of the prayer to God, and to us?
What is it that the men are trying to say in this awful, flaming,
blackening metaphor of wishing Lord Devonport dead?
The gist of it is that they mean to say, whether they are right or wrong
(like us, as we would say, whether we were right or wrong), they mean to
say that they have a right to live.
In other words, the gist of it is that we are like them, and that they are
like us.
I, too, in my hour of deepest trial, with no silk hat, with no gloves, with
no gilt prayer-book, as I should, have flashed out my will upon my God. I,
too, have cried with Paul, with Job, across my sin—my sin that very
moment heaped up upon my lips—have broken wildly in upon that still,
white floor of Heaven!
And when the dockers break up through, fling themselves upon their
God, what is it, after all, but another way of saying, "I am persuaded that
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God...."
It may have been wicked in the dockers to address God in this way, but
it would have been more wicked in them not to think He could understand.
I believe, for one, that when Jacob wrestled with the angel, God looked
on and liked it.
The angel was a mere representative at best, and Jacob was really
wrestling with God.
And God knew it and liked it.
Praying to strike Lord Devonport dead was the dockers' way of saying
to God that there was something on their minds that simply could not be
said.
I can imagine that this would interest a God, a prayer like the dockers'
prayer, so spent, so desperate, so unreasonable, breaking through to that
still, white floor of Heaven!
And it does seem as if, in our more humble, homely, and useful capacity
as fellow human beings, it might interest us.
It seems as if, possibly, we might stop criticising people who pray
harder than we do, pointing out that wrestling with God is really rather rude
—as if we might stop and see what it means to God and what it means to
us, and what there is that we might do, you and I, oh, Gentle Reader, to
make it possible for the dockers on Tower Hill to be more polite, perhaps,
more polished, as it were, when they speak to God next time.
Perhaps nothing the dockers could do in the way of being violent could
be more stupid and wicked than having all these sleek, beautiful, perfect
people, twenty-six million of them, all expecting them not to be violent.
In my own quiet, gentle, implacable beauty of spirit, in my own ruthless
wisdom on a full stomach, I do not deny that I do most sternly disapprove
of the dockers and their violence.
But it is better than nothing, thank God!
They want something.
It gives me something to hope for, and to have courage for, about them
—that they want something.
Possibly if we could get them started wanting something, even some
little narrow and rather mean thing, like having enough to eat—possibly
they will go on to art galleries, to peace societies, and cathedrals next, and
to making very beautiful prayers (alas, Gentle Reader, how can I say it?)
like you—Heaven help us!—and like me!
I would have but one objection to letting the dockers have their full
way, and to letting the control of the situation be put into their hands.
They do not hunger enough.
They are merely hungering for themselves.
This may be a reason for not letting the world get entirely into their
hands, but in the meantime we have every reason to be appreciative of the
good the dockers are doing (so far as it goes) in hungering for themselves.
It would be strange indeed if one could not tolerate in dockers a little
thing like this. Babies do it. It is the first decency in all of us. It is the first
condition of our knowing enough, or amounting to enough, to ever hunger
for any one else. Everybody has to make a beginning somewhere. Even a
Saint Francis, the man who hungers and thirsts for righteousness, who rises
to the heights of social-mindedness, who hungers and thirsts for everybody,
begins all alone, at the breast.
Which is there of us who, if we had not begun our own hungering and
thirsting for righteousness, our tugging on God, in this old, lonely,
preoccupied, selfish-looking way, would ever have grown up, would ever
have wanted enough things to belong to a Church of England, for instance,
or to a Congregational Home Missionary Society?
It is true that the dockers are, for the moment (alas, fifty or sixty years
or so!), merely wanting things for themselves, or wanting things for their
own class. And so would we if we had been born, brought up, and
embedded in a society which allowed us so little for ourselves that not
growing up morally—keeping on over and over again, year after year, just
wanting things for ourselves, and not really being weaned yet—was all that
was left to us.
There is really considerable spiritual truth in having enough to eat.
Sometimes I have thought it would be not unhelpful, would make a little
ring of gentle-heartedness around us, some of us—those of us who live
protected lives and pray such rich, versatile prayers, if we would stop and
think what a docker would have to do, what arrangements a docker would
have to make before he could enjoy praying with us—falling back into our
beautiful, soft, luxurious wanting things for others.
Possibly these arrangements, such as they are, are the ones the dockers
are trying to make with Lord Devonport now.
The docker is trying to get through hungering for something to eat, to
arrange gradually to have his hungers move on.
Chapter XIII.
Men Who Get Things
Table of Contents
All the virtues are hungers. A vice is the failure of desire. A vice is a man's
failure to have enough big hungers at hand, sternly within reach, to control
his little ones.
A man who is doing wrong is essentially bored. He has let himself drop
into doing rows of half-things, or things which he can only half do. He
forgets, for the moment, what it really is that he wants, or possibly that he
wants anything. Then it is that the one little, mean Lonely Hunger—a glass
of liquor, a second piece of pie, another man's wife, or a million dollars,
runs away with him.
When a man sins it is because his appetites fail him. Self-control lies in
maintaining checks and balances of desire, centripetals, and centrifugals of
desire. The worst thing that could happen to the world would be to have it
placed in the hands of men who only have a gift of hungering for certain
sorts of things, or hungering for certain classes of people, or hungering for
themselves.
We do not want the man who is merely hungering for himself to rule the
world—not because we feel superior to him, but because a man who is
merely hungering for himself cannot be taken seriously as an authority on
worlds. People can take him seriously as an authority on his own hunger.
But what he thinks about everything beyond that point cannot be taken
seriously. What he thinks about how the world should be run, about what
other people want, what labour and capital want, cannot be taken seriously.
I will not yield place to any one in my sympathy with the dockers.
I like to think that I too, given the same grandfathers, the same sleeping
rooms and neighbours, the same milk, the same tincture of religion, would
dare to do what they have done.
But I cannot be content, as I take my stand by the dockers, with
sympathizing in general. I want to sympathize to the point.
And on the practical side of what to do next in behalf of the dockers, or
of what to let them do, I find myself facing two facts:
First, the dockers are desperate. I take their desperation as conclusive
and imperative. It must be obeyed.
Second, I do not care what they think.
What they think must not be obeyed. Men who are in the act of being
scared or hateful, whether it be for five minutes, jive months, or sixty years,
who have given up their courage for others, or for their enemies, are not
practical. What a man who despairs of everybody except himself thinks,
does not work and cannot be made to work. The fact that the dockers have
no courage about their employers may be largely the employers' fault. It is
largely the fault of society, of the churches, the schools, the daily press. But
the fact remains, and whichever side in the contest has, or is able to have,
first, the most courage for the other side, whichever side wants the most for
the other side, will be the side that will get the most control.
If Labour, in the form of syndicalism, wants to grasp the raw materials,
machinery, and management of modern industry out of the hands of the
capitalists and run the world, the one shrewd, invincible way for Labour to
do it is going to be to want more things for more people than capitalists can
want.
The only people, to-day, who are going to be competent to run a world,
or who can get hold of even one end of it to try to run it, are going to be the
people who want a world, who have a habit, who may be said to be almost
in a rut, of wanting things all day, every day, for a world—men who cannot
keep narrowed down very long at a time to wanting things for themselves.
There will be little need of our all falling into a panic, or all being
obliged to rely on policemen, or to call out troops to stave off an uprising of
the labour classes as long as the labour classes are merely wanting things
for themselves. It is the men who have the bigger hungers who are getting
the bigger sorts of things—things like worlds into their hands. The me-man
and the class-man, under our modern conditions, are being more and more
kept back and held under in the smaller places, the me-places and class-
places, by the men who want more things than they can want, who lap over
into wanting things for others.
The me-man often may see what he wants clearly and may say what he
wants.
But he does not get it. It is the class-man who gets it for him.
The class-man may see what he wants for his class clearly and may say
what he wants.
But he does not get it. It is the crowd-man who gets it for him.
It is a little startling, the grim, brilliant, beautiful way that God has
worked it out!
It is one of His usual paradoxes.
The thing in a man that makes it possible for him to get things more
than other people can get them is his margin of unselfishness.
He gets things by seeing with the thing that he wants all that lies around
it. With equal clearness he is seeing all the time the people and the things
that are in the way of what he wants; how the people look or try to look,
how they feel or try to make him think they feel, what they believe and do
not believe or can be made to believe; he sees what he wants in a vast
setting of what he cannot get with people, and of what he can—in a huge
moving picture of the interests of others.
The man who, in fulfilling and making the most of himself, can get
outside of himself into his class, who, in being a good class-man, can
overflow into being a man of the world, is the man who gets what he wants.
I am hopeful about Labour and Capital to-day because in the industrial
world, as at present constituted in our coöperative age, the men who can get
what they want, who get results out of other people, are the men who have
the largest, most sensitive outfits for wanting things for other people.
If there is one thing rather than another that fills one with courage for
the outlook of labouring men to-day it is the colossal failure Ben Tillett
makes in leading them in prayer.
Even the dockers, perhaps the most casually employed, the most spent
and desperate class of Labour of all, only prayed Ben Tillet's prayer a
minute and they were sorry the day after.
And it was Ben Tillett's prayer in the end that lost them their cause—a
prayer that filled all England on the next day with the rage of Labour—that
a man like Ben Tillett, with such a mean, scared, narrow little prayer,
should dare to represent Labour.
In the same way, after the shooting in the Lawrence strike, when all
those men (Syndicalists) had streamed through the streets, showing off
before everybody their fine, brave-looking thoughtless, superficial,
guillotine feelings and their furious little banner, "No God and no
Master"—it did one good, only a day or so later, to see a vast crowd of
Lawrence workers, thirty thousand strong, tramping through the streets,
singing, with bands of music, and with banners, "In God we trust" and "One
is our Master, even Christ"—thousands of men who had never been inside a
church, thousands of men who could never have looked up a verse in the
Bible, still found themselves marching in a procession, snatching up these
old and pious mottoes and joining in hymns they did not know, all to
contradict, and to contradict thirty thousand strong, the idea that the blood
and froth, the fear and unbelief, of the Industrial Workers of the World
represented or could ever be supposed to represent for one moment the
manhood and the courage, the faithfulness and (even in the hour of their
extremity) the quiet-heartedness, the human loyalty and self-forgetfulness,
the moral dignity of the American workingman.
It cannot truly be said that the typical modern labouring man, whether in
America or England, is a coward; that he has no desire, no courage, for any
one except for himself and for his own class. Mr. O'Connor of the Dockers'
Organization in the East of Scotland, said at the time of the strike of the
dockers in London: "This kind of business of the bureaucratic labour men in
London, issuing orders for men to stop work all over the country, is against
the spirit of the trades unions of England. It is a thing we cannot possibly
stand. We have an agreement with the employers, and we have no intention
of breaking it."
It cannot be said that the typical modern labourer is listening seriously
to the Syndicalist or to the Industrial Worker of the World when he tells him
that Labour alone can save itself, and that Labour alone can save the world.
He knows that any scheme of social and industrial reform which leaves any
class out, rich or poor, which does not see that everybody is to blame,
which does not see that everybody is responsible, which does not arrange or
begin to arrange opportunity and expectation for every man and every
degree and kind of man, and does not do it just where that man is, and do it
now, is superficial.
If we are going to have a society that is for all of us, it will take all of
us, and all of us together, to make it. Mutual expectation alone can make a
great society. Mutual expectation, or courage for others, persistently and
patiently and flexibly applied—applied to details by small men, applied to
wholes by bigger ones—is going to be the next big serious, unsentimental,
practical industrial achievement. And I do not believe that for sheer
sentiment's sake we are going to begin by rooting up millionaires and, with
one glorious thoughtless sweep, saying, "We will have a new world,"
without asking at least some of the owners of it to help, or at least letting
them in on good behaviour. Nor are we going to begin by rooting up trade
unions and labour leaders.
The great organizations of Capital in the world to-day are daily
engaged, through competition and experiment and observation, in educating
one another and finding out what they really want and what they can really
do; and it is equally true that the great organizations of labour, in the same
way, are educating one another.
The real fight of modern industry to-day is an educational fight. And the
fight is being conducted, not between Labour and Capital, but between the
labouring men who have courage for Capital and labouring men who have
not, and between capitalists who have courage for Labour and those who
have not. To put it briefly, the real industrial fight to-day is between those
who have courage and those who have not.
It is not hard to tell, in a fight between men who have courage and men
who have not, which will win.
Probably, whatever else is the matter with them, the world will be the
most safe in the hands of the men who have the most courage.
There are four items of courage I would like to see duly discussed in the
meetings of the trades unions in America and England.
First, A discussion of trades unions. Why is it that, when the leaders of
trades unions come to know employers better than the other men do and
begin to see the other side and to have some courage about employers and
to become practicable and reasonable, the unions drop them?
Second, Why is it that, in a large degree, the big employers, when they
succeed in getting skilled representatives or managers who come to know
and to understand their labouring men better than they do, do not drop
them? Why is it that, day by day, on all sides in America and England, one
sees the employing class advancing men who have a genius for being
believed in, to at first questioned, and then to almost unquestioned, control
of their business? If this is true, does it not seem on the whole that industry
is safer in the hands of employers who have courage for both sides and who
see both sides than of employees who do not? Does not the remedy for
trades unions and employees, if they want to get control, seem to be, instead
of fighting, to see if they cannot see both sides quicker, and see them better,
than their employers do?
Third, A discussion of efficiency in a National Labour Party from the
point of view of the trend of national efficiency in business. Apparently the
most efficient and shrewd business men in England and America are the
men who are running what might be called lubricated industries—who are
making their industries succeed on the principle of sympathetic, smooth-
running, mutual interests. If the successful modern business man who owns
factories is not running each factory as a small civil war, is it not true that
the only practical and successful Labour Party in England, the only party
that can get things done for labour and that can hold power, is bound to be
the party that succeeds in having the most courage for both sides, in seeing
the most mutual interests, and in seeing how these interests can be put
together, and in seeing it first and acting on it before any other merely one-
sided party would be able to think it out?
Fourth, A discussion of the selection of the best labour leaders to place
at the head of the unions.
Nearly every man who succeeds in business notably, succeeds in
believing something about the people with whom he deals that the men
around him have not believed before, or in believing something which, if
they did believe it, they had not applied or acted as if they had believed
before. If, in order to succeed, a business man does not believe something
that needs to be believed before other people believe it, he hires somebody
who does believe it to believe it for him.
Perhaps Labour would find it profitable to act on this principle too, and
to see to it that the leaders chosen to act for them are not the noisiest
minded, but the most creative men, the men who can express original,
shrewd faiths in the men with whom they have to deal—faiths that the men
around them will be grateful (after a second thought) to have expressed
next.
In the meantime, whether among the labourers or the capitalists, however
long it may take, it is not hard to see, on every hand to-day, the world about
us slowly, implacably getting into the hands of the men, poor or rich, who
have the most keen, patient courage about other people, the men who are
"good" (God save the word!), the men who have practical, working human
sympathies and a sense of possibilities in those above them and beneath
them with whom they work—the men who most clearly, eagerly, and
doggedly want things for others, who have the most courage for others.
I have thought that if we could find out what this courage is, how it
works, how it can be had, and where it comes from, it might be more worth
our while to know than any other one thing in the world.
I would like to try to consider a few of the sources of this courage for
others.
Chapter XIV.
Sources of Courage for Others—Toleration
Table of Contents
After making an address on inspired millionaires one night before the
Sociological Society in their quarters in John Street, I found myself the next
day—a six-penny day—standing thoughtfully in the quarters of the
Zoölogical Society in Regent's Park.
The Zoölogical Society makes one feel more humble, I think, than the
Sociological Society does.
All sociologists, members of Parliament, eugenists, professors, and
others, ought to be compelled by law to spend one day every two weeks
with the Zoölogical Society in Regent's Park.
All reformers who essay to make over human nature, all idealists,
should be required by law to visit menageries—to go to see them faithfully
or to be put in them a while until they have observed life and thought things
out.
A GREEN BENCH, THE ZOO, REGENT'S PARK, 1911.
For orienting a man and making him reasonable, there is nothing, I find,
like coming out and putting in a day here, making one's self gaze firmly and
doggedly at the other animals.
We have every reason to believe that Noah was a good psychologist, or
judge of human nature, before he went into the ark, but if he was not, he
certainly would have come out one.
There is nothing like a menagerie to limber one up.
Especially an idealist.
Take a pelican, for instance. What possible personal ideal was it that
could make a pelican want to be a pelican or that could ever have made a
pelican take being a pelican seriously for one minute?
And the camel with his lopsided hump. "Why, oh, why," cries the
idealist, wringing his hands. "Oh, why——?"
I have come out here this afternoon, in the middle of my book, in the
middle of a chapter against the syndicalists, but it ill beseems me, after
spending half a day looking calmly at peacocks, at giraffes, at
hippopotamuses, at all these tails, necks, legs and mouths, at this stretch or
bird's eye view—this vast landscape of God's toleration—to criticise any
man, woman or child of this world for blossoming out, for living up, or
fleshing up, or paring down, to what he is really like inside.
Possibly what each man stands for is well enough for him to stand for. It
is only when what a man says, comes to being repeated, to being made
universal, to being jammed down on the rest of us, that the lie in it begins to
work out.
Let us let everybody alone and be ready to find things out just for
ourselves.
Here is this big, frivolous, gentle elephant, for instance, poking his
huge, inquiring trunk into baby carriages. He is certainly too glorious, too
profound, a personage to do such things! It does seem a little unworthy to
me, as I have been sitting here and watching him from this park bench, for a
noble, solemn being like the elephant—a kind of cathedral of a beast, to be
as deeply interested as he is in peanuts.
He looms up before me once more. I look up a little closer—look into
his little, shrewd eyes—and, after all, what do I know about him?
And I watch the camels with the happy, dazed children on their backs,
go by with soft and drifting feet. Do I suppose I understand camels? Or I
follow the crowd. I find myself at last with that huge, hushed, sympathetic
congregation at the 4 P.M. service, watching the lions eat.
Everything does seem very much mixed up when one brings one's
Sociological Society dogmas, and one's little neat, impeccable row of
principles to the test of watching the lions eat!
Possibly people are as different from one another inside—in their souls
at least—as different as these animals are.
It is true, of course, that as we go about, people do have a plausible way
in this world—all these other people, of looking like us.
But they are different inside.
If one could stand on a platform as one was about to speak and could
really see the souls of any audience—say of a thousand people—lying out
there before one, they would be a menagerie beside which, O Gentle
Reader, I dare to believe, Barnum and Bailey's menagerie would pale in
comparison.
But in a menagerie (perhaps you have noticed it, Gentle Reader) one
treats the animals seriously, and as if they were Individuals.
They are what they are.
Why not treat people's souls seriously?
It is true that people's souls, like the animals, are alike in a general way.
They all have in common (in spiritual things) organs of observation,
appropriation, digestion and organs of self-reproduction.
But these spiritual organs of digestion which they have are theirs.
And these organs of self-reproduction are for the purpose of
reproducing themselves and not us.
These are my reflections, or these try to be my reflections when I
consider the Syndicalist—how he grows or when I look up and see a class-
war socialist—an Upton Sinclair banging loosely about the world.
My first wild, aboriginal impulse with Upton Sinclair when I come up
to him as I do sometimes—violent, vociferous roaring behind his bars, is to
whisk him right over from being an Upton Sinclair into being me. I do not
deny it.
Then I remember softly, suddenly, how I felt when I was watching the
lions eat.
I remember the pelican.
Thus I save my soul in time.
Incidentally, of course, Upton Sinclair's insides are saved also.
It is beautiful the way the wild beasts in their cages persuade one almost
to be a Christian!
Of course when one gets smoothed down one always sees people very
differently. In being tolerant the rub comes usually (with me) in being
tolerant in time. I am tempted at first, when I am with Upton Sinclair, to act
as if he were a whole world of Upton Sinclairs and of course (anybody
would admit it) if he really were a whole world of Upton Sinclairs he would
have to be wiped out. There would be nothing else to do. But he is not and
it is not fair to him or fair to the world to act as if he were.
The moment I see he is confining himself to just being Upton Sinclair I
rather like him.
It is the same with Ella Wheeler Wilcox. It is when I fall to thinking of
her as if she were, or were in danger of being, a whole world of Ella
Wheeler Wilcoxes that I grow intolerant of her. Ella Wheeler Wilcox as a
Tincture, which is what she really is, of course, is well enough. I do not
mind.
The real truth about a man like Upton Sinclair, when one has worked
down through to it, is that while from my point of view a class-war socialist
—a man who proposes to put society together by keeping men apart—is
wrong and is sure to do a great deal of harm to some people, there are other
people to whom he does a great deal of good.
There really are people who need Upton Sinclair. It may be a hard fact
to face perhaps, but when one faces it one is glad there is one. Some of the
millionaires need Sinclair. There are others whose attention would be
attracted better in more subtle ways.
The class-war socialist, though I may be at this moment in the very act
of trying to make him impossible, to put him out of date, has been and is, in
his own place and his own time, I gratefully acknowledge, of incalculable
value.
Any man who can, by saying violent and noisy things, make rich, tired,
mechanical-minded people, and poor, tired mechanical-minded people wake
up enough to feel hateful has performed a public service. The hatefulness is
the beginning of their being covetous for other things than the things they
have. If a man has a habit of hunger he gets better and better hungers as a
matter of course; bread and milk, ribbons, geraniums, millinery, bathtubs,
Bibles, copartnership associations. And in the meantime the one precious
thing to be looked out for in a man, and to be held sacred, is his hunger.
The one important religious value in the world is hunger and to all the
men to-day who are contributing to the process of moving on hungers;
whether the hungers happen to be our hungers or not or our stages of
hunger or not, we say Godspeed.
There are times when the sudden sense one comes to have that the
world is a struggle, a great prayer toward the sun, a tumult and groping of
desire, the sense that every kind and type of desire has its time and its place
in it and every kind and type of man, gives a whole new meaning to life.
This sense of a now possible toleration which we come to have, some of us,
opens up to us always when it comes a new world of courage about people.
It makes all these dear, clumsy people about us suddenly mean something.
It makes them all suddenly belong somewhere. They become, as by a kind
of miracle, bathed in a new light, wrong-headed, intolerable though they be,
one still sees them flowing out into the great endless stream of becoming—
all these dots of the vast desire, all these queer, funny, struggling little sons
of God!
It has been overlooked that social reform primarily is not a matter of
legislation or of industrial or political systems, or of machinery, but a
matter, of psychology, of insight into human nature and of expert reading
and interpretation of the minds of men. What are they thinking about? What
do they think they want?
The trades unions and employers' associations, extreme socialists and
extreme Tories have so far been very bad psychologists. If the Single Tax
people were as good at being intuitionalists or idea-salesmen as they are at
being philosophers in ideas they would long before this have turned
everything their way. They would have begun with people's hungers and
worked out from them. They would have listened to people to find out what
their hungers were. The people who will stop being theoretical and logical
about each other and who will look hard into each other's eyes will be the
people whose ideas will first come to pass. Everything we try to do or say
or bring to pass in England or America is going to begin after this, not in
talking, but in listening. If social reformers and industrial leaders had been
good listeners, the social deadlock—England with its House of Lords and
railroads both on strike and America with its great industries quarrelling—
would have been arranged for and got out of the way over twenty years ago.
We have overlooked the first step of industrial reform, the rather
extreme step of listening. The most hard-headed and conclusive man to
settle any given industrial difficulty is the man who has the gift of divining
what is going on in other people's minds, a gift for being human, a gift for
treating everybody who disagrees with him as if they might possibly be
human too, though they are very poor, even though they are very rich.
Practical psychology has come to be not only the only solution but also the
only method of our modern industrial questions. Being so human that one
can guess what any possible human being would think is the one hard-
headed and practical way to meet the modern labour problem.
The first symptom of being human in a man is his range and power of
shrewd, happy toleration, or courage for people who know as little now as
he knew once.
A man's sense of toleration is based primarily upon the range and power
of his knowledge of himself, upon his power of remembering and
anticipating himself, upon his laughing with God at himself, upon his habit
in darkness, weariness or despair, or in silent victory and joy, of falling on
his knees.
Toleration is reverence. It is the first source of courage for other people.
Chapter XV.
Conversion
Table of Contents
Some people think of the world as if it were made all through, people and
all, of reinforced concrete, as if everything in it—men, women, children,
churches, colleges, and parties, were solidly, inextricably imbedded in it.
Every age in history has had to get on as well as it could with two sets
of totally impracticable people, our two great orders of Philistines in this
world, the people who put their trust in Portland Cement and the people
who put their trust in Explosives.
There has not been a single great movement in history yet that every
thoughtful man has not had to watch being held up by these people—by
millions of worthy, simple, rudimentary creatures who consent to be mere
conservatives or mere radicals.
One set says, "People cannot be converted so we will blow them up."
The other set says, "We are going to be blown up, so let us put on
Plaster of Paris as a garment, we will array ourselves before the Lord in
Portland Cement."
Both of these classes of people believe alike on one main point.
They do not believe in Conversion.
If the conservatives believed in conversion they would not be so afraid
that they feel obliged to resort to Portland Cement. If the radicals believed
in conversion they would not be so afraid that they feel obliged to resort to
Explosives.
In our machine civilization to these two great standard classes of scared
people, there has been added what seems to be a third class—the people
who have responded to a kind of motor spirit in the time, who have
modulated a little their unbelief in human nature. They have substituted for
their reinforced concrete Unbelief, a kind of Whirling Unbelief, called
machinery.
They admit that in our modern life men are not made of reinforced
concrete. We may move, but we move as wheels move, they tell us. We arc
whirlingly imbedded. We are cogs and wheels in an Economic Machine.
I would like to consider for a moment this Whirling Unbelief.
There was a time once when I took the Economic Machine very
seriously.
I looked up when I went by, at the Economic Machine as the last and
the most terrific of the inventions among the machines. The machine that
mocked all the other machines, that made all our machines look pathetic
and ridiculous, was the Economic Machine. There were days when I heard
it or seemed to hear it—this Economic Machine closing in around my life,
around all our lives like the last hoarse mocking laugh of civilization.
I said I will love every machine that runs except the Economic Machine
—the machine for making people into machines.
But one day when I had waited or dared to wait, I know not why, a little
longer than usual before the Whirling Unbelief, I heard the hoarse mocking
laugh die away. I became very quiet. I began to think, I reflected on my
experiences. I began to notice things.
I noted that every time I had found myself being discouraged about
people, I had caught myself thinking of people as Cogs and Wheels.
Were they really Cogs and Wheels?
Possibly it was merely the easiest, most mechanical-minded thing to do
to think of people (with all this machinery around one) as cogs and wheels
in an economic machine.
Then it began to occur to me that it was because I had looked upon the
economic machine a little lazily, a little innocently that I had been awed and
terrific—and had been swept away with it into the Whirling Unbelief.
Then I stood quietly and calmly for days, for weeks, for years before it.
I watched it Go Round.
I then discovered under close observation that what had looked to me
like an economic machine was not an economic machine at all.
The modern economic world has innumerable mechanical elements in
it, but it is not an economic machine.
It is a biological engine.
It is the biology in it that conceives, desires, and determines the
machinery in it.
The most important parts of the machine are not the very mechanical
parts. They are the very biological parts.
The economic machine is full of made-people, but it does not make very
much difference about the made-people. I find that as a plain, practical
matter of fact I do not need to watch the made-people so very much to
understand the world, or to get ready for what is happening to it.
In prospecting for a world, I watch the born people.
I watch especially the people who have been born twice.
As one watches the way the world is going round one finds that what is
really making it go round, is not its being an economic machine, but its
being a biological engine.
Industrial reform is a branch of biology.
The main fact of biology as regards a man is that he can be born.
The main fact of biology as regards society—that is, the main fact of
social biology—is that a man can be born twice.
As long as a man is born to go with a father and a mother it is well
enough to have been born once, but the moment a man deals with other
people or with the world, he has to be born again.
This is the main fact about the biological engine we call the world.
The main fact about the Engine is the biology in it.
Every other fact for a man has to be worked out from this—that is: out
of being born once if one wants to belong merely to a father and mother,
and out of being born twice if one wants to belong to a world.
A man does not need to enter again into his mother's womb and come
out a child. He enters into the World's Womb and comes out a man.
The world is being placed to-day before our eyes in the hands of the men
who are born twice.
Not all men are cogs and wheels.
The first day I discovered this and believed this I went out into the
streets and looked into the faces of the men and the women and I looked up
at the factories and the churches and I was not afraid.
I do not deny that cogs and wheels are very common.
But I do not believe that an economic system or industrial scheme based
on the general principle of arranging a world for cogs and wheels would
work. I believe in arranging the world on the principle that there are now
and are going to be always enough men in it who are born, and enough who
are born twice to keep cogs and wheels doing the things men who have
been born twice, who have visions for worlds, want done, and to keep
people who prefer being cogs and wheels where they will work best and
where they will help the running gear of the planet most—by going round
and round, in the way they like—going round and round and round and
round.
But why is it, one cannot help wondering, that the moment a man rises
up suddenly in this modern world and bases or seeks to base an industrial or
social reform frankly on courage for other people, on believing in the
inherent and eternal power of men of changing their minds, of being put up
in new kinds and new sizes of men, in other words, on conversion—why is
it that clergymen, atheists, ethical societies, politicians, socialists will all
unite, will all flock together and descend upon him, shout and laugh him
away, bully him with dead millionaires, bad corporations and humdrum
business men, overawe him with mere history, argue him with statistics, and
thunder him with sermons out of the world—if he puts up a faint little
chirrup of hope that men can be converted?
It is not that the synods, ethical societies, anarchists, the bishops and
Bernard Shaw, have merely given up expecting individual men to be
converted. There would be a measure of plausibility in giving up on a few
particular men's being born again. It is worse than that. What seems to have
happened to nearly all the people who have schemes of industrial reform is
that they have really given up at one fell swoop a whole new generation's
being born again. It is going to be just like this one, they tell us, the new
generation—the same old things the same old foolish ways of deceiving the
world, that any child can see have not worked—Bernard Shaw and the
bishops whisper to us, are coming around and around again. They must be
planned for. All these young men of wealth about us who read the papers
and who are ashamed of their fathers are going to be just like their fathers.
The atheists, the socialists, and the single taxers, missionaries and
evangelists have given up their last loophole of hope in the new business
generation and they trust only to machines to save us, or to professors, or to
paper-treatises on eugenics!
And yet, after all, if we were going to start an absolute, decisive, and
practical scheme of eugenics to-morrow with whom would we begin, with
which particular people would we begin? We would have to go back,
Bernard Shaw and the bishops and all of us, to the New Testament—to the
old idea of being born again.
I have watched now these many years the professors, caught in their
culture-machines going round and round, and the priests caught in their
religion-machines going round and round, and the business men caught in
their economic machine, and I have heard them all saying over and over in
a kind of terrible sing-song day and night, the silly, lazy words of a glorious
old roue four thousand years ago, "The thing that hath been is the thing
which shall be, and that which is done is that which shall be done and there
is no new thing under the sun."
There are some of us who do not believe this. We defy the culture-
machines. We believe that even professors can be converted, can be
educated.
We defy the bishops. We believe that business men can be converted.
We defy the business men. We believe the bishops can be converted.
I speak for a thousand, thousand men.
In the hum and drive of the wheels and the great roar around me of the
Whirling Unbelief. I speak for these men—for all of us. We are not cogs
and wheels. We are men. We are born again ourselves. Other men can be
born again.
Men shall not look each other in the eyes wisely and nod their heads
and say that human nature will not change.
We will change it. If we cannot get but two or three together to change
it, then two or three by just being two or three and by daring to be two or
three, or even one if necessary shall change it.
The moment ninety million people in a great nation have welded out a
vision of the kind of man of wealth—the kind of employer they want, the
moment they set the millionaire in the vise of some great national
expectation, carve upon him firmly, implacably the will of the people, the
people will have the millionaire they want. If a nation really wants a great
man it invents him. We have hut to see we really want him, and that no
other machinery will work, and we will invent him.
Necessity is the mother of invention. Here in these United States sixty
years ago were we not all at work on a man named Abraham Lincoln? We
had been at work on him for years trying to make him into a Lincoln. He
could not have begun to be what he was without us, without the daily
thought, the responsibility, the tragical national hope and fear, the sense of
crisis in a great people. All these had been set to work on him, on making
him a Lincoln.
Lincoln would not have dared not to be a great man, an all-people man
with a whole mighty nation, with all those millions of watchful, believing
people laying their lives softly, silently, their very sons' lives in his hands.
He did not have the smallest possible chance from the day he was named
for President, to be a second-rate man or to betray a nation, or to back down
out of being himself. He had been filled night and day with the vision of a
great nation struggling, with the grim glory of it. He was free to make
mistakes for it, but there was no way he could have kept from being a true,
mighty, single-hearted man for it, if he had tried. We had clinched Lincoln
in 1862. He was caught fast in the vise of our hopes.
Perhaps it is because, at certain times in history, nations seem to be
siding with the worst in their public men and expecting the worst in them
that they get them.
If a crowd wants to be represented, wants to touch to the quick and
kindle the man in it, the man filled with vision, the man who is born again
into its desire, the crowd-man, they have but to surround him and
overshadow him. They will create him, in scorn and joy will they conceive
him, and before he knows who he is, they will bring him forth.
It would not be hard, I imagine, to be a great man, with a true, steadied,
colossal, single-heartedness, if one were caught fast in the vision, the
expectation of a great nation.
To be born again is simple with ninety million people to help. We have
all been born again in little things with a few people to help. We have been
swung over from little short motives to big, long-levered controlling ones.
We have known in a small way what Conversion is. We have seen how
naturally it works out in little things.
There is nothing new about it. There is not a man who does not know
what it is to get over a small motive. We have seen, when we looked back,
what it was that happened.
The way to get over a small motive is to let it get lost in a big one.
A man does not stop to pick up a penny or a million dollars when he is
running to save his life.
A man does not stop to pick up two pennies, or two thousand dollars, or
two million dollars when he is running to save ten thousand lives or running
to save ninety million lives, when he is running to save a city or a nation.
This is Conversion—entering into the World's Womb, the world's vision
or expectation and being born again.
It is not for nothing that I have seen the sun lifting up the faces of the
flowers, and crumbling the countenances of the hills. And I have seen music
stirring faintly in the bones of old men. And I have heard the dead
Beethoven singing in the feet of children.
And I have watched the Little Earth in its little round of seasons dancing
before the Lord.
And I have believed that music is wrought into all things, and that the
people I see about me have not one of them been left out.
I believe in sunshine and in hothouses. I believe in burning glasses. I
believe in focusing light into heat and heat into white fire, and turning white
fire into little flowing brooks of steel.
And I believe in focusing men upon men.
I believe in Conversion.
Of course it would all be different—focusing men upon men, if men
were cogs and wheels, or if the men they were focused on were made of
stones.
I stand and look at this stone and believe it is all rubber and whalebone
inside.
But what of it?
It does not get true.
While I am looking at a man and believing a certain thing about the
man, it gets true.
What is going on in my mind while I look at him effects actual
mechanical changes in him, affects the flow of blood in his veins. A look
colours him, whitens him, twists and turns the muscles and tissues in his
body. I draw lines upon his inmost being. I lay down a new face upon his
face. A moment after I look upon the man's face it has become, as it were,
or may have become, a new little landscape. I have seen a great country
opened up in him of what he might be like. While I look I have been
ushered softly, for a second, into the presence of a man who was not there
before.
Such things have happened.
Beatrice looked at Dante once. Ten silent centuries began singing.
A man named Stephen, one day, while he was dying, gave a look at a
man named Paul. Paul came away quietly and hewed out history for two
thousand years.
Chapter XVI.
Exception
Table of Contents
A bicycle, the other day, a little outside Paris as it was running along
quietly, lifted itself off the ground suddenly, and flew three yards and seven
inches.
There are nine million seven hundred and eighty nine thousand nine
hundred and seventy-nine bicycles that have not flown three yards and
seven inches.
But what of it? Why count them up? Why bother about them? The
important, conclusive, massive, irresistible, crushing, material fact is that
one bicycle has flown three yards seven inches.
The nine million seven hundred and eighty-nine thousand nine hundred
and seventy-nine bicycles that can not fly yet are negligible. So are nine out
of ten business firms.
If there is one exceptional man in modern industry who is running his
business in the right way and who has made a success of it and has proved
it—he may look visionary to class-socialists and to other people who decide
by measuring off masses of fact, and counting up rows of people and who
see what anybody can see, but he is after all in arranging our social
programme the only man of any material importance for us to consider. It
would be visionary to take the past, dump it around in front of one, and try
to make a future out of it. I do not deny what people tell me about
millionaires and about factory slaves. I have not mooned or lied or turned
away my face. I stand by time one live, right, implacable, irrevocable,
prolific exception. I stand by the one bicycle out of them all that has flown
three yards and seven inches. I lay out my program, conceive my world on
that. Piles of facts arranged in dead layers high against heaven, rows of
figures, miles of factory slaves, acres of cemeteries of dead millionaires,
going-by streetfuls of going-by people, shall not cow me.
My heart has been broken long enough by counting truths on my
fingers, by numbering grains of sand, men, and mountains, bombs, acorns
and marbles alike.
Which truth matters?
Which man is right?
Where is Nazareth?
Nazareth is our only really important town now. I will see what is going on
in Nazareth. On every subject that comes up, in every line of thought, I will
go to the city of implacable exceptions. All the inventors flock there—the
man with the one bicycle which flies, the one great industrial organizer, the
man with the man-machine, and the man—the great boy who carries new
great beautiful cities in his pocket like strings and nails and knives, they are
all there.
Nazareth is the city, the one mighty little city of the spirit where all the
really worth-while men wherever they may seem to be, all day, all night, do
their living.
Other cities may make things, in Nazareth they make worlds. One can
see a new one almost any day in Nazareth. Men go up and down the streets
there with their new worlds in their eyes.
Some of them have them almost in their hands or are looking down and
working on them.
It does not seem to me that any of us can make ourselves strong and fit
to lay out a sound program or vision for a world, who do not watch with
critical expectation and with fierce joy these men of Nazareth, who do not
take at least a little time off every day, in spirit, in Nazareth, and spend it in
watching bicycles fly three feet and seven inches. To watch these men, it
seems to me, is our one natural, economical way to get at essential facts, at
the set-one-side truths, at the exceptions that worlds and all-around
programs for worlds are made out of. To watch these men is the one way I
know not to be lost in great museums and storehouses of facts that do not
matter, in the streetfuls and skyscraperfuls of men that go by.
I regret to record that professors of political economy, social
philosophers, industrial big-wigs, presidents of boards of trade have not
been often met with on the streets of this silent, crowded, mighty, invisible
little town that rules the destinies of men.
Not during the last twenty years, but one is meeting them there to-day.
All these things that people are saying to me are mere history. I have
seen the one live exception. One telephone was enough. And one Galileo
was enough, with his little planet turning round and round, with all of us on
it who were obliged to agree with him about it. It kept turning round and
round with us until we did.
Chapter XVII.
Invention
Table of Contents
If I were a Noah and wanted to get a fair selection of people in London to
be saved to start a new world, I would go out and look over the crowd who
are watching the flying machines at Hendon, and select from them.
The Hendon crowd will not last forever. People who would be far less
desirable to start worlds with would gradually work their way in, but it is
only fair to say that these first few thousand men and women of all classes
who responded to the flying machine would be possessed, as any one could
see with a look, of special qualifications for running worlds.
I shall never quite forget the sense I had the first day of the crowd at
Hendon—those thousands of faces that had gathered up in some way out of
themselves a kind of huge crowd-face before one—that imperturbable
happiness on it and that look of hard sense and hope, half poetry, half
science ... it was like gazing at some portrait, or some vast countenance of
the future—watching the crowd at Hendon. Scores of times I looked away
from the machines swinging up past me into the sky to watch the faces of
the men and the women that belonged with sky machines; these men and
women who stood on the precipice of a new world of air, of sunshine, and
of darkness, and were not afraid.
One was in a little special civilization for the time being, all the new
people in it sorted out from the old ones. One felt a vast light-heartedness
all about. One was in the presence of the picked people who had come to
see this first vast initiative of man toward Space, toward the stars, the
people who had waited for four thousand years to see it; to see at last Little
Man (as it would seem to God) in this his first clumsy, beautiful childlike
tottering up the sky.
One was with the people on the planet who were the first to see the
practical, personal value, the market value, of all these huge idle fields of
air that go with planets. They were the first people to feel identified with the
air, to have courage for the air, the lovers of initiative, the men and women
that one felt might really get a new world if they wanted one and who
would know what to do with it when they got it.
The other day in London near Charing Cross, as the crowds were streaming
down the Strand, a heavy box joggled off over the end of a dray, crashed to
the pavement, flew open and sent twenty-four hundred pennies rolling
under the feet of the men and of the women and of the boys along the street.
Traffic was stopped and a thousand men and women and boys began
picking the pennies up. They all crowded up around the dray and put the
pennies in the box.
The next day the brewer to whom the pennies belonged had a letter in
the Times saying that not one of the twenty-four hundred pennies was
missing.
He closed his letter with a few moral remarks, announced that he had
sent the twenty-four hundred pennies as a kind of tribute to people—to
anybody Who Happened Along the Strand—to a Foundling Hospital.
The man who told me this (it was at a business men's dinner), told it
because he knew I was trying to believe pleasant things about human
nature. He thought he ought to encourage me.
I will not record the conversation, I merely record my humble opinion.
I think it would have been better to have had just a few of those pennies
in the Strand say seven or eight missing.
On Broadway probably eleven or twelve out of twenty-four hundred
would have been missing—I hope.
And I am not unhopeful about England, or about the Strand.
There are two ways to get relief from this story.
First, the brewer lied. There were fewer pennies stolen than he would
have thought, and when he figured it out and found just a few pennies
between him and a good story, he put the pennies in. And so the dear little
foundlings got them—the letter in the Times said. They were presented to
them, as it were, by the Good Little Boys in the Strand.
Second, somebody else put the pennies in, some person standing by
with a sense of humour, who knew the letters that people write to the Times
and the kind, serious, grave way English people read them. He put the
pennies grimly in at one end, then he waited grimly for the letter in the
Times to come out at the other.
Either of these theories would work very well and let the crowd off.
But if they are disproved to me, I have one more to fall back upon.
If the story is true and not a soul in that memorable crowd on that
memorable day stole a penny, it was because they had all, as it happened in
that particular crowd, stolen their pennies before, and got over it. It would
seem a great pity if there had not been some one boy with enough initiative
in him, enough faculty for moral experiment, to try stealing a penny just
once, to see what it would be like.
The same boy would have seen at once what it was like, tried feeling
ashamed of it promptly, and would never have had to bother to do it again.
He would have felt that penny burning in his pocket past cash drawers, past
banks, past bonds, until he became President of the United States.
At all events the last thing that I would be willing to believe is that
either America or England would be capable of producing a chance crowd
in the street that out of sheer laziness or moral thoughtlessness would not be
able to work up at least one boy in it who would have a sudden flash of
imagination about a penny rolling around a man's leg—if he picked it up
and—did not put it in the box.
The crowd in the Strand, of course, like any other real crowd, was a
stew of development, a huge laboratory of people. All stages of experience
were in it.
Some of the people in the crowd that day had a new refreshing thought,
when they saw those pennies rolling around everybody. They thought they
would try and see what stealing a penny was like. Then they did it.
Others in the crowd thought of stealing a penny too, and then they had
still another thought. They thought of not stealing it. And this second
thought interested them more.
Others did not think of stealing a penny at all because they had thought
of it so often before had got used to it and had got used to dismissing it.
Others thought of stealing a penny and then they thought how ashamed
they were of having thought of it. Others looked thoughtfully at the pennies
and thought they would wait for guineas.
But whatever it was or may have been that was taking place in that
crowd that day—they all thought.
And after all what is really important to a nation is that the people in it
—any chance crowd in a street in it should think. I confess I care very little
one way or the other about the pennies being saved, or about the brewer's
little touch of moral poetry, his idea that this particular crowd was solid
Sunday-school from one end to the other, all through. Whether it was a
crowd that thought of stealing a penny and did or did not, if the pennies
rolling around among their feet made them think, made them experiment,
played upon the initiative, the individuality or invention in them, the
personal self-control, the social responsibility in them, it was a crowd to be
proud of. And I am glad, for one, that the box of pennies was dumped in the
street.
I would like to see shillings tried next time.
Then guineas might be used.
A box of guineas dumped in the street would do more good than a box
of pennies because there are many people who would think more with the
guineas rolling around out of sight around a man's legs than they would
with a penny's doing it.
In this way a box of guineas would do more good.
Thousands of men and women that we have sent to India from this Western
World have been trying with Bibles, and good deeds, and kind faces, and
Sunday-schools to get the Hindoos to believe that it would not be a sin to
kill the rats and stop the bubonic plague.
Nothing came of it.
In due time General Booth-Tucker appeared on the scene.
He came too, of course, with a Bible and with his kind face like the
others, and of course, too, he went to Sunday-school regularly.
And while he was watching the bubonic plague sweeping up cities, he
tried too, like the others, to tell the people about a God who would not be
displeased if they killed the rats and stopped the plague.
But he could not convince anybody, or at best a few here and there.
The next thing that was known about General Booth-Tucker's work in
India was, that he had (still with his Bible, of course, and with his kind
look) slipped away and established in the south of France a factory for the
manufacture of gloves.
He then returned to his poor superstitious people in India who would
not believe him, and told them that he knew and knew absolutely that they
would not be punished for killing the rats, that the rats were not sacred, and
that he could prove it.
He offered the people so much apiece for the skins of the rats.
The poorest and most desperate of the natives then began killing the rats
secretly and bringing in the skins.
They waited for the wrath of Heaven to fall upon them. Nothing
happened, then they told others. The others are telling everybody.
General Booth-Tucker's factory to-day in the south of France is very
busy making money for the Salvation Army, turning out Christian gloves
for the West and turning out Christians or the beginnings of Christians for
the East, and the ancient, obstinate theological idea of the holiness of the
rats which the Hindoos have had is being ceaselessly, happily, and
stupendously, all day and all night, disproved.
Incidentally the little religious glove factory of General Booth-Tucker's
in the south of France is giving India the first serious and fair chance it has
ever had to stop being a pest house on the world, and to bring the bubonic
plague with its threat at a planet to an end.
General Booth-Tucker's Bible was just like anybody else's Bible. But
there must have been something about the way he read his Bible that made
him think of things. And there must have been something about his kind
look. He looked kindly at something in particular, and he was determined to
make that something in particular do. He had the rats, and he had the
gloves, and he had the Hindoo's—and he made them do, and before he
knew it (I doubt if he knows it now) he became a saviour or inventor.
In the big, desolate, darkened heart of a nation he had wedged in a God.
I wonder if General Booth-Tucker—that is, the original, very small edition
of General Booth-Tucker—had been in that memorable crowd, that
memorable day in the Strand when nobody (with a report that was heard
around the world) stole a penny—I wonder if General Booth-Tucker would
have been A Very Good Little Boy.
One of the pennies might have been missing.
I have no prejudice against the Very Good Little Boy. It is not his
goodness that is what is the matter with him. But I am very much afraid that
if there were any way of getting all the facts, it would not be hard to prove
categorically that what has been holding the world back the last twenty-five
years in its religious ideals, its business ethics, its liberty, candour, its
courage, and its skill in social engineering, is the Very Good Little Boy. He
may be comparatively harmless at first and before his moustache is grown,
but the moment he becomes a grown-up or the moment he sits on
committees with his quiet, careful, snug, proper fear of experiment, of bold
initiative, his disease of never running a risk, his moral anæmia, he blocks
all progress in churches, in legislatures, in directors' meetings, in trades
unions, in slums and May-fairs. One sees The Good Little Boys weighing
down everything the moment they are grown up.
They have all been brought up each with his one faint, polite little
hunger, his one ambition, his one pale downy desire in life, looking forward
day by day, year by year, to the fine frenzy, to the fierce joy of Never
Making a Mistake.
If I had been given the appointment and were about to set to work to-
morrow morning to make a new world, I would begin by getting together
all the people in this one that I knew, or had noticed anywhere, who seemed
to have in them the spirit of experiment. Any boy or girl or man or woman
that I had seen having the curiosity to try the different kinds and different
sizes of right and wrong, or that I had seen boldly and faithfully
experimenting with the beautiful and the ugly so that they really knew
about them for themselves—would be let in. I would put these people for a
time in a place by themselves where the people who want to keep them
from trying or learning, could not get at them.
Then I would let them try.
I would put the humdrum people in another place by themselves and let
them humdrum, the respectable people by themselves and let them
respectabilize.
Then after my try-world had tried, and got well started and the people in
it had finished off some things and knew what they wanted, I would allow
the humdrums and the respectabilities to be let in—to do what they were
told.
Doing what they are told is what they like. So they would be happy.
Of course doing what they are told is what is the matter with them. But
what is the matter with them would be useful.
And everybody would be happy.
When the Titanic went down a little while ago and those few quiet men on
deck began their duty in that soft, gracious moonlit night, of sorting out the
people who should die from the people who should live—if one was a
woman one could live. If one was a man one could die.
No one will quarrel with the division as the only possible or endurable
one that could have been made.
But if God himself could have made the division or some super-man
ship's officer who could have represented God, could have made it, it is not
hard to believe that a less superficial, a more profound and human
difference between people would have been used in sorting out the people
who should live from the people who should die than a difference in organs
of reproduction.
The women were saved first because the men were men and because it
was the way the men felt. It expressed the men who were on the deck that
night that the women should be saved first; it was the last chance they had
to express themselves like men and they wanted to do it.
But if God himself could have made the division with the immediate
and conclusive knowledge of who everybody was, of what they really were
in their hearts, and of what they and their children and their children's
children would do for the world if they lived no one would have quarrelled
with God for making what would have seemed at the moment, no doubt,
very unreasonable and ungallant and impossible-looking discriminations in
sorting out the people who should live from the people who should die.
Possibly even Man (using the word with a capital), acting from the point
of view of history and of the race and from the point of view of making a
kind of world where Titanic disasters could not happen, would have chosen
on the deck of the Titanic that night, very much the way God would.
From the point of view of Man there would have been no discrimination
in favour of a woman because she was a woman.
The last cry of the last man that the still listening life-boats heard
coming up out of the sea that night might have been the cry of the man who
had invented a ship that could not sink.
There would not have been a woman in a life-boat or a woman sinking
in the sea who would not have had this man saved before a woman.
If we could absolutely know all about the people, who are the people in
this world that we should want to have saved first, that we would want to
have taken to the life-boats and saved first at sea?
The women who are with child.
And the men who are about to have ideas.
And the men who man the boats for them, who in God's name and in the
name of a world protect its women who are with child, and its men who are
about to have ideas.
The world is different from the Titanic. We do not need to line up our
immortal fellow human beings, sort them out in a minute on a world and
say to them, "Go here and die!" "Go there and live!" We are able to spend
on a world at least an average of thirty-five years apiece on all these
immortal human beings we are with, in seeing what they are like, in
guessing on what they are for and on their relative value, and in deciding
where they belong and what a world can do with them.
We ought to do better in saving people on a world. We have more time
to think.
What would we try to do if we took the time to think? Would there be
any way of fixing upon an order for saving people on a world? What would
be the most noble, the most universal, the most Godlike and democratic
schedule for souls to be saved on—on a world?
I think the man that would save the most other people should be saved
first. It would not be democratic to save an ordinary man, a man who could
just save himself, just think for himself, when saving the man next to him
instead would be saving a man who would save a thousand ordinary men,
or men who have gifts for thinking only of themselves.
Of course one man who thinks merely of himself is as good as another
man who thinks merely of himself, but from the point of view of a
democracy every common man has an inalienable right—the right to have
the man who saves common men saved first.
And the moment we get in this world, our first democracy, the moment
the common man really believes in democracy, this aristocracy or people
who save others (the common man himself will see to it) will be saved first.
He will make mistakes in applying the principle of democracy, that is in
collecting his aristocracies, his strategic men, his linchpins of society, but
he will believe in the principle all through. It will be not merely in his brain,
but in his instincts, in his unconscious hero-worship, in his sinews and his
bones, and it will stir in his blood, that some men should be saved before
others.
But if the world is not a Titanic, and if we have on the average thirty-
five years apiece to decide about men on a world and put them where they
belong, it might not be amiss to try to unite for the time being on a few
fundamental principles. What would seem to us to be a few fundamental
principles for the act of world-assimilation, that vast, slow, unconscious
crowd-process, that peristaltic action of society of gathering up and stowing
away men—all these little numberless cells of humanity where they
belong?
No one cell can have much to say about it. But we can watch.
And as we watch it seems to us that men may be said to be dividing
themselves roughly and flowingly at all times into three great streams or
classes.
They are either Inventors, or they are Artists, or they are Hewers.
Of course in classifying men it is necessary to bear in mind that their
getting out of their classifications is what the classifications are for.
And it is also necessary to bear in mind that men can only be classified
with regard to their emphasis and may belong in one class in regard to one
thing and in another class with regard to another, but in any particular place,
or at any particular time a man is doing a thing in this world, he is probably
for the time being, while he is doing it, doing it as an Inventor (or genius),
as an Artist (or organizer), or as a Hewer. Most men, it must be said, settle
down in their classifications. They are very apt to decide for life whether
they are Inventors or Artists or Hewers.
But as has been said before, being on a world and not on a Titanic, we
have time to think.
On what principles could we make out a schedule or inventory of
human nature, and decide on world-values in men?
When I was a boy I played in the hollow of a great butternut tree—the
one my mother was married under. When I was in college I used to go back
to it. I used to wonder a little that it was still there. When we had all grown
up we all came back and got together under it one happy day and there it
still stood, its great arms from out of the sky bent over lovers and over
children on its little island, its wide river singing round it, still that glorious
old hollow in it, full of dreams and childhood and mystery, and that old
sudden sunshine in it through the knots like portholes ... then we stood there
all of us together. And the mother watched her daughter married under it.
I can remember many days standing beneath it as a small boy (my small
insides full of butternuts, a thousand more butternuts up on the tree), and I
used to look up in its branches and wonder about it, wonder how it could
keep on so with its butternuts and with its leaves, with its winters and with
its summers, its cool shadows and sunshines, still being a butternut tree,
with that huge hollow in it.
I have learned since that if a few ounces or whittlings of wood in a tree
are chipped out in a ring around it under the bark, cords of wood in the
limbs all up across the sky would die in a week—if one chips out those few
little ounces of wood.
Cords of wood can be taken out of the inside of the tree and it will not
mind.
It is that little half-inch rim of the tree where the juice runs up to the sun
that makes the tree alive or dead.
The part that must be saved first and provided for first is that slippery
little shiny streak under the bark.
One could dig out a huge brush-heap of roots and the tree would live.
One could pick off millions of leaves, could cut cords of branches out of it,
or one could make long hollows up to the sun, tubes to the sky out of trees,
and they would live, if one still managed to save those little delicate pipe
lines for Sap, running up and running down, day and night, night and day,
between the light in heaven and the darkness in the ground.
Perhaps Men are valuable in proportion as it would be difficult to
produce promptly other men to perform their functions, or to take their
places.
If we cut away in society men of genius, leaves, and blossoms, in trees,
men who reach down Heaven to us, they grow out again.
If we cut away in society great masses of roots, common men who hew
out the earth in the ground and get earth ready to be heaved up to the sky—
the roots grow out again.
But if we cut a little faint rim around it of artists, of inventive men-
controllers, of the Sap-conductors, the men who make the Hewers run up to
the sky and who make the geniuses come down to the ground, the men who
run the tree together, who out of dark earth and bright sunshine build it
softly—if we destroy these, this little rim of great men or men who save
others, a totally new tree has to be begun.
It is the essence of a democracy to acknowledge that some men for the
time being are more important in it than others, and that these men,
whosoever they are, in whatever order of society they may be—poor, rich,
famous, obscure—these men who think for others, who save others and
invent others, who make it possible for others to invent themselves, these
men shall be saved first.
One always thinks at first that one would like to make a diagram of human
nature. It would be neat and convenient.
Then one discovers that no diagram one can make of human nature—
unless one makes what might be called a kind of squirming diagram will
really work.
Then one tries to imagine what a flowing diagram would be like.
Then it occurs to one, one has seen a flowing diagram.
A Tree is a flowing diagram.
So I am putting down on this page for what it may be worth, what I
have called A Family Tree of Folks.
Read across:
INVENTORS
ARTISTS
HEWERS
Inventors
Organizers
Labourers
Imagination
Applied
Imagination
Tool or Mechanism
Fecundity
Control
Activity
Seer
Poet
Actor
The Man who
Generalizes
The Man who Sees
the General in the
Particular
Action
The Deeper
Permanent
Significance
The Immediate
Significance or
Meaning
Hewing
Light
Applied Light or
Heat
Applied Heat or
Motion
Stevenson and
Watt
James J. Hill
Railway Hands
Creating
Creative Selecting
Hewing
The Democrat
The Aristocrat or
Crowdman
The Crowd
Gods
Heroes
Men
Centrifugal Power
Equilibrium
Centripetal Power
The Whirl-Out
People
The Centre People
The Whirl-In
People
Alexander Graham
Bell
Telephone-Vail
Hands
Architect
Contractor
Carpenter
Genius
Artist
Workmen
Columbus
Columbus
Isabella and the
sailors
The Prospector
The Engineer
Scoopers, Grabbers
(in mind or body),
Hewers
David the poet
David the king
David the soldier
Shakespeare
Shakespeare
Shakespeare
Chapter XVIII.
The Man Who Pulls the World Together
Table of Contents
The typical mighty man or man of valour in our modern life is the
Organizer or Artist.
If a man has succeeded in being a great organizer, it is because he has
succeeded in organizing himself.
A man who has organized himself is a man who has built a personality.
The main fact about a man who has succeeded in being an organized man or
personality is, that he has ordered himself around.
Naturally, when other people have to be ordered around, being full-
head-on in the habit of ordering, even ordering himself, the hardest feat of
all, he is the man who has to be picked out to order other people. As a rule
the man who orders himself around successfully, who makes his whole
nature or all parts of himself work together, does it because he takes pains
to find out who he is and what he is like. If he orders other men successfully
and makes them work together it is because he knows what they are like.
A man knows what other people are like and bow they feel by having
times of being a little like them and by being a big, latent all-possible, all-
round kind of man.
Leadership follows.
Modern business consists in getting Inventors' minds and Hewers'
minds to work together. The ruler of modern business is the man who by
experience or imagination is half an Inventor himself, and half a Hewer
himself. He knows how inventing feels and how hewing feels.
He has a southern exposure toward Hewers and makes Hewers feel
identified with him. He has what might be called an eastern exposure
toward men of genius, understands the inventive temperament, has the kind
of personality that evokes inventiveness in others.
Incidentally he has what might be called a northern exposure which
keeps him scientific, cool, and close to the spirit of facts.
And there has to be something very like a western exposure in him too,
a touch of the homely seer, a habit of having reflections and afterglows, a
sense of principles, and of the philosophy of men and things.
If I were to try to sum up all these qualities in a man and call it by one
name, I would call it Glorified-commonsense.
If I were asked to define Glorified-commonsense I would say it is a
glory which works. It belongs to the man who has a vision or coinage for
others because he sees them as they are, and sees how the glory buried in
them (i.e., the inspiration or source of hard work in them) can be got out.
Everywhere that the Artist in business, or Organizer, with his Inventors
on one side of him and his Hewers on the other, can be seen to-day
competing with the man who has the mere millionaire or owning type of
mind, he is crowding him from the market.
It is because he understands how Inventors and Hewers feel and what
they think and when he turns on Inventors he makes them invent and when
he turns on Hewers he makes them hew.
The Hewer often thinks because he is rich or because he owns a
business, that he can take the place of the artist, but he can be seen every
day in every business around us, being passed relentlessly out of power
because he cannot make his Inventors invent and cannot make his Hewers
hew as well as some other man. The moment his Inventors and Hewers
think of him, hear about him, or have any dealing with him—with the mere
millionaire, the mere owner kind of person, his Inventors invent as little as
they can, and his Hewers hew as softly as they dare.
This is called the Modern Industrial Problem.
And no man but the artist, the man with the inventing and the hewing
spirit both in him, who daily puts the inventing spirit and the hewing spirit
together in himself, can get it together in others.
Only the man who has kept and saved both the inventing and hewing
spirit in himself can save it in others—can be a saviour or artist.
Chapter XIX.
The Man Who Stands By
Table of Contents
I have been trying to say in this book that goodness in daily life, or in
business, in common world-running or world housekeeping, is by an
implacable crowd-process working slowly out of the hands of the wrong
men into the hands of the right ones.
If this is not true, I am ready to declare myself as a last resort, in favour
of a strike.
There is only one strike that would be practical.
I would declare for a strike of the saviours.
By a saviour I do not mean a man who stoops down to me and saves me. A
saviour to me is a man who stands by and lets me save myself.
I am afraid we cannot expect much of men who can bear the idea of
being saved by other people, or by saviours who have a stooping feeling.
I rejoice daily in the spirit of our modern laboring men, in that holy
defiance in their eyes, in the way they will not say "please" to their
employers and announce that they will save themselves.
The only saviour who can do things for labouring men is the saviour
who proposes to do things with them, who stands by, who helps to keep
oppressors and stooping saviours off—who sees that they have a fair chance
and room to save themselves.
I define a true saviour as a man who is trying to save himself.
It was because Christ, Savonarola, and John Bunyan were all trying to
save themselves that it ever so much as occurred to them to save worlds.
Saving a world was the only way to do it.
The Cross was Christ's final stand for his own companionableness, his
stand for being like other people, for having other people to share his life
with, his faith in others and his joy in the world.
The world was saved incidentally when Christ died on the Cross. He
wanted to live more abundantly—and he had to have certain sorts of people
to live more abundantly with. He did not want to live unless he could live
more abundantly.
We live in a world in which inventors want to die if they cannot invent
and in which Hewers want to die if they cannot hew.
I am not proud. I am willing to be saved. Any saviour may save me if he
wants to, if his saving me is a part of his saving himself.
If the inventor saves me and saves us all because he wants to be in a
world where an inventor can invent, wants some one to invent to; if the
artist saves me because it is part of his worship of God to have me saved
and wants to use me every day to rejoice about the world with—if the
Hewer comes over and hews out a place in the world for me because he
wants to hew, I am willing.
All that I demand is, that if a man take the liberty of being a saviour to
me that he refrain from stooping, that he come up to me and save me like a
man, that he stand before me and tell me that here is something that we, he
and I, shoulder to shoulder, can do, something that neither of us could do
alone. Then he will fall to with me and I will fall to with him, and we will
do it.
This is what I mean by a saviour.
Chapter XX.
The Strike of the Saviours
Table of Contents
A factory in —— some ten years ago employed one hundred men. Three of
these men were in the office and ninety-seven were hands in the works. To-
day this same factory which is doing a very much larger business is still
employing one hundred men, but thirty of the men are employed in the
office and seventy in the works.
Ten years, ago to put it in other words, the factory provided places for
one artist or manager and two inventors and places for ninety-seven
Hewers.
To-day the factory has made room for thirty inventors, one manager and
twenty-nine men who spend their entire time in thinking of things that will
help the Hewers hew.
It has seventy Hewers who are helping the Inventors invent by hewing
three times as hard and three times as skilfully or three times as much as
without the Inventors to help them, they had dreamed they could hew
before.
The Artist or Organizer who made this change in the factory found that
among the ninety-seven Hewers that were employed a number of Hewers
were hewing very poorly, because though hewing was the best they could
do, they could not even hew. He found certain others who were hewing
poorly because they were not Hewers, but Inventors. These he set to work
—some of them inventing in the office.
On closer examination the two Inventors in the office were found to be
not Inventors at all. One of them was a fine Hewer who liked to hew and
who hated inventing and the other was merely a rich Hewer who was an
owner in the business who saw suddenly that he would have to stop
inventing and stop very soon if he wanted the business to make any more
money.
There are four things that the Artist has to do with a factory like this
before he can make it efficient.
Each of these things is an art. One art is the art of compelling the mere
owner, the man with the merely hewing mind, to confine himself to the one
thing he knows how to do, namely to shovelling, to shovelling his money in
when and where he was told it was needed, and to shovelling his money out
when it has been made for him.
The art of compelling a mere owner to know his place, of keeping him
shovelling money in and shovelling money out silently and modestly,
consists as a rule in having the Artist or Organizer tell him that unless the
business is placed completely in his hands he will not undertake to run it.
This is the first art. The second art consists in having an understanding
with the inventors that they will invent ways of helping the Hewers hew.
The third art consists in having an understanding with the Hewers that
they will accept the help of the Inventors and hew with it. The fourth art is
the art of representing the consumer with the Hewer and with the Inventor
and with the Owner and seeing that he shares in the benefits of all
economies and improvements.
These are all human arts and turn on the power in a man of being a true
artist, of being a man-inventor, a man-developer and a man-mixer, daily
taking part of himself and using these parts in putting other men together.
These organizers or artists, being the men who see how—are the men
who are not afraid.
Chapter XXI.
The League of the Men Who are Not Afraid
Table of Contents
If all the unbrained money in the world to-day and the men that go with it
could be isolated, could be taken by men of imagination and put in a few
ships and sent off to an island in the sea—if New York and London and all
the other important places could be left in the hands of the men who have
imagination, poor and rich, they would soon have the world in shape to
make the men with merely owning minds, the mere owners off on their
island, beg to come back to it, to be allowed to have a share in it on any
terms.
In order to be fair, of course, their island would have to be a furnished
island—mines, woods, and everything they could want. It would become a
kind of brute wilderness or desert in twenty-five years. We could, now and
then, some of us, take happy little trips, go out and look them over on their
little furnished island. It would do us good to watch them—these men with
merely owning or holding-on minds, really noticing at last how unimportant
they are.
But it is not necessary to resort to a furnished island as a device, as a
mirror for making mere millionaires see themselves.
This is a thing that could be done for millionaires now, most of them,
here just where they are.
All that is necessary is to have the brains of the world so organized that
the millionaires who expect merely because they are millionaires to be run
after by brains, cannot get any brains to run after them.
I am in favour of organizing the brains of the world into a trades union.
One of the next things that is going to happen is that the managing and
creating minds of the world to-day are going to organize, are going to see
suddenly their real power and use it. The brains are about to have, as labour
and capital already have, a class consciousness.
I would not claim that there is going to be an international strike of the
brains of the world, but it will not be long before the managing class as a
class will be organized so that they can strike if they want to.
The Artists or Organizers and Managers of business will not need
probably, in order to accomplish their purpose, to strike against the
uncreative millionaires. They will make a stand (which the best of them
have already made now) for the balance of power in any business that they
furnish their brains to. The brains that create the profits for the owners and
that create the labour for the labourers, will make terms for their brains and
will withhold their brains if necessary to this end. But it is far more likely
that they will accomplish their purpose sooner by using their brains for the
millionaires and for the labourers—by coöperating with the millionaires and
labourers than they will by striking against them or keeping their brains
back.
They are in a position to make the millionaires see how little money
they can make without them even in a few days. They will let them try. A
very little trying will prove it.
Where hand labour would have to strike for weeks and months to prove
its value, brain labour would have to strike hours and days.
This is what is going to be done in modern business in one business at a
time, the brains insisting in each firm upon full control.
Then, of course, the firms that have the brains in most full control will
drive the firms in which brains are in less control out of competition.
Then brains will spread from one business to another. The Managers,
Artists, and Organizers of the world will have formed at last a Brain
Syndicate, and they will put themselves in a position to determine in their
own interests and in the interests of society at large the terms on which all
men—all men who have no brains to put with their money—shall be
allowed to have the use of theirs. They will monopolize the brain supply of
the world.
Then they will act. Under our present régime money hires men; under
the régime of the Brain Syndicate men will hire money. Money—i.e., saved
up or canned labour, is going to be hired by Managers, Organizers, and
Engineers with as much discrimination and with as deep a study of its
efficiency, as new labour is hired. The millionaires are going to be seen
standing with their money bags and their little hats in their hands like office
boys asking for positions for their money before the doors of the really
serious and important men, the men who toil out the ideas and the ways and
the means of carrying out ideas—the men who do the real work of the
world, who see things that they want and see how to get them—the men of
imagination, the inventors of ideas, organizers of facts, generals and
engineers in human nature.
It is these men who are going to allow people who merely have
thoughtless labour and people who merely have thoughtless money to be let
in with them. The world's quarrel with the rich man is not his being a rich
man, but his being rich without brains, and its quarrel with the poor
labourer is not his being a poor labourer, but his being a poor labourer
without brains. The only way that either of these men can have a chance to
be of any value is in letting themselves be used by the man who will supply
them with what they lack. They will try to get this man to see if he cannot
think of some way of getting some good out of them for themselves, and for
others.
We have a Frederick Taylor for furnishing brains to labour.
We are going to have a Frederick Taylor to attend to the brain-supply of
millionaires, to idea-outfits for directors.
Every big firm is going to have a large group of specialists working on
the problem of how to make millionaires—its own particular millionaires
think, devising ways of keeping idle and thoughtless capitalists out of the
way. If the experts fail in making millionaires think, they may be succeeded
by experts in getting rid of them and in finding thoughtful money, possibly
made up of many small sums, to take their place.
The real question the Artist or Organizer is going to ask about any man
with capital will be, "Is it the man who is making the money valuable and
important or is it the money that is making this man important for the time
being and a little noticeable or important-looking?"
The only really serious question we have to face about money to-day is
the unimportance of the men who have it. The Hewers or Scoopers, or
Grabbers, who have assumed the places of the Artist and the Inventor
because they have the money, are about to be crowded over to the silent,
modest back seats in directors' meetings. If they want their profits, they
must give up their votes. They are going to be snubbed. They are going to
beg to be noticed. The preferred stock or voting stock will be kept entirely
in the hands of the men of working imagination, of clear-headedness about
things that are not quite seen, the things that constitute the true values in
any business situation, the men who have the sense of the way things work
and of the way they will have to go.
Mere millionaires who do not know their place in a great business will
be crowded into small ones. They will be confronted by the organized
refusal of men with brains to work for their inferiors, to be under control of
men of second-rate order. Men with mere owning and grabbing minds will
only be able to find men as stupid as they are to invest and manage their
money for them. In a really big creative business their only chance will be
cash and silence. They will be very glad at last to get in on any terms, if the
men of brains will let their money edge into their business without votes
and be carried along with it as a favour.
It is because things are not like this now, that we have an industrial
problem.
Managers who have already hired labour as a matter of course are going
to hire the kind of capital they like, the kind of capital that thinks and that
can work with thinking men.
There will gradually evolve a general recognition in business on the part
of men who run it and on the part of managers, of the moral or human value
of money. The successful manager is no longer going to grab thoughtlessly
at any old, idle, foolish pot of money that may be offered to him. He is
going to study the man who goes with it, see how he will vote and see
whether he knows his place, whether he is a Hewer, for instance, who
thinks he is an Inventor. Does he or does he not know which he is, an
Inventor, an Artist, or a Hewer?
Capitalists will expect as a matter of course to be looked over and to be
hired in a great business enterprise as carefully as labourers are being hired
now.
The moment it is generally realized that the managers of every big
modern business have become as particular about letting in the right kind of
directors as they have been before about letting in the right kind of labour,
we will stop having an upside-down business world.
An upside-down business world is one in which any man who has
money thinks he can be a director almost anywhere, a world in which on
every hand we find managers who are not touching the imagination of the
public and getting it to buy, and not touching the imagination of labour and
getting it to work, because they are not free to carry out their ideas without
submitting them to incompetent and scared owners.
The incompetent and scared owners—the men who cannot think—are
about to be shut out. Then they will be compelled to hire incompetent and
scared managers. Then they will lose their money. Then the world will slip
out of their hands.
The problem of modern industry is to be not the distribution of the
money supply, but the distribution of the man-supply.
Money follows men.
Free men. Free money.
Book Five.
Good News and Hard Work
Table of Contents
TO ANYBODY
"I know that all men ever born are also my brothers....
Limitless leaves too, stiff or drooping in the fields,
And brown ants in the little wells beneath them
And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heaped stones, elders, mulleins
and poke weed."
A Child said, "What is grass?" fetching it to me with full hands.
How could I answer the Child?
"I want to trust the sky and the grass!
I want to believe the songs I hear from the fenceposts!
Why should a maple-bud mislead me?"
Part One.
News and Labour
Table of Contents
A big New England factory, not long ago, wanted to get nearer its raw
material and moved to Georgia.
All the machine considerations, better water-power, cheaper labour,
smaller freight bills, and new markets had argued for moving to Georgia.
Long rows of new mills were built and thousands of negroes were
moved in and thousands of shanties were put up, and the men and the
women stood between the wheels. And the wheels turned.
There was not a thing that had not been thought of except the men and
women that stood between the wheels.
The men and women that stood between the wheels were, for the most
part, strong and hearty persons and they never looked anxious or abused
and did as they were told.
And when Saturday night came, crowds of them with their black faces,
of the men and of the women, of the boys and girls, might have been seen
filing out of the works with their week's wages.
Monday morning a few of them dribbled back. There were enough who
would come to run three mills. All the others in the long row of mills were
silent. Tuesday morning, Number Four started up, Wednesday, Number
Five. By Thursday noon they were all going.
The same thing happened the week after, and the week after, and the
week after that.
The management tried everything they could think of with their people,
scolding, discharging, making their work harder, making their work easier,
paying them less, paying them more, two Baptist ministers and even a little
Roman Catholic Church.
As long as the negroes saw enough to eat for three days, they would not
work.
It began to look as if the mills would have to move back to
Massachusetts, where people looked anxious and where people felt poor,
got up at 5 A.M. Mondays and worked.
Suddenly one day, the son of one of the owners, a very new-looking
young man who had never seen a business college, and who had run
through Harvard almost without looking at a book, and who really did not
seem to know or to care anything about anything—except folks—appeared
on the scene with orders from his father that he be set to work.
The manager could not imagine what to do with him at first, but finally,
being a boy who made people like him more than they ought to, he found
himself placed in charge of the Company Store. The company owned the
village, and the Company Store, which had been treated as a mere necessity
in the lonely village, had been located, or rather dumped, at the time, into a
building with rows of little house-windows in it, a kind of extra storehouse
on the premises.
The first thing the young man did was to stove four holes in the
building, all along the front and around the corners on the two sides, and
put in four big plate-glass windows. The store was mysteriously closed up
in front for a few days to do this, and no one could see what was happening,
and the negroes slunk around into a back room to buy their meal and
molasses. And finally one morning, one Sunday morning, the store opened
up bravely and flew open in front.
The windows on the right contained three big purple hats with blue
feathers, and some pink parasols.
The windows on the left were full of white waistcoats, silver-headed
canes, patent-leather shoes and other things to live up to.
Monday morning more of the mills were running than usual.
Later in the week there appeared in the windows melodions,
phonographs, big gilt family Bibles, bread machines, sewing machines, and
Morris chairs. Only a few hands took their Mondays off after this.
All the mills began running all the week.
Of course there are better things to live for than purple hats and blue
feathers, and silver-headed canes, and patent leather shoes. But if people
can be got to live six days ahead, or thirty days, or sixty days ahead, instead
of three days ahead, by purple hats and blue feathers and white waistcoats,
and if it is necessary to use purple hats and blue feathers to start people
thinking in months instead of minutes, or to budge them over to where they
can have a touch of idealism or of religion or of living beyond the moment,
I say for one, with all my heart, "God bless purple hats and blue feathers!"
The great problem of modern charity, the one society is largely occupied
with to-day, is: "What is there that we can possibly do for our millionaires?"
The next thing Society is going to do, perhaps, is to design and set up
purple hats with blue feathers for millionaires.
The moment our millionaires have placed before them something to live
for, a few real, live, satisfying ideals, or splendid lasting things they can do,
things that everybody else would want to do, and that everybody else would
envy them for doing, it will bore them to run a great business merely to
make money. They will find it more interesting, harder, and calling for
greater genius, to be great and capable employers. When our millionaires
once begin to enter into competition with one another in being the greatest
and most successful employers of labour on earth, our industrial wars will
cease.
Millionaires who get as much work out of their employees as they dare,
and pay them as little as they can, and who give the public as small values
as they dare, and take as much money as they can, only do such stupid,
humdrum, conventional things because they are bored, because they cannot
really think of anything to live for.
Labourers whose daily, hourly occupation consists in seeing how much
less work a day than they ought to do, they can do, and how much more
money they can get out of their employers than they earn, only do such
things because they are tired or bored and discouraged, and because they
cannot think of anything that is truly big and fine and worth working for.
The industrial question is not an economic question. It is a question of
supplying a nation with ideals. It is a problem which only an American
National Ideal Supply Company could hope to handle. The very first
moment three or four purple hats with blue feathers for millionaires and for
labourers have been found and set up in the great show window of the
world, the industrial unrest of this century begins to end.
As I went by, one day not long ago, I saw two small boys playing house—
marking off rooms—sitting-rooms and bedrooms, with rows of stones on
the ground. When I came up they had just taken hold of a big stone they
wanted to lift over into line a little. They were tugging on it hopefully and
with very red faces, and it did not budge. I picked up a small beam about
five feet long on my side of the road, that I thought would do for a crowbar,
stepped over to the boys, fixed a fulcrum for them, and went on with my
walk. When I came back after my walk that night to the place where the
boys had been playing, I found the boys had given up working on their
house. And as I looked about, every big stone for yards around—every one
that was the right size—seemed subtly out of place. The top of the stone
wall, too, was very crooked.
They had given up playing house and had played crowbar all day
instead.
I should think it would have been a rather wonderful day, those boys'
first day, seven or eight hours of it spent, with just a little time off for
luncheon, in seeing how a crowbar worked!
I have forgotten just how much larger part of a ton one inch more on a
crowbar lifts. I never know figures very well. But I know people and I
know that a man with only three day's worth of things ahead to live for does
not get one hundredth part of the purchase power on what he is doing that
the man gets who works with thirty days ahead of things to live for, all of
them nerving him up, keeping him in training, and inspiring him. And I
know that the man who does his work with a longer lever still, with thirty or
forty years worth' of things he wants, all crowding in upon him and backing
him up, can lift things so easily, so even jauntily, sometimes, that he seems
to many of us sometimes to be a new size and a new kind of man.
The general conventional idea of business is, that if you give a man more
wages to work for, he will work more, but of course if a business man has
the brains, knows how to fire up an employee, knows how to give him
something or suggest something in his life that will make him want to live
twenty times as much, it would not only be cheaper, but it would work
better than paying him twice as much wages.
Efficiency is based on news. Put before a man's life twenty times as
much to live for and to work for, and he will do at least, well—twice as
much work.
If a man has a big man's thing or object in view, he can do three times as
much work. If the little thing he has to do, and keep doing, is seen daily by
him as a part of a big thing, the power and drive of the big thing is in it, the
little thing becomes the big thing, seems big while he is doing it every
minute. It makes it easier to do it because it seems big.
The little man becomes a big man.
From the plain, practical point of view, it is the idealist in business, the
shrewd, accurate, patient idealist in modern business who is the man of
economic sense. The employer who can put out ideals in front of his people,
who can make his people efficient with the least expense, is the employer
who has the most economic sense.
The employer who is a master at supplying motives to people, who
manages to cut down through to the quick in his employees, to the daily
motives, to the hourly ideals, the hourly expectations with which they work,
is the employer who already takes the lead, who is already setting the pace
in the twentieth-century business world.
Possibly you have noticed this trait in the great employers or, at least, in
the great managers of employers?
You are going, for instance, through a confectionery shop. As you move
down the long aisles of candy machines you hear the clock strike eleven.
Suddenly music starts up all around you and before your eyes four hundred
girls swing off into each other's arms. They dance between their machines
five minutes, and then, demurely, they drop back to their work. You see
them sitting quietly in long white rows, folding up sweet-meats with
flushed and glowing cheeks.
Is this sentiment or is it cold businesslike efficiency?
The more sentiment there is in it, I think, the more efficient it is and the
better it works.
"Business is not business."
One need not quarrel about words, but certainly, whatever else business
is, it is not business. It would be closer to the facts to call business an art or
a religion, a kind of homely, inspired, applied piety, based upon gifts in men
which are essentially religious gifts; the power of communion in the human
heart, the genius for cultivating companionship, of getting people to
understand you and understand one another and do team work. The bed-
rock, the hard pan of business success lies in the fundamental, daily
conviction—the personal habit in a man of looking upon business as a hard,
accurate, closely studied, shrewd human art, a science of mutual
expectation.
I am not saying that I would favour all employers of young women
having them, to-morrow morning at eleven o'clock, swing off into each
other's arms and dance for five minutes. The value of the dance in this
particular case was that the Firm thought of the dancing itself and was
always doing things like it, that everybody knew that the Firm, up in its
glass office, felt glad, joined in the dance in spirit, enjoyed seeing the girls
caught up for five minutes in the joy and swing of a big happy world full of
sunshine and music outside, full of buoyant and gentle things, of ideals
around them which belonged to them and of which they and their lives were
a part.
When we admit that business success to-day turns or is beginning to
turn on a man's power of getting work out of people, we admit that a man's
power of getting work out of people, his business efficiency, turns on his
power of supplying his people with ideals.
Ideals are news.
You come on a man who thinks he is out of breath and that he cannot
possibly run. You happen to be able to tell him that some dynamite in the
quarry across the road is going to blow the side of the hill out in forty-five
seconds and he will run like a gazelle.
You tell a man the news, the true news that his employees are literally
and honestly finding increased pay or promotion, either in their own
establishment or elsewhere for every man they employ, as fast as he makes
himself fit, and you have created a man three times his own size before your
own eyes, all in a minute. And he begins working for you like a man three
times his own size, and not because he is getting more for it, but because he
suddenly believes in you, suddenly believes in the world and in the human
race he belongs to.
To make a man work, say something to him or do something to him
which will make him swing his hat for humanity, and give three cheers (like
a meeting of workmen the other day): "Three cheers for God!"
There is a well-known firm in England which has the best labour of its
kind in the world, because the moment the Firm finds that a man's skill has
reached the uttermost point in his work, where it would be to the Firm's
immediate interests to keep him and where the Firm could keep on making
money out of him and where the man could not keep on growing, they have
a way of stepping up to such a man (and such things happen every few
days), and telling him that he ought to go elsewhere, finding him a better
place and sending him to it. This is a regular system and highly organized.
The factory is known or looked upon as a big family or school. There are
hundreds of young men and young women who, in order to get in and get
started, and merely be on the premises of such a factory, would offer to
work for the firm for nothing. The Factory, to them, is like a great Gate on
the World.
It is its ideals that have made the factory a great gate on the World.
And ideals are news. Ideals are news to a man about himself. News to a
man about himself and about what he can be, is gospel.
And a factory with men at the top who have the brains about human
nature to do things like this, men who can tell people news about
themselves, all day, every day, all the week, like a church—let such a
factory, I say, for one, have a steeple with chimes in it, if it wants to, and be
counted with the other churches!
People have a fashion of speaking of a man's ideals in a kind of weak,
pale way, as if ideals were clouds, done in water-colour by schoolgirls, as if
they were pretty, innocent things, instead of being fierce, splendid, terrific
energies, victorious, irrevocable in human history, trampling the earth like
unicorns, breathing wonder, deaths, births upon the world, carrying
everything before them, everywhere they go. These are ideals! This may not
be the way ideals work in a moment or in a year, but it is the way they work
in history, and it is the way they make a man feel when he is working on
them. It is what they are for, to make him feel like this, when he is working
on them. With the men who are most alive and who live the longest, the
men who live farther ahead and think in longer periods of time, the energies
in ideals function as an everyday matter of course.
I wish people would speak oftener of a man's motives, what he lives for,
as his motive powers. They generally speak of motives in a man as if they
were a mere kind of dead chart or spiritual geography in him, or clock-hand
on him or map of his soul. The motives and desires in a man are the motors
or engines in him, the central power house in a man, the thing in him that
makes him go.
All a man has to do to live suddenly and unexpectedly a big life is to
have suddenly a big motive.
Anybody who has ever tried, for five minutes, a big motive, ever tried
working a little happiness for other people into what he is doing for himself,
for instance, if he stopped to think about it and how it worked and how
happy it made him himself, would never do anything in any other way all
his life. It is the big motives that are efficient.
Part Two.
News and Money
Table of Contents
I think it was Sir William Lever who remarked (but I have heard in the last
two years so many pearls dropped from the lips of millionaires that I am not
quite sure) that the way to tell a millionaire, when one saw one, was by his
lack of ready money. He added that perhaps a surer way of knowing a
millionaire, when one saw one, was by his lack of ideas.
My own experience is that neither of these ways works as well as it
used to. I very often meet a man now—a real live millionaire, no one would
think it of.
One of them—one of the last ones—telegraphed me from down in the
country one morning, swung up to London on a quick train, cooped me up
with him at a little corner table in his hotel, and gave me more ideas in two
hours than I had had in a week.
I came away very curious about him—whoever he was.
Not many days afterward I found myself motoring up a long, slow hill,
full of wind and heather, and there in a stately park with all his treetops
around him, and his own blue sky, in a big, beautiful, serene room, I saw
him again.
He began at once, "Do you think Christ would have approved of my
house?"
His five grown sons were sitting around him but he spoke vividly and
directly and like a child, and as if he had just brushed sixty years away, and
could, any time.
I said I did not think it fair to Christ, two thousand years off, to ask what
he would have thought of a house like his, now. The only fair thing to do
would be to ask what Christ would think if He were living here to-day.
"Well, suppose He had motored over here with you this afternoon from
—— Manor, and spent last night with you there, and talked with you and
with —— and had seen the pictures, and the great music room and
wandered through the gardens, and suppose that then He had come through
on his way up, all those two miles of slums down in —— seen all those
poor, driven, crowded people, and had finally come up here with you to this
big, still, restful place two thousand people could live in, and which I keep
all to myself. You don't really mean to say, do you, that He would approve
of my living in a house like this?"
I said that I did not think that Christ would be tipped over by a house or
lose his bearings with a human soul because he lived in a park. I thought He
would look him straight in the eyes.
"But Christ said, 'He that loseth his life shall save it!'"
"Yes, but He did not intend it as a mere remark about people's houses."
It did not seem to me that Christ meant simply giving up to other people
easy and ordinary things like houses or like money, but that He meant
giving up to others our motives, giving up the deepest, hardest things in us,
our very selves to other people.
"And so you really think that if Christ came and looked at this house
and looked at me in it, He would not mind?"
"I do not know. I think that after He had looked at your house He would
go down and look at your factory, possibly. How many men do you
employ?"
"Sixteen hundred."
"I think He would look at them, the sixteen hundred men, and then He
would move about a little. Very likely He would look at their wives and the
little children."
He thought a moment. I could see that he was not as afraid of having
Christ see the factory as he was of having Him see the house.
I was not quite sure but I thought there was a little faint gleam in his eye
when I mentioned the factory.
"What do you make?" I asked.
He named something that everybody knows.
Then I remembered suddenly who he was. He was one of the men I had
first been told about in England, and the name had slipped from me. He had
managed to do and do together the three things one goes about looking for
everywhere in business—what might be called the Three R's of great
business (though not necessarily R's). (1) He had raised the wages of his
employees. (2) He had reduced prices to consumers. (3) He had reduced his
proportion of profit and raised the income of the works, by inventing new
classes of customers, and increasing the volume of the business.
He had found himself, one day, as most men do, sooner or later, with a
demand for wages that he could not pay.
At first he told the men he could not pay them more, said that he would
have to close the works if he did.
He was a very busy man to be confronted with a crisis like this. The
market was trouble enough.
One morning, when he was up early, and the house was all still and he
was sitting alone with himself, the thought slipped into his mind that there
had been several times before in his life when he had sat thinking about
certain things that could not be done. And then he had got up from thinking
they could not be done and gone out and done them.
He wondered if he could not get up and go out and do this one.
As he sat in the stillness with a clear road before his mind and not a soul
in the world up, the thought occurred to him, with not a thing in sight to
stop it, that he had not really trained himself to be quite such an expert in
raising wages as he had in some other things.
Perhaps he did not know about raising wages.
Perhaps if he concentrated his imagination as much on getting higher
wages for his workmen as he had in those early days years before on
making over all his obstinate raw material into the best cases of —— on
earth, he might find it possible to get more wages for his men by persuading
them to earn more and by getting their coöperation in finding ways to earn
more.
As he sat in the stillness, gradually (perhaps it was the stillness that did
it) the idea grew on him.
He made up his mind to see what would happen if he worked as hard at
paying higher wages for three months as he had for three years at making
raw material into cases of the best——on earth.
Then things began happening every day. One of the most important
happened to him.
He found that higher wages were as interesting a thing to work on as
any other raw material had ever been.
He found that a cheap workman as raw material to make a high-priced
workman out of was as interesting as a case of——.
A year or so after this, there was a strike (in his particular industry) of
all the workmen in England. They struck to be paid the wages his men were
paid.
He had been able to do three things he thought he thought he could not
do. He had succeeded in doing the first, in raising the wages of his
employees, by thinking up original ways of expressing himself to them, and
of getting them to believe in him and of making them want to work a third
harder. At the same time he succeeded in doing the second, in reducing the
prices to consumers, by inventing new by-products out of waste.
He had succeeded in doing the third, in reducing his per cent. of profits
and increasing his income from the works at the same time, by thinking up
ways of creating new habits and new needs in his customers.
He had fulfilled, as it seems, the three requisites of a great business
career. He had created new workmen, invented new things for men and
women to want, and had then created some new men and women who could
want them.
Incidentally all the while, day by day, while he was doing these things,
he had distributed a large and more or less unexpected sum of money
among all these three classes of people.
Some of this extra money went to his workmen, and some to himself,
and some to his customers, but it was largely spent, of course, in getting
business for other manufacturers and in getting people to buy all over
England, from other manufacturers, things that such people as they had
never been able before to afford to buy.
All these things that I have been saying and which I have duly confided to
the reader flashed through my mind as I stood with my back to the fire,
realizing suddenly that the man who had done them was the man with
whom I was talking.
Possibly some little thing was said. I do not remember what. The next
thing I knew was that, with his five grown sons around him, he returned to
his attack on his house.
He said some days he was glad it was so far away. He did not want his
workmen to see it. He did not go to the mill often in his motor-car, not
when he could help it.
I said that I thought that a man who was doing extraordinary things for
other people, things that other men could not get time or strength or
freedom or boldness of mind or initiative to do, that any particular thing he
could have that gave him any advantage or immunity for doing the
extraordinary things better, that would give him more of a chance to give
other people a chance, that the other people, if they were in their senses,
would insist upon his having these things.
"I think there are hundreds of men in my mill who think that they ought
to have my motor-car and three or four rooms in this house."
"Are they the most efficient ones?"
"No."
If a man gives over to other people his deepest motives, and if he really
identifies himself—the very inside of himself with them and treats their
interests as his interests, the more money he has, the more people like it.
"Take me, for instance," I said.
"I have hoped every minute since I knew you, that you were a
prosperous man. I saw the house and looked around in the park as I motored
up with joy. And when I came to the big gate I wanted to give three cheers!
I wish you had stock in the Meat Trust in America, that you could pierce
your way like a microbe into the vitals, into the inside of the Meat Trust in
my own country, make a stand in a Directors' Meeting for ninety million
people over there, say your say for them, vote your stock for them, say how
you want a Meat Trust you belong to, to behave, how you want it to be a
big, serious, business institution and not a humdrum, mechanical-minded
hold-up anybody could think of—in charge of a few uninteresting,
inglorious men—men nobody really cares to know and that nobody wants
to be like ... when I think of what a man like you with money can do ...!
"Am I not tired every day, are you not tired, yourself, of going about
everywhere and seeing money in the hands of all these second-class,
socially feeble-minded men, of seeing columns in the papers of what such
men think, of having college presidents, great universities, domes, churches
and thousands of steeples all deferring to them and bowing to them, and all
the superior, live, interested people ringing their door bells for their money
waiting outside on benches for what they think?"
I do not believe that Christ came into the world, two thousand years
ago, to say that only the men who have minds of the second class, men who
are not far-sighted enough in business to be decently unselfish in this world,
should be allowed to have control of the money and of the peoples' means
of living in it.
We are living in an age of big machines and big, inevitable
aggregations, and to say in an age like this, and above all, to get it out of a
Bible, or put it into a hymn book or make a religion of it, that all the first
class minds of the world—the men who see far enough to be unselfish,
should give over their money to second-class men, is the most monstrous,
most unbelieving, unfaithful, unbiblical, irreligious thing a world can be
guilty of. The one thing that is now the matter with money, is that the
second-class people have most of it.
"What would happen if we applied asceticism or a tired, discouraged
unbelief to having children that we do to having pounds and pence and
dollars and cents? You would not stand for that would you?"
I looked at his five sons.
"Suppose all the good families of to-day were to take the ground that
having children is a self-indulgence unworthy of good people; suppose the
good people leave having children in this world almost entirely to bad
ones?
"This is what has been happening to money.
"Unbelief in money is unbelief in the spirit. It is paying too much
attention to wealth to say that one must or that one must not have it."
I cannot recall precisely what was said after this in that long evening
talk of ours but what I tried to say perhaps might have been something like
this:
The essence of the New Testament seems to be the emphasis of a man's
spirit with or without money. Whether a man should be rich or get out of
being rich and earn the right to be poor (which some very true and big men,
artists and inventors in this world will always prefer) turns on a man's
temperament. If a man has a money genius and can so handle money that he
can make money, and if he can, at the same time, and all in one bargain,
express his own spirit, if he can free the spirits of other men with money
and express his religion in it, he should be ostracized by all thoughtful,
Christian people, if in the desperate crisis of an age like this, he tries to get
out of being rich.
The one thing a man can be said to be for in this world, is to express the
goodness—the religion in him, in something, and if he is not the kind of
man who can express his religion in money and in employing labour, then
let him find something—say music or radium or painting in which he can. It
is this bounding off in a world, this making a bare spot in life and saying
"This is not God, this cannot be God!"—it is this alone that is sacriligious.
It may be that I am merely speaking for myself, but I did discover a man on
Fleet Street the other day who quite agreed with me apparently, that if the
thing a man has in him is religion he can put it up or express it in almost
anything.
This man had tried to express his idea in a window.
He had done a Leonardo da Vinci's "Last Supper," in sugar—a kind of
bas-relief in sugar.
I do not claim that this kind of foolish, helpless caricature of a great
spiritual truth filled me with a great reverence or that it does now.
But it did make me think how things were.
If sugar with this man, like money with a banker, was the one logical
thing the man had to express his religion in, or if what he had had to express
had been really true and fine, or if there had been a true or fine or great man
to express, I do not doubt sugar could have been made to do it.
One single man with enough money and enough religions skill in
human nature, who would get into the Sugar Trust with some good,
fighting, voting stock, who could make the Sugar Trust do as it would be
done by, would make over American industry in twenty years.
He would have thrown up as on a high mountain, before all American
men, one great specimen, enviable business. He would have revealed as in a
kind of deep, sober apocalypse, American business to itself. He would have
revealed American business as a new national art form, as an expression of
the practical religion, the genius for real things, that is our real modern
temperament in America and the real modern temperament in all the
nations.
Of course it may not need to be done precisely with the Sugar Trust.
The Meat Trust might do it first, or the Steel Trust.
But it will be done.
Then the Golden Rule, one great Golden Rule-machine having been
installed in our trust that knew the most, and was most known, it could be
installed in the others.
Religion can be expressed much better to-day in a stock-holder's
meeting than it can in a prayer-meeting.
Charles Cabot, of Boston, walked in quietly to the Stock-holder's
Meeting of the Steel Trust one day and with a little touch of money—
$2,900 in one hand, and a copy of the American Magazine in the other,
made (with $2,900) $1,468,000,000 do right.
Part Three.
News and Government
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Oxford Street and the House of Commons
Table of Contents
Every now and then when I am in London (at the instigation of some
business man who takes the time off to belong to it), I drop into a pleasant
but other-worldly and absent-minded place called the House of Commons.
I sit in the windows in the smoking-room and watch the faces of the
members all about me and watch the steamships, strangely, softly, suddenly
—Shakespeare and Pepys, outside on the river, slip gravely by under glass.
Or I go in and sit down under the gallery, face to face with the Speaker,
looking across those profiles of world-makers in their seats; and I watch
and listen in the House itself. There is a kind of pleasant, convenient,
appropriate hush upon the world there.
Wisdom.
The decorous, orderly machinery of knowledge rolls over one—one
listens to It, to the soft clatter of the endless belt of words.
Every now and then one sees a member in the middle of a speech, or
possibly in the middle of a sentence, slip up quietly and take a look (under
glass) at The People, or he uses a microscope, perhaps, or a reading glass on
The People, Mr. Bonar Law's, Mr. Lloyd George's, Ramsay MacDonald's,
Will Crook's, or somebody's. Then he comes back gravely as if he had got
the people attended to now, and finishes what he was saying.
It is a very queer feeling one has about the People in the House of
Commons.
I mean the feeling of their being under glass; they all seem so
manageable, so quiet and so remote, a kind of glazed-over picture in still
life, of themselves. Every now and then, of course one takes a member
seriously when he steps up to the huge showcase of specimen crowds,
which members are always referring to in their speeches. But nothing
comes of it.
The crowds seem very remote there under the glass. One feels like
smashing something—getting down to closer terms with them—one longs
for a Department Store or a bridge or a 'bus—something that rattles and
bangs and is.
All the while outside the mighty street—that huge megaphone of the
crowd, goes shouting past. One wishes the House would notice it. But no
one does. There is always just the House Itself and that hush or ring of
silence around it, all England listening, all the little country papers far away
with their hands up to their ears and the great serious-minded Dailies, and
the witty Weeklies, the stately Monthlies, and Quarterlies all acting as if it
mattered....
Even during the coal strike nothing really happened in the House of
Commons. There was a sense of the great serious people, of the crowds on
Westminster Bridge surging softly through glass outside, but nothing got in.
Big Ben boomed down the river, across the pavements, over the hurrying
crowds and over all the men and the women, the real business men and
women. The only thing about the House that seemed to have anything to do
with anybody was Big Ben.
Finally one goes up to Harrod's to get relief, or one takes a 'bus, or one
tries Trafalgar Square, or one sees if one can really get across the Strand or
one does something—almost anything to recall one's self to real life.
And then, of course, there is Oxford Street.
Almost always after watching the English people express themselves or
straining to express themselves in the House of Commons, I try Oxford
Street.
I know, of course, that as an art-form for expressing a great people,
Oxford Street is not all that it should be, but there is certainly something,
after all the mooniness and the dim droniness, and lawyer-mindedness in
the way the English people express themselves or think that they ought to
express themselves in their house of Commons—there is certainly
something that makes Oxford Street seem suddenly a fine, free, candid way
for a great people to talk! And there is all the gusto, too, the 'busses, the
taxies, the hundreds of thousands of men and women saying things and
buying things they believe.
Taking in the shops on both sides or the street, and taking in the things
the people are doing behind the counters, and in the aisles, and up in the
office windows three blocks of Oxford Street really express what the
English people really want and what they really think and what they believe
and put up money on, more than three years of the house of Commons.
If I were an Englishman I would rather be elected to walk up and down
Oxford Street and read what I saw there than to be elected to a seat in the
House of Commons, and I could accomplish more and learn more for a
nation, with three blocks of Oxford Street, with what I could gather up and
read there, and with what I could resent and believe there, than I could with
three years of the House of Commons.
I know that anybody, of course, could be elected to walk up and down
Oxford Street. But it is enough for me.
So I almost always try it after the house of Commons.
And when I have taken a little swing down Oxford Street and got the
House of Commons out of my system a little, perhaps I go down to the
Embankment, and drop into my club.
Then I sit in the window and mull.
If the English people express themselves and express what they want
and what they are bound to have, on Oxford Street and put their money
down for it, so much better than they do in the House of Commons, why
should they not do it there?
Why should elaborate, roundabout, mysterious things like governments,
that have to be spoken of in whispers (and that express themselves usually
in a kind of lawyer-minded way, in picked and dried words like wills), be
looked upon so seriously, and be taken on the whole, as the main reliance
the people have, in a great nation, for expressing themselves?
Why should not a great people be allowed to say what they are like and
to say what they want and what they are bound to get, in the way Oxford
Street says things, in a few straight, clean-cut, ordinary words, in long quiet
rows of deeds, of buying and selling and acting?
Pounds, shillings, and silence.
Then on to the next thing.
If the House of Commons were more like Oxford Street or even if it had
suddenly something of the tone of Oxford Street, if suddenly it were to
begin some fine morning to express England the way Oxford Street does,
would not one see, in less than three months, new kinds and new sizes of
men all over England, wanting to belong to it?
Big, powerful, uncompromising, creative men who have no time for
twiddling, who never would have dreamed of being tucked away in the
house of Commons before, would want to belong to it.
In the meantime, of course, the men of England who have empires to
express, are not unnaturally expressing them in more simple language like
foundries, soap factories around a world, tungsten mines, department stores,
banks, subways, railroads for seventy nations, and ships on seven seas,
Winnipeg trolleys and little New York skyscrapers.
Business men of the more usual or humdrum kind could not do it, but
certainly, the first day that business men like these, of the first or world-size
class, once find the House of Commons a place they like to be in, once
begin expressing the genius of the English people in government as they are
already expressing the genius of the English people in owning the earth, in
buying and selling, in inventing things and in inventing corporations, the
House of Commons will cease to be a bog of words, an abyss of
committees, and legislation will begin to be run like a railroad—on a block
signal system, rows of things taken up, gone over, and finished. The click of
the signal. Then the next thing.
I sit in my club and look out of the window and think. Just outside
thousands of taxies shooting all these little mighty wills of men across my
window, across London, across England, across the world ... the huge,
imperious street ... all these men hurling themselves about in it, joining their
wills on to telephone wires, to mighty trains and little quiet country roads,
hitching up cables to their wills, and ships—hitching up the very clouds
over the sea to their wills and running a world—why are not men like these
—men who have the street-spirit in them, this motor genius of driving
through to what they want, taking seats in the House of Commons?
Perhaps Oxford Street is more efficient and more characteristic in
expressing the genius and the will of the English people than the House of
Commons is because of the way in which the people select the men they
want to express them in Oxford Street.
It may be that the men the people have selected to be at the top of the
nation's law-making are not selected by as skillful, painstaking, or thorough
a process as the men who have been selected to be placed at the top of the
nation's buying and selling.
Possibly the reason the House of Commons does not express the will of
the people is, that its members are merely selected in a loose, vague way
and by merely counting noses.
Possibly, too, the men who are selected by a true, honest, direct, natural
selection to be the leaders and to free the energies and steer the work of the
people, the men who are selected to lead by being seen and lived with and
worked with all day, every day, are better selected men than men who
having been voted on on slips of paper, and having been seen in newspaper
paragraphs, travel up to London and begin thoughtlessly running a world.
The business man drops into the House of Commons after the meeting
of his firm in Bond Street, Lombard Street, or Oxford Street and takes a
look at it. He sees before him a huge tool or piece of machinery—a body of
men intended to work together and to get certain grave, particular, and
important things done, that the people want done, and he does not see how a
great good-hearted chaos or welter, a kind of chance national Weather of
Human Nature like the House of Commons, can get the things done.
So he confines himself more and more to business where he loses less
time in wondering what other people think or if they think at all, cuts out
the work he sees, and does it.
He thinks how it would be if things were turned around and if people
tried to get expressed in business in the loose way, the thoughtless reverie
of voting that they use in trying to get themselves expressed in politics.
He thinks the stockholders of the Sunlight Soap Company, Limited,
would be considerably alarmed to have the president and superintendent
and treasurer and the buyers and salesmen of the company elected at the
polls by the people in the county or by popular suffrage. He thinks that
thousands of the hands as well as the stockholders would be alarmed too. It
does not seem to him that anybody, poor or rich, employer or employee, in
matters of grave personal concern, would be willing to trust his interest or
would really expect the people, all the people as a whole, to be represented
or to get what they wanted, to act definitely and efficiently through the
vague generalizations of the polls. Perhaps a natural selection, a dead-
earnest rigorous, selection that men work on nine hours a day, an
implacable, unremitting process during working hours, of sorting men out
(which we call business), is the crowd's most reliable way of registering
what it definitely thinks about the men it wants to represent it. Business is
the crowd's, big, serious, daily voting in pounds, shillings, and pence—its
hour to hour, unceasing, intimate, detailed labour in picking men out, in
putting at the top the men it can work with best, the men who most express
it, who have the most genius to serve crowds, to reveal to crowds their own
minds, and supply to them what they want.
As full as it is—like all broad, honest expressions, of human
shortcomings and of things that are soon to be stopped, it does remain to be
said that business, in a huge, rough way, daily expressing the crowds as far
as they have got—the best in them and the worst in them, is, after all, their
most faithful and true record, their handwriting. Business is the crowds'
autograph—its huge, slow, clumsy signature upon our world.
Buying and selling is the life blood of the crowds' thought, its big,
brutal daily confiding to us of its view of human life. What do the crowds,
poor and rich, really believe about life? Property is the last will and
testament of Crowds.
The man-sorting that goes on in distributing and producing property is
the Crowd's most unremitting, most normal, temperamental way of
determining and selecting its most efficient and valuable leaders—its men
who can express it, and who can act for it.
This is the first reason I would give against letting the people rely on
having a House of Commons compel business men to be good.
Men who meet now and again during the year, afternoons or evenings,
who have been picked out to be at the top of the nation's talking, by a loose
absent-minded and illogical paper-process, cannot expect to control men
who have been picked out to be at the top of a nation's buying and selling,
by a hard-working, closely fitting, logical process—the men that all the
people by everything they do, every day, all day, have picked out to
represent them.
Any chance three blocks of Oxford Street could be relied on to do
better.
Keeping the polls open once in so often, a few hours, and using hearsay
and little slips of paper—anybody dropping in—seems a rather fluttery and
uncertain way to pick out the representatives of the people, after one has
considered three blocks of Oxford Street.
The next thing the crowd is going to do in getting what it wants from
business men is to deal directly with the business men themselves and stop
feeling, what many people feel partly from habit, perhaps, that the only way
the crowd can get to what it wants is to go way over or way back or way
around by Robin Hood's barn or the House of Commons.
But there is a second reason:
The trouble is not merely in the way men who sit in the House of
Commons are selected. The real deep-seated trouble with the men who sit
in the House of Commons is that they like it. The difficulty (as in the
American Congress too) seems to be something in the men themselves. It
lies in what might be called, for lack of a better name, perhaps, the Hem
and Haw or Parliament Temperament.
The dominating type of man in all the world's legislative bodies, for the
time being, seems to be the considerer or reconsiderer, the man who dotes
on the little and tiddly sides of great problems. The greatness of the problem
furnishes, of course, the pleasant, pale glow, the happy sense of importance
to a man, and then there is all the jolly littleness of the little things besides
—the little things that a little man can make look big by getting them in the
way of big ones—a great nation looking on and waiting.... For such a man
there always seems to be a certain coziness and hominess in a Legislative
Body....
As a seat in the House of Commons not unnaturally—every year it is
hemmed or hawed in, gets farther and farther away from the people, it is
becoming more and more apparent to the people every year that the
Members of their House of Commons as a class are unlikely to do anything
of a very striking or important or lasting value in the way of getting
business men to be good.
The more efficient and practical business men are coming to suspect
that the members of the House of Commons, speaking broadly, do not know
the will of the people, and that they could not express it in creative,
straightforward and affirmative laws if they did.
Chapter II.
Oxford Street Hums. The House Hems
Table of Contents
But it is not only because the members of the House of Commons are
selected in a vague way or because they are a vague kind of men, that they
fail to represent the people.
The third reason against having a House of Commons try to compel
business men to be good, by law, is its out-of-the-way position.
The out-of-the-way position that a Parliament occupies in getting
business men to be good, can be best considered, perhaps, by admitting at
the outset that a government really is one very real and genuine way a great
people may have of expressing themselves, of expressing what they are like
and what they want, and that business is another way.
Then the question narrows down. Which way of expressing the people
is the one that expresses them the most to the point, and which expresses
them where their being expressed counts the most?
The people have a Government. And the people have Business.
What is a Government for?
What is Business for?
Business is the occupation of finding out and anticipating what the
wants of the English people really are and of finding out ways of supplying
them.
The business men on Oxford Street hire twenty or thirty thousand men
and women, keep them at work eight or nine hours a day, five or six days in
a week, finding out what the things are that the English people want and
reporting on them and supplying them.
They are naturally in a strategic position to find out, not only what kinds
of things the people want, but to find out, too, just how they want the things
placed before them, what kind of storekeepers and manufacturers, salesmen
and saleswomen they tolerate, like to deal with and prefer to have prosper.
And the business men are not only in the most strategic and competent
position to find out what the people who buy want, but to find out too, what
the people who sell want. They are in the best position to know, and to
know intimately, what the salesmen and saleswomen want and what they
want to be and what they want to do or not do.
They are in a close and watchful position, too, with regard to the
conditions in the factories from which their goods come and with regard to
what the employers, stockholders, foremen and workmen in those factories
want.
What is more to the point, these same business men, when they have
once found out just what it is the people want, are the only men who are in
a position, all in the same breath, without asking anybody and without
arguing with anybody, without meddling or convincing anybody—to get it
for them.
Finding out what people want and getting it for them is what may be
called, controlling business.
The question not unnaturally arises with all these business men and their
twenty or thirty thousand people working with them, eight or nine hours a
day, five or six days a week, in controlling business, why should the
members of the House of Commons expect, by taking a few afternoons or
evenings off for it, to control business for them?
If I were an employee and if what I wanted to do was to improve the
conditions of labour in my own calling, I do not think I would want to take
the time to wait several months, probably, to convince my member of
Parliament, and then wait a few months more for him to convince the other
members of Parliament, and then vote his one vote. I would rather deal
directly with my employer.
If my employer is on my back and if I can once get the attention of my
employer himself, as to where he is and as to how he is interrupting what I
am doing for him—if I once get his attention and once get him to notice my
back, he can get down. No one else can get down for him and no one else,
except by turning a whole nation all around, can make him get down. Why
should a man bother with T.P.'s Weekly or with Horatio Bottomley or with
the Daily Mail or the Times, with a score of other people's by-elections all
over England to lift his own employer off his back?
There is a very simple rule for it.
The way to lift one's employer off one's back is to make one's back so
efficient that he cannot afford to be on it.
The first thing I would do would be to see if I could not persuade my
employer to take steps to train me and to make me efficient, himself. And
perhaps the second thing I would try to do would be to wake my trades
union up, to get my trades union to consent to let me want to try to be
efficient and work as hard as I can, or to consent to my employer's hiring
engineers to make me efficient. I would try to get my trades union to be
interested in hiring itself some special expert like Frederick Taylor, some
specialist in making a man do three times as much work with the same
strength, making him three times as valuable for his employer and three
times as fit and strong for himself.
This is what I would do if I wanted to make my employer good. I would
be so good that he could not afford not being good too.
If I were an employer, on the other hand, and understood human nature,
and knew enough about psychology to found a great business house and
wanted to make my employee good, or make him work three times as hard
for me, with three times the normal strength, day by day, and have a normal
old age to look forward to, I do not think I would wait for the House of
Commons to butt in and pension him. It seems to me that I would be in a
position to do it more adequately, more rapidly, and do it with more
intimate knowledge of economy than the House of Commons could. And I
would not have to convince several hundred men, men from rural counties,
how I could improve my factory and get them to let me improve it. I could
do it quietly by myself.
In any given industrial difficulty, there is and must be a vision for every
man, a vision either borrowed for him or made for him by some one else, or
a vision he has made for himself, that fits in just where he is. In the last
analysis our industrial success is going to lie in the sense of Here, and Me,
and Now, raised to the nth power, in what might be called a kind of larger
syndicalism.
The typical syndicalist, instead of saying, as he does to-day, "We will
take the factories out of our employers hands and run them ourselves," is
going to say, "We will make ourselves fit to run the factories ourselves."
What would please the employers more, give them a general, or national
confidence in trying to run business and improve the conditions of work to-
day, than to have their employees, suddenly, all over the nation, begin doing
their work so well that they would be fit to run the factories?
What is true of employers and employees in factories is still more true
of the employers and employees in the great retail stores. If there is one
thing rather than another the business men and women on Oxford Street, the
managers, floor walkers and clerks all up and down the street are really
engaged in all day all their lives, it is what might be called a daily nine-hour
drill in understanding people. Why should employers and employees like
these—experts in human nature—men who make their profession a success
by studying human nature, and by working in it daily, call in a few drifting
gentlemen from the House of Commons and expect them to work out their
human problems better than they can do it?
Employers and clerks in retail stores are the two sets of people in all the
world most competent to study together the working details of human
nature, to act for themselves in self-respecting man-fashion and without
whining at a nation.
Who that they could hope to deal with and get what they want from,
could know more about human nature than they do? Are they not the men
of all others, all up and down that little strip of Oxford Street, who devote
their entire time to human nature? They are in the daily profession of
knowing the soonest and knowing the most about what people are like, and
about what people will probably think. They are intimate with their
peccadillos in what they want to wear and in what they want to eat; they
have learned their likes and dislikes in human nature; they know what they
will support and what they will defy in human nature, in clerks, and in
stores, and in storekeepers.
And these things that they have learned about human nature (in
themselves and other people) they have learned not by talking about human
nature but by a grim daily doing things with it.
These things being so, it would almost seem that these people and
people like them were qualified to act, and as they happen to be in the one
strategic position, both employers and employees alike, to act and to act for
themselves and act directly and act together, it will not be very long,
probably, before the nation will be very glad to have them do it.
It is likely to be seen very soon (at least by all skilled Labour and all
skilled Capital) that running out into the street and crying "Help!" and
calling in some third person to settle family difficulties that can be better
settled by being faced and thought out in private, is an inefficient and
incompetent thing to do.
And for the most part it is going to be only in the more superficial,
inefficient, thoughtless industry that men, either employers or employed,
will be inclined to leave their daily work, run out wildly and drag in a
House of Commons to help them to do right.
I am only speaking for myself but certainly if I were an employer or an
employee, I would not want to wait for an election a year away or to wait
for the great engineering problem of compelling my member of Parliament
by my one vote to act for me.
Perhaps workingmen in England and America are deceived about the
value of voting as a means of improving conditions of workingmen.
Possibly women are deceived about the value of voting as a means of
improving the conditions of working women.
Possibly a woman could do more behind a counter or by buying a store
than by voting to have some man she has read about in a paper, improve
business by talking about it in the House of Commons.
There is also a kind of program or vision of action one can use as a
customer as well as an employer or employee.
I might speak for myself.
I have about so much money I spend every year in buying things. I have
proposed to study with my money every firm on which I spend it. I propose
to take away my trade from the firm that does the least as it should and give
it to the firm that does the most as it should. I will vote with my entire
income and with every penny I save for the kind of employers I believe in
and that I want, for the kind of employers who can earn and deserve and
enjoy and keep the kind of salesmen and saleswomen I choose to do
business with.
All the year round, every firm with which I deal, I am going to study not
only with my mind but with my money. I will proceed to take my trade
away from the big employers who think that I want shoddy goods or who
think that I want or am willing to trade with saleswomen who would let an
employer impose on them, saleswomen that he thinks he can afford to
impose upon. I will proceed to vote with my money, with every penny I
have in the world, and I will earn more that I may vote more, for the kind of
employer with whom I like to trade. And there shall not be a man, woman,
or child of my acquaintance, if I can help it, or of my family's acquaintance
who shall not know who these employers are by name and by address, the
employers that I will trade with and the employers that I will not.
This is my idea as a customer, as a member of the public, of the way for
a people to express itself and to get what it wants.
What I want may be said to be a kind of news, news about me so far as I
go, as one member of the public. As I am only one person every item of the
news about me must be put where it works. I will deal directly with the
news of what I want and I will convey that news, not to the House of
Commons but to the men who have what I want and who can give it to me
when they know it.
News is the real government now and always of this world.
When one has made up one's mind to tell this news, obviously the best
art-form for telling news to employers and business men—the news of what
we want and what we do not want and of what we want in them as well as
in the things they sell, is to tell them the news in the language they have
studied most, tell it to them in pounds, shillings, dollars, and cents, and by
trading somewhere else.
The gospel-bearing value, the news that one can get into a man's mind
with one dollar, the news that he can be made to see and act on for one
dollar—well, thinking of this some days, makes for me, at least, going up
and down the Main Street of the World feeling my purse snuggling in my
pocket, and all the people I can step up to with my purse and tell so many
dollars' worth of news to, tell that dollar's worth of gospel to about the
world—makes going up and down with a dollar on a big business street,
and spending it or not spending it, feel like a kind of chronic, easy, happy,
going to Church. One always has a little money in one's pocket that one
spends or that one won't spend, and sometimes even not spending a dollar,
practised by some people, at just the right moment and in just the right way,
can be made to mean as much and do as much with a world as spending a
thousand dollars would without any meaning put into it.
Sometimes I even go into a store on purpose, a certain kind of store I
know will try to cheat me in a certain way, let them look a minute at the
dollar they cannot have. Then I walk out with it quietly.
I have said that the life-blood of my convictions shall circulate in my
money and if I cannot express my soul, my religion, my gospel or news for
this world, news about what I want and about what I will have in a world, if
I cannot make every dollar, every shilling I earn, go through the world and
sing my own little world-song in it, may I never have another shilling or
earn another dollar as long as I live!
The very sight of a dollar now whenever I see one once more, fills me
with deep, hopeful working joy, thinking of what a bargain it is and how I
can use it twice over, thinking of the dollar's worth of news, to say nothing
of the dollar's worth of things that belong with a dollar!
For some generations, now, we have tried to make people good in a vague,
general way, by using priests, sacraments and confessional boxes. For some
centuries we have been trying to make people good with lawyers and juries
and ballot boxes. We are now to try, at last, religion or gospel or news or
ideals—practical, shrewd aimed ideals, that is, news to a man about himself
or news about the man from the man himself to us. In everything a man
does he is expressing to us this news about himself, and about his world,
and about his God. We are all telling news about the world and about
ourselves all the time and we are all in a position for news all the time.
What is it from hour to hour and day to day that we will do and we will
not do?
This news about us is the religion in us.
The average man is coming to have very accurate ideas of late as to just
where his religion is located. He has come to see that real religion in a man,
very conveniently located (immediately at hand in him and personally
directed), is his own action, his own divine "I will" or "I won't."
He has come to be deeply attracted by this idea of a religion for every
man just where he is, fitted on patiently, cheerfully, to just where he is,
every day all day, his glorious, still, practical, good-natured, godlike "I will"
and "I won't "—or News about himself.
Chapter III.
President Wilson and Moses
Table of Contents
We are deeply interested in the United States just now, in seeing what will
be the fate of President Wilson's government in getting men to be good. The
fate of a government in 1913 may be said to stand on the government's
psychology or knowledge of human nature or of what might be called
human engineering, its mastery of the principles of lifting over in great
masses heavy spiritual bodies, like people, swinging great masses of
people's minds over as on some huge national derrick up on The White
House, from one lookout on life to another.
There are certain aspects of human nature when power is being applied
to it in this way, and when it is being got to be good, that may not be beside
the point.
If one could drop in on a government and have a little neighbourly chat
with it, as one was going by, I think I would rather talk with it (especially
our government, just now), about Human Nature than about anything.
I would have to do it, of course, in what might seem to a government to
be a plain and homely way.
I would ask the government what it thought of two or three observations
I have come to lately about the way that human nature works, when people
are getting it to be good. What a government thinks about them might
possibly prove before many months to be quite important to It.
The first observation is this:
The reason that the average bachelor is a bachelor is that he spends the
first forty-five years of his life in picking out women he will not marry.
Possibly it is because many people are following the same principle in
trying to be good and in getting other people to be good that they make such
poor work of it.
Possibly the main reason why there are so many wicked people or seem
to be, in proportion, among the Hebrews in the Old Testament, is that
Moses was a lawyer and that he tried to start off a great people with the Ten
Commandments, that is, a list of nine things they must never do any more,
and of one that they must.
Some of us who have tried being good, have noticed that when we have
hit it off, being good (at least with us) consists in being focused, in getting
concentrated, in getting one's attention to what one really wants to do.
Moses' idea when he started his government, the idea of getting people
concentrated on not getting concentrated on nine things, was not conducive
to goodness. The fundamental principle Moses tried to make the people
good with was a contradiction in terms. It is a principle that would make
wicked people out of almost anybody. It is not a practicable principle for a
government to rely on in getting people to be good. It did not work with the
people in the Old Testament and it has never worked with people since.
It does not call people out, in getting them to take up goodness, to point
out to them nine places not to take hold of and one where they will be
allowed to take hold, if they know how.
All that one has to do to see how true this is, is to observe the groups or
classes of people who are especially not what they should be. The people
who never get on morally (as different as they may be in most things and in
the fields of their activity) all have one illusion in common. There is one
thing they always keep saying when any new hopeful person tries once
more to get them to be good.
They say (almost as if they had a phonograph) that they try to be good
and cannot do it.
And this is not true.
When a man says he tries to be good and cannot do it, if he sits down
and thinks it over he finds, generally, he is not trying to be good at all. He is
trying to be not bad.
A man cannot get himself reformed, by a negative process, by being not
bad, and it is still harder for him and for everybody, when other people try
to do it—those who are near him, and it is still, still harder for a President
down in Washington to do it.
An intelligent, live man or business corporation cannot be got to keep
up an interest very long in being not bad. Being not bad is a glittering
generality. It is like being not extravagant or economical.
Most people who have ever tried to attain in a respectable degree to a
pale little neuter virtue like economy, and who have reflected upon their
experiences, have come to conclusions that may not be very far from the
point in a fine art like getting one's self to be good or getting other people to
be good.
To concentrate on being economical by going grimly down the street,
looking at the shop windows, looking hard at miles of things one will not
buy, cannot be said to be a practicable method of attaining economy.
The real artist, in getting himself to be good, proceeds to upon the
opposite principle. Even if the good thing he tries for is merely a negative
good thing like economy, he instinctively seeks out some positive way of
getting it.
A man who is cultivating the art of getting himself to be economical, or
of getting his wife to be economical, does not make a start by sitting down
with a pencil and making out a list, by concentrating his mind on rows of
things that he and his family must get along without. He knows a better
way. He goes downtown with his entire family, takes them into a big shop
and sits down with them and listens to a Steinway Grand he cannot get. As
he listens to it long enough, he thinks he will get it.
Then a subtle, spiritual change passes over him and over his family
while they listen. He would not have said before he started that sitting down
and thinking of things he could get along without—making lists in his mind
of things that he must not have—could ever be in this world a happy, even
an almost thrilling experience. But as a matter of fact, as he sits by the
piano and listens, he finds himself counting off economies like strings of
pearls, and he greets each new self-sacrifice he can think of with a cheer.
While the Steinway Grand fills the room with melody all around him, there
he actually is sitting, and having the time of his life dreaming of the things
he can get along without!
When he goes home, he goes home thinking. And the family all go
home thinking.
Then economy sets in. The reason most people make a failure of their
economy is that they are not artistic with it, they do not enjoy it. They do
not pick out anything to enjoy their economy with.
With some people an automobile would work better than a Steinway
Grand and there are as many ways, of course, of practising the Steinway
Grand principle in not being bad as there are people, but they all consist
apparently in selecting some big, positive thing that one wants to do, which
logically includes and bundles all together where they are attended to in a
lump, all the things that one ought not to do.
Most sins (every one who has ever tried them knows this) most sins are
not really worth bothering with, each in detail, even the not-doing them and
the most practical, firm method of getting them out of the way (thousands
of them at once, sometimes, with one hand) is to have something so big to
live for that all the things that would like to get in the way, and would like
to look important, look, when one thinks of it, suddenly small.
The distinctive, preëminent, official business for the next four years, of
making small things in this country look small and of gently, quietly
making small men feel small, has been assigned by our people recently, to
Mr. Woodrow Wilson.
Now it naturally seems to some of us, the best way for Mr. Wilson's
government to do in getting the Trusts to give up lying and stealing, is
going to be to place before them quietly a few really big, interesting,
equally exciting things that Trusts can do, and then dare them, as in some
great game or tournament of skill—all the people looking on—dare them,
challenge them like great men, to do them.
There are three ideas President Wilson may have of the government's
getting people to be good.
First, not letting people be bad. (Moses.)
Second, being good for them. (Karl Marx.)
Third, letting them be good themselves. (Any Democrat.)
The first of these ideas means government by Prison. The second,
means government by Usurpation, that is, the moment a man amounts to
enough to choose to do right or do wrong of his own free will, the moment
he is a man, in other words, being so afraid of him and of his being a man,
that we all, in a kind of panic, shove into his life and live it for him—this is
Socialism, a scared machine that scared people have invented for not letting
people choose to do right because they may choose to do wrong.
The third, letting people be good themselves, letting them be self-
controlling, self-respecting, self-expressing or voluntarily good people, is
democracy, a machine for letting men be men by trying it.
Moses was the inventor of a kind of national moral-brake system, a
machine for stopping people nine times out of ten. The question that faces
President Wilson just now, while the world looks on is, "Is a government or
is it not a moral-brake system—a machine for stopping people nine times
out of ten?"
There is a considerable resemblance between Moses' position and the
new President's in the United States. When Moses looked around on the
things he saw the men around him doing, and took the ground that at least
nine out of ten of the things should be stopped, he was academically
correct. And so, also, President Wilson, gazing at the business of this
country to-day, at nine out of ten of the humdrum thoughtless things that
trusts and corporations have been doing, will be academically correct in
telling them to stop, in having his little, new, helpless, unproved, adolescent
government stand up before all the people and speak in loud, beautiful,
clear accents and (with its left fist full of prisons, fines, lawyers, of forty-
eight legislatures all talking at once) bring down its right fist as a kind of
gavel on the world and say to these men, before all the nations, that nine of
the things they are doing must be stopped and that one of the things, if they
happen to able be to think out some way of keeping on doing it—nobody
will hurt them.
But the question before President Wilson, to-day, with all our world
looking on, is not whether he would be right in entering upon a career of
stopping people. The real and serious question is, does stopping people stop
them? And if stopping people does not stop them, what will?
Perhaps the way for a government to stop people from doing things they
are doing, is to tell them the things it wants done. A government that does
not express what it wants, that has not given a masterful, clear, inspired
statement of what it wants—a government that has only tried to say what it
does not want, is not a government.
The next business of a government is a statement of what it wants.
The problem of a government is essentially a problem of statement.
How shall this statement be made?
Chapter IV.
The President Says Yes and No
Table of Contents
It was not merely because the seventh commandment was negative, but
because it was abstract that David found it so hard to keep. If the seventh
commandment (like Uriah's wife) could have had deep blue eyes or could
have been beautiful to look upon, and, on a particular day in a particular
place, could have been bathing in a garden, David would have found
keeping it a very different matter. The tendency to make a statue of purity
as a lovely female figure carries us a little further in moral evolution, than
the moral statement that Moses had managed to get, and it was further
toward the concrete, but it was not far enough for a real artist or man who
does things.
One of the things about the real artist that makes him an artist, is that he
is always and always has been and always will be profoundly dissatisfied
with a statue of a female figure as an emblem of purity. He challenges the
world, he challenges God, he challenges himself, he challenges the men and
women about him when he is being put off with a Statue as an emblem of
purity. He demands, searches out, interprets, creates something concrete and
living to express his idea of purity.
How can President Wilson, in getting the Trusts not to be corrupt, in
trying to win them—how can President Wilson make the law alluring? How
can he make the People have a Low Voice?
A great deal if not nearly everything depends in tempting business men
to be good, upon the tone in which they are addressed. Every government,
like every man, soon comes to have its own characteristic tone in
addressing the people. And, as a matter of fact, it is almost always the tone
in a government, like the voice in a man, which tells us the most definitely
what it is like, and is the most intimate and effective expression of what it
wants and is the most practical way of getting what it wants. Everybody has
noticed that a man's voice works harder for him, works more to the point for
him in getting what he wants than his words do. It is his voice that makes
people know him, that makes them know he means what he says. It is his
voice that tells them whether he is in the habit of meaning what he says, and
it is his voice that tells them whether he is in habit of getting what he wants,
and of knowing what to do with what he wants when he gets it.
A government does not need to say very much if it has the right tone.
The tone of a government is the government.
If President Wilson is going to succeed in tempting business men to be
good, he is going to do it, some of us think, by depending on three
principles.
These three principles, like all live, active principles, may be stated as
three principles or as three personal traits.
First, by being affirmative. (Isaiah, in distinction from Moses.)
Second, by being concrete. (Bathsheba.)
Third, by being specific, by seeing the universal in the particular. (Like
any artist or man who does things.)
The value of being affirmative and the value of being concrete have
already been touched upon. There remains the value of being specific.
Possibly, in this present happy hour, when our country has grown
suddenly sensible and has become practical enough to pick out at last, once
more, a President with a real serious working sense of humour, even a sense
of humour about himself, it may not be considered disrespectful if I
continue a little longer dropping in on the Government, and saying what I
have to say in a few plain and homely words.
The trouble with most people in being economical with their money is,
that when they spend it, they spend it on something in particular, and when
they save it, they try to save it in a kind of general way. The same principle
applies to doing right. It is because when people do right, they do it in a
kind of general pleasant, abstract way, and when they do wrong they always
do something in particular, that they are so Wicked.
A man will do almost anything to save his life at a particular place and
at a particular time, say at ten o'clock to-morrow morning, if he is
drowning, but if he has a year to save it in, a year of controlling his
appetites, of daily, detailed mastering of his spirit, of not taking a piece of
mince pie, of stopping his work in time and of going to bed early, he will
die.
It is easier when one is going under water for the third time and sees a
rope, to stretch just one inch more and grasp the rope, reach up to forty
more years of one's life, all concentrated for one on the tip of a rope, than it
is to spread out saving one's life over a whole year, 365 breakfasts, 365
luncheons, 365 dinners, 33,365 moments of anger, of reckless worry, of
remorse, of self-pity, 40,000 of despair and round up with a swing at the
end of one's year at the tiptop of one's being, as if it had only taken five
minutes. And yet it is only an act of the creative imagination of seeing the
whole, of having a happy, daily, detailed spectacle of the end in view, that
is, of the part in its setting of the whole—going without a piece of mince
pie. If one could only make one's self see the piece of mince pie as it is, it
would not be difficult. If one could see it on the plate there and see the not
taking it as a little wedge-shaped rivet, a little triangular link of coupling in
the chain that keeps one holding on forty years longer to this planet, a piece
of mince pie left on a plate would become a Vision.
This seems to be the principle that works best in getting other people to
be good.
Perhaps the President will succeed in getting Trusts to be good, by
taking hold of specific Trusts, one by one, and setting them—all mankind
looking on—in the nation's vision, setting them even in their own vision—
taking the Trusts that thought they had got what they wanted, making them
stand up and look (in some great public lighted place) at what pathetic,
tragical failures they are, letting them see that what their Trust had wanted
all along, if it had only thought about it, was not success one went to jail for
—success by getting the best out of the most people, but success by serving
the most people the best.
A great many of us in America have been exercising our minds for a
long time now about the eagerness of the Trusts, and the trouble we were
going to have in curbing the eagerness of the Trusts.
Sometimes I have wondered if, after all, it was our minds we were
exercising, for when one sits down seriously to think of it, it is the
eagerness of the Trusts that is the most hopeful thing about them.
What is the matter with our American Trusts, perhaps, is not and never
has been, their eagerness, but their eagerness for things that they did not
want, and for things that almost everybody is coming to see that they did
not want.
The moment that the eagerness of our American Trusts is an eagerness
for things that they really want, the Trusts will be seen piling over each
other's heels, asking the government to please investigate them. The more
they can get the people to know about them and about their eagerness, the
more the people will trust them and deal with them.
All that we have been waiting for is a government that sees the part
from the point of view of the whole, which will take up a few specific
Trusts and be specific enough with them to make them think, think hard
what they really want, and what their real eagerness is about, and the entire
face of modern business will change. First the expression will change and
then the face itself.
The moment it is found that the government is a specific government,
all the trusts that know what they really want and know what they really are
doing, will want to be investigated, because they will want everybody to
know that they know. In case of the trusts that do not know what they want
and that do not know what they are doing, the government will just step in,
of course, and investigate them until they find out.
A specific government will not need to be specific many times.
It takes up a particular Trust in its hand, turns it over quietly, empties its
contents out before the people and says to everybody, "This particular Trust
you see here has tried to be a kind of Trust, which it found out afterward, it
did not want to be. It is the kind of Trust whose officers hide their faces
when they think of what it was that they thought that they thought that they
wanted....
"These men you see here, forty silent nations looking on, hundreds and
thousands of self-respecting, self-supporting, public-serving, creative,
successful business men, whom all the world envies looking on, do hereby
beg to declare to all business men who know them and to the people, that
they did not ever really want these things for themselves that their business
says or seems to say they wanted.
"They wish to ask the public to put themselves in their places and to
refuse to believe that they deliberately sat down, seriously thought it all out,
that they had planned to express to everybody what their natures really were
in a blind, brutal, foolish business like this which we have just been
showing you. They beg to have it believed that their business misrepresents
them, that it misrepresents what they want, and they ask to be again
admitted to the good-will, the hope and forgiveness, the companionship of a
great people.
"They declare" (the government will go on) "that they are not the men
they seem. They are merely men in a hurry. They want it understood that
they have merely hurried so fast and hurried so long that they now wake up
at last only to see, see with this terrific plainness what it really is that has
been happening to them all their lives, viz.: for forty, fifty, or sixty years
they have merely forgot who they were and overlooked what they were like.
"In hurrying, too, it is only fair to say they have had to use machines to
hurry with and unconsciously, year by year, associating almost exclusively
with machines, their machines (pump handles, trip-hammers, hydraulic
drills, steam shovels and cranes and cash registers) have grown into them.
"This is the way it has happened. 'Let the nation be merciful to them,'
the government will then say, and dismiss the subject."
What our President seems to be for in America, is to do up a nation in one
specific, particular man who expresses everybody.
This man deals with each other specific man, his aggressions and
services, as a nation would if a nation could be one specific man.
The President of the United States is the Comptroller of the people's
vision, by seeing a part and dealing with a part as a part of a whole, he
governs the people.
He is the Chancellor of the People's Attention.
The business of being a President is the business of focusing the vision,
of flooding the whole desire or will of a people around a man and letting
him have the light of it, to see what he is doing by, and to be seen by, while
he is doing it.
The corporations have expressed or focused the employers of labour.
The Labour Unions have focused or expressed the will of the labourers, and
the government focuses and expresses the will of the consumers, of the
people as a whole, rich and poor, so that Labour and Capital, both listen to
It, understand It and act on It.
The way to deal with a specific sin is to flood it around with the general
vision. Then it does not need to be dealt with. Then strangely, softly, and
almost before we know—out there in the Light, it automatically deals with
itself.
When the Government takes hold quietly of the National Cash Register
Company, turns it up, empties its contents out,—all its methods and its
motives—and all the things It thought It wanted, and then proceeds to put
its president and twenty-nine of its officers into jail, my readers will
perhaps point out to me that this action of the government as a method of
tempting people to be good, while it may have the virtue of being concrete
and the virtue of being specific, certainly does not have the other virtue that
I have laid down, the virtue of being affirmative. "Certainly" they will say
"there is not anything affirmative about putting twenty-nine big business
men in jail." Many people would call it the most magnificently negative
thing a President could have done. Moses himself would have done it.
It does not seem to me that Moses would have done it, or that it was
essentially negative. It could not unfairly be claimed that in spite of its
negative look on the surface, it was the most massive, significant, crushing
affirmation that a great people has made for years.
By putting the twenty-nine officers of the National Cash Register
Company in jail, the American people affirmed around the world the
nation's championship of the men that had been defeated in the competition
with the National Cash Register Company. They affirmed that these men
who were not afraid of the National Cash Register Company because they
were bigger, and who stood up to them and fought them, were the kind of
men Americans wanted to be like, and that the officers of the National Cash
Register Company were the kind of men Americans did not want to be like,
would not do business with, would not tolerate, would not envy, would not
live on the same continent with, unless they were kept in jail.
The President of the United States, sitting in Washington, at the head of
this vast affirmative and assertive continent, indicted the Cash Register
Company, that is, by a slight pointed negative action, by pushing back a
button he turned on the great chandelier of a nation and flooded a nation
with light. We, the American people, suddenly, all in a flash, looked into
each other's faces and knew what we were like.
We had hoped we believed in human nature, and in brave men and in
men against machines but we could not prove it.
Suddenly, we stood in a blaze of truth about ourselves. Suddenly, we
could again look with our old stir of joy at our national Flag. If we liked, we
could swing our hats.
Perhaps I should speak for myself, but I had been trying to get this news
for years. It is news I have wanted to live with and do business with. I have
been trying to get my question answered. What are the American people
really like?
The President points at the National Cash Register Company and I find
out. All the people find out.
In the last analysis, the masterful, shrewd, practical, and constructive
part of being a President of the United States—the thing in the business of
being a President that keeps the position from being a position which only
the second rate or No type of man would have time to take, is the fact that
the President is the Head Advertising Manager of the United States,
conducting a huge advertising campaign of what Americans really want.
He takes up the National Cash Register Company, picks out its twenty-
nine officers, makes it a bill board sky-high across the country. "Here are
the kind of business men that the people of the United States do not want,
and here are the kind of men that we do!"
The thing that makes indicting a trust a positive and affirmative act is
the advertising in it.
Gladstone once wrote a postcard about a little book of Marie
Bashkirtseff's.
Twenty nations read the little book.
Every now and then one watches a man or sees a truth that would make
a nation. One wishes one had some way of being the sort of person or being
in the kind of place where one could make a nation out of it.
One thinks it would be passing wonderful to be President of the United
States. It would be like having a great bell up over the world that one could
reach up to and ring! But it is better than that. One touches a button at one's
desk if one is President of the United States, a nation looks up. He whispers
to twenty thousand newspapers, "Take your eyes away a minute," he says,
"from Jack Johnson and Miss Elkin's engagement, and look, oh, look, ye
People, here is a man in this world like this! He has been in the world all
this while without our suspecting it. Did you know there was or could be
anywhere a man like THIS? And here is a man like this! Which do you
prefer? Which are you really like?"
There is nothing really regal or imperial in a man, nothing that makes a
man feel suddenly like a whole Roman Empire all by himself, in 1913, like
saying "Look! Look!"
Sometimes I think about it. Of course I could take a great reel of paper
and sit down with my fountain pen, say Look for a mile, "Look! look! look!
look!!!—President Wilson says it once and without exclamation points.
Skyscrapers listen to him! Great cities rise and lift themselves and smite the
world. And the faint, sleepy little villages stir in their dreams."
Moses said, "Thou shalt not!" President Wilson says, "Look!"
Perhaps if Moses had had twenty thousand newspapers like twenty
thousand field-glasses that he could hand out every morning and lend to
people to look through—he would not have had to say, "Thou shalt not."
The precise measure of the governing power a man can get out of the
position of being President of the United States to-day is the amount of
advertising for the people, of the people, and by the people he can crowd
every morning, every week, into the papers of the country.
A President becomes a great President in proportion as he acts
authoritatively, tactfully, economically, and persistently as the Head
Advertising Manager of the ideals of the people. He is the great central,
official editor of what the people are trying to find out—of a nation's news
about itself.
By his being the President of what people think, by his dictating the
subjects the people shall take up, by his sorting out the men whom the
people shall notice, this great ceaseless Meeting of ninety million men we
call the United States—comes to order.
Chapter V.
The President Says "Look!"
Table of Contents
Our American President, if one merely reads what the Constitution says
about him, is a rather weak-looking character.
The founders of the country did not intend him to be anybody in
particular—if it could be helped. They were discouraged about allowing
governments to be efficient. Not very much that was constructive to do was
handed over to him. And the most important power they thought it would
do for him to have was the veto or power to say "No."
Possibly if our fathers had believed in liberty more they would have
allowed more people to have some; or if they had believed in democracy
more, or trusted the people more, they would have thought it would do to
let them have leaders, but they had just got away. They felt timid about
human nature and decided that the less constructive the government was
and the less chance the government had to be concrete, to interpret a people,
to make opportunities and turn out events, the better.
Looked at at first sight no more elaborate, impenetrable, water-tight
arrangement for keeping a government from letting in an idea or ever
having one of its own or ever doing anything for anybody, could have been
conceived than the Constitution of the United States, as the average
President interprets it.
Each branch of the government is arranged carefully to keep any other
branch from doing anything, and then the people, every four years, look the
whole country over for some new man they think will probably leave them
alone more than anybody—and put him in for President.
Looking at it narrowly and by itself, all that a President selected like
this could ever expect in America to put in his time on, would seem to be—
being the country's most importantly helpless man—the man who has been
given the honour of being a somewhat more prominent failure in America
than any one else would be allowed to be.
He stops people for four years. Other people stop him for four years.
Then with a long happy sigh, at the end of his term, he slips back into real
life and begins to do things.
This has been the more or less sedately disguised career of the typical
American President. Merely reading the Constitution or the lives of the
Presidents, without looking at what has been happening to the habits of the
people in the last few years, we might all be asking to-day, "What is there
that is really constructive that President Wilson can do?" What is there that
is going to prevent him, with all that moral earnestness dammed up in him,
that sense of duty, that Presbyterian sense of other people's duties—what is
there that is going to prevent him, with his school-book habits, his ideals,
his volumes of American history, from being a teachery or preachery person
—a kind of Schoolmaster or Official Clergyman to Business?
News.
The one really important and imperative thing to the people of this
country to-day is News. In spite of newspapers, authors, College presidents,
Bank presidents, Socialist agitators, Bill Heywoods, and Trusts, the people
are bound to get this news, and any man who is so placed by his
prominence that he can scoop up the news of a country, hammer its news
together into events the papers will report, express news in the laws, build
news into men who can make laws and unmake laws, any man who is so
placed that directly or indirectly he takes news, forces it in by hydraulic
pressure where people see it doing things, who takes news and crowds it
into courts, crowds news into lawyers and into legislatures, pries some of it
even into newspapers, can have, the ordinary American says to-day, as
much leeway in this government as he likes.
The ordinary American has never been able to understand the objection
important people have—that nearly everybody has (except ordinary people)
to news—especially editors and publishers.
It is an old story. Every one must have noticed it. One set of people in
this world, always from the beginning, trying to climb up on the housetops
to tell news, and another set of people hurrying up always and saying,
"Hush, Hush!" Some days it seems, when I read the papers, that I hear half
the world saying under its breath, a vast, stentorian, "Shoo! shoo! SHSH!
SHSH!"
Then I realize I live in an editor's world. I am expected to be in the
world that editors have decided on the whole to let me be in.
Of course I did not know what to do at first when this came over me.
I naturally began to try to think of some way of cutting across lots, of
climbing up to News.
I looked at all the neat little park paths, with all those artistic curves of
truth on them the editors have laid out for me and for all of us. Then I
looked at the world and asked myself, "Who are the men in this world, if
any, who are able to walk on the Grass, who cut across the little park paths
when they like?"
And as fate would have it (it was during the Roosevelt administration),
the first two men I came on who seemed to be stamping about in the
newspapers quite a little as they liked were the Prime Minister of England
and the President of the United States.
Just how much governing can a President do?
How many columns a day is he good for, how many acres of attention
every morning in the papers of the country—all these white fields of
attention, these acres of other people's thoughts, can he cover?
How many sticks a day can he make compositors set up of what he
thinks?
How many square miles of the people's thoughts can he spread out at
breakfast tables, lift up in a thousand thousand trolleys before their faces?
I have seen the white fields of attention filled with the footprints of his
thoughts, of his will, of his desires!
I have seen that the President is the Editor of that vast, anonymous,
silent newspaper, written all the night, written all the day, and softly
published across a country—the newspaper of people's thoughts.
I have seen the vision of the forests he has cast down, ground into
headlines, into editorials, into news. Mountains and hills are laid bare to say
what he thinks. Thousands of presses throb softly and the white reels of
wood pulp fly into speech. Thousands of miles of paper wet with the
thoughts of a people roll dimly under ground in the night.
The President is saying Look! in the night!
The newsboys hasten out in the dawn. They cry in the streets!
Chapter VI.
The People Say "Who are You?"
Table of Contents
If news is governing, how does the President do his governing?
By being News, himself.
By using his appointing power and putting other men who are News
Themselves, news about American human nature—where all the people
will see it.
By telling the people directly (when he feels especially asked) news
about what is happening in his mind—news about what he believes.
By telling the people sometimes (as candidly as he can without giving
the people's enemies a chance to stop him), what he is going to do next,
sketching out in order of time, and in order of importance, his program of
issues.
By telling the people news about their best business men, the business
men and inventors who, in their daily business, free the energies, unshackle
the minds and emancipate the genius of the people.
By telling these business men news about the people—and interpreting
the people to them.
It is by being news to the people himself that all the other news a President
can get into his government counts.
A man is a man according to the amount of news there is in him.
There are twenty personal traits in a President which of themselves
would all be national news of the first importance if he had them. The bare
fact that a President could have certain traits at all and still get to be a
President in this country, would be news.
One of the most important facts about news is that while it can be
distributed by machines, machines cannot make it, and as a rule they do not
understand it. Important and critical news is almost always fresh and made
by hand the first time. Most of the popular news as to what is practical in
American polities for the last forty years has been produced by political
machines, and of course men who were a good deal like machines were the
best men to finish the ideas off and to carry them out.
As a result of course, all the really big leaders for the last forty years,
our most powerful and interesting personalities have been shut out from
being President of the United States. The White House was merely being
run as machinery and did not interest them. They watched it grinding its
ideas faithfully out from year to year of what America was like and what
American politicians were like, and finally at last in the clatter of the
machines there rings out suddenly across the land a shot that no machinery
had allowed for. Before any one knows almost there slips suddenly by the
side door into the White House a really interesting man, and suddenly, all in
one minute, almost, this man makes being President of the United States the
most interesting lively and athletic feat in the country. And now, apparently
that the idea has been worked out in public before everybody, by hand, as it
were, that a man can be alive and interesting all over, can have at least a
little touch of news about him and still be a President in this country,
another man with some news in him has been allowed to us and suddenly
politics throughout all America has become a totally new revealing
profession, and men, instead of being selected because they were blurred
personalities, the ghosts of compromises, would-be everybodies—men who
had not decided who they were, and who could not settle down and let
people know which of their characters they had hit on at last to be really
theirs, men who had no cutting edge to do things, screw-drivers trying to be
chisels—were revealed to our people at last as vague, mean, other-worldly
persons, not fitting into our real American world at all, and hopelessly
visionary and impracticable in American politics.
And now one more hand-made man has been allowed to us.
The machines run very still in the White House.
The people of this country no longer go by the White House on their
way to their business and just hear it humdrumming and humdrumming
behind the windows as of yore. The nation stands in crowds around the
gates and would like to see in. The people wonder. They wonder a million
columns a day what is inside.
What is inside?
An American who governs by being news, himself.
The first thing that the people demand from our President now is that he
shall be news himself. The news that they have selected to know first during
the next four years—have put into the White House to know first is
Woodrow Wilson.
"Who are you, Woodrow Wilson, in God's name?" the steeples and
smoking chimneys, the bells and whistles, the Yales and Harvards, and the
little country schools, the crowds in the streets, and the corn in the fields all
say, "Who Are You?"
Then the people listen. They listen to his "I wills" and "I won'ts" for
news about him. They look for news about him in the headlines he steers
into the papers every morning, in the events he makes happen, in the
editorials he makes men think of, in the men he calls up and puts on the
National Wire—in all these, slowly, daily, hourly they drink up their long,
patient, hopeful answer to their question, "Who Are You, Woodrow
Wilson?"
Chapter VII.
The People Say "Who are We?"
Table of Contents
But if the President governs first by being news himself, he governs second
by his appointments, by gathering about him other men who are news to
people, too.
One need not divide people into good and bad, because the true line of
division between good and bad instead of being between one man and
another, is apt to be as a matter of fact and experience cut down through the
middle of each of us.
But for the purposes of public action and decision and getting good
things done, this line does seem to be cut farther over in the middle of some
of us, than it is in others. Taking a life-average in any moral or social
engineering feat, in any correct calculation of structural strain, how far over
this line cuts through in a man, has to be reckoned with.
The president by appointing certain men to office, saying "I will" and "I
won't" to certain types of men, in saying who shall be studied by the people,
who shall be read as documents of our national life, puts, if not the most
important, at least the most lively and telling news about his administration
into print.
We watch our President acting for us, telling us news about what we are
like, sorting men out around him the way ninety million people would sort
them out if they were there to do it.
The President's appointments may be said to be in a way the breath of
the nation.
A nation has to breathe, and the plain fact seems to be that certain kinds
of people have to be breathed out of a nation and other kinds of people have
to be breathed in. The way a President appoints men to office is his way of
letting a nation breathe.
With all his attractive qualities, perhaps it is because Mr. Taft did not
quite let the nation breathe, and suffocated it a little that there came such an
outbreak at the end. Perhaps it is because Mr. Taft looked at Mr. Ballinger
and then looked at Mr. Pinchot, all the people of the country all the while
looking on, and said, "Ballinger is the kind of man our people prefer, and
Pinchot is not," that the people broke out so amazingly, so incredibly, and
decided by such an enormous majority that a man who could pick out men
for them like this would not do—as things are just now anyway—for a
President of the United States.
Chapter VIII.
News About Us to the President
Table of Contents
A nation wakes up every morning and for one minute before it runs to its
work it says to its President, "HERE WE ARE!"
The best a President can do in the way of a plain, everyday
acknowledgment of the presence of the people is News.
The news that the people are demanding from the President to-day is
intensely personal. It is a kind of rough, butting, good-natured familiarity a
great people has with its President, a little heedless, relentless, like some
splendid Child, ready to forgive and expecting to be forgiven, it jostles in
upon him daily, "Here we are! What are you believing this morning? Did
you believe in us yesterday? Did you act as if you believed in us? Did you
get anybody to believe in us? Who are the men you say are like us? What
are they like this morning?
"We have asked a hundred times; we can only ask it once more. How do
you think you are turning out yourself, Mr. President? Are you what you
thought you would be? Do you think it is a good time for us to decide this
morning what you are really like? And, after all, Mr. President—if you
please—who are you? And once more, Mr. President, in God's name, who
are we?"
This is always the gist of what it says, "Who are we?"
It is the people's main point, after all, asking a President who they are,
wondering if he can interpret them.
Then he shuts his door and thinks, or he calls his Cabinet and thinks.
Rows of little-great men file by all day. They stand each a few minutes
with his little Speck or Dot of the People in his hands, and they say, "This is
the People."
He listens.
It is very hard to be always President of the People when one is
listening and the little-great go by.
One has to go back a little, in the night perhaps, or when one is quite
alone. He sees again the Child; it is what he is in the White House for, he
remembers, to express this dumb giant, this mighty Child, half weary, half
glad, standing there by day by night, saying, "Who are we?" One would
think it would be hard to be glib with the Child.
Sometimes it is so deep and silent!
Once when It broke in on Lincoln in this way and said, "Who are we?"
he prayed.
Chapter IX.
News-Men
Table of Contents
It seems very difficult to get news through as to who we really are to a
President. When I look about me and see what the President's ways are of
telling news about himself to us, I see that he is not without his advantages.
But when I look about to see what conveniences we have as a people for
telling our President news about us, I note some curious things. The fears of
the American people, the fears and threats of labour and capital are
organized and expressed, but their faiths, their wills, the things in them that
make them go and that make them American, are not organized and are not
expressed.
The labour unions are afraid and say, "We will not work," to their
employers, "You cannot make us work." The President hears this. It is about
all they say.
The capitalists and employers are afraid and they say, "We will not pay,"
"You cannot make us pay."
Shall the President act as if these men represent Labor and Capital?
We say, "No."
Neither of these groups of men express real live American labour or real
live characteristic American money.
American money is free, bold, manful, generous and courageous to a
fault. American money swings out in mighty enterprises, shrewdly
believing things, imperiously singing things out of its way.
A singing people want a singing government. How is our President
going to hear our labour and our money sing?
Pinchot expressed us, not Ballinger.
Mr. Pinchot is no mere uplifter or missionary. He is an artist in
expressing America to a President. If we have a President who will not
listen to a man like Pinchot, let us try a President that will.
Pinchot—an American millionaire with a fortune made out of forests,
who is spending the fortune in protecting the forests for the nation, is the
kind of American Americans like to set up before a President to say what
Americans are like. Millions of men stand by Pinchot. We like the way he
makes money sing.
Tom L. Johnson—an American millionaire who made his money in the
ordinary humdrum way, by getting valuable street railway franchises out of
a city for nothing—has the courage to turn around, spend his fortune and
spend it all, in keeping other people from doing it.
America presents Tom L. Johnson to a President with its compliments
and says, "This is what America is like."
It may not look always as if Tom L. Johnson were America—America
in miniature. But millions of us say he is. He makes money sing.
We want a President—millions of us want him—and this is the most
important news about us, who expects money in this country to sing.
We want our money and expect our money in this country to stop saying
mean things about us, things that make us ashamed to look a true
newspaper in the face, or one another in the face, and that humiliate us
before the world.
And now I have come to an awkward place in this book where I hope the
reader will help me all he can.
There is nothing to do but to let out the real truth and face the music.
The fact is, Gentle Reader—perhaps you have suspected it all along—that if
it had not been for fear of mixing my book all up with him and making it a
kind of arena or tournament instead of a book, I would have mentioned ex-
President Roosevelt before this. He has been getting in or nearly getting in
to nearly every chapter so far, but of course I knew, as any one would, that
he would spoil all the calm equipoise, the quiet onward flowing of the
Stream of Thought, and with one chapter after the other, with each as the
crisis came up, though I scarcely know how, I have managed to keep him
out. And now, oh, Gentle Reader, here he is! I know very well that he is in
everything, and right in the middle of everything, and that in a kind of
splendid mixed happy uproarious way, there somehow has to be a great to-
do the moment he appears. The beautiful clear water, the lucid depth of
Thought—will all become (ah, I know it too well, Gentle Reader) all
thunder and spray and underneath the mighty grinding of the wheels—the
wheels of the Nation and the Mowing Machine of Time, and in the
background—in the red background of the Dawn, there will be the face of
Theodore—just the face of Theodore in this book shining at us—readers
and writer and all—out of a huge rosy mist!
But I have been driven to it. The fact seems to be that I must find at just
this point in the book, if I can, a word. And the word will have to be a word,
too, that everybody knows, and that conveys a lively sense to everybody the
moment it is used—of a certain tone or quality, or hum or murmur of being.
No one regrets this more than I, because it is so unwieldy and inconvenient
and always bulges out in a sentence or a book or a nation more than it was
meant to, but the word ROOSEVELT, R O O S E V E L T, happens to be
the word that people in this country, and very largely in other nations, and
in all languages have chosen and are using every day to express to one
another a certain American quality or tone now abroad in our world—a
certain hum, as one might say, or whirr of goodness.
This particular hum, or whirr of goodness, which is instantly associated
with the word Roosevelt, expresses, except that of course it over-expresses,
a part of the news to-day about America which we want our President to
read.
One cannot help wondering why it is that if one wanted to express to the
largest number of people in the world a certain quality of goodness, the
word Roosevelt would do it best.
I am not dealing for the purpose of this book in what Mr. Roosevelt's
goodness is or whether it is what he thinks it is. We might all disagree about
that. I am dealing quite strictly in this connection with what even his
enemies would say is his almost egregious success in advertising goodness.
While we might all disagree as to his goodness being the kind that he or any
one ought to love, we would not fail to agree that it is his love of his own
goodness, such as it is, and his holding on to it, and his love of other
people's and his love of getting his goodness and their goodness together,
that has made him the most unconcealed person in modern life. These
qualities have established him, with his ability raised to the nth power of
attracting attention to anything he likes, as the world's greatest News Man
—the world's greatest living energy to-day in advertising what is good and
what is had in our American temperament.
Even the people who disagree with him or dislike him—many of them
would have to fall back on using the word roosevelt, or rather the verb to
roosevelt.
It does not seem to be because his goodness in itself is extraordinary. It
is even, for that matter, in the sense that anybody could have it, or some
more just like it, a little common.
What seems to be uncommon and really distinguished about Mr.
Roosevelt is the way he feels about his goodness, and the way he grips hold
of it, and the way he makes it grip hold of other people—practically
anybody almost, who is standing by. Even if they are merely going by in
automobiles, sometimes they catch some. I do not imagine that his worst
enemies, however seriously they may question the general desirability or
safety of having so much goodness roosevelting around, would fail to admit
his own real enthusiasm about goodness anywhere he finds it
indiscriminately, whether it is his own or other people's. He grips hold of it,
and grips like a cable car—instantly.
His enthusiasm is so great that many people are nonplussed by it. The
enthusiasm must really be in spite of appearances about something else,
something wicked in behind, they think, and not really about goodness. An
entire stranger would not quite believe it. It would be too original in him,
they would say, or in anybody, to care so about goodness.
If one could watch the expression in Mr. Roosevelt's face or his manner
while he is in the act of having a virtue and if one could not see plainly
from where one was, just what it was he was doing, one would at once
conclude that it must be some vice he is having. He looks happy and as if it
were some stolen secret. There is always that manner of his when he is
caught doing right, as if one were to say "Now, at last, I have got it!" He
does right like a boy with his mouth full of jam, and this seems to be true
not only when, with a whole public following and two or three nations
besides, and all the newspapers, he goes off on an orgy of righteousness,
makes the grand tour of Europe, and has the time of his life. It is the steady-
burning under enthusiasm with him all the while. The spectacle of a good
man doing a tremendous good thing affects Theodore Roosevelt like one of
the great forces of nature, like Niagara Falls, like the screws of the
Mauritania, or any other huge, happy thing that is having its way against
fear; against weakness, or against small terrified goodness.
Mr. Roosevelt in doing right conveys the sense of enjoying it so himself
that he has made almost an art form of public righteousness. He has found
his most complete, his most naïve, instinctive self-expression in it, and
while we have had goodness in public men before, we have had no man
who has been such an international chromo for goodness, who has made
such a big, comfortable "He-who-runs-may-read" bill-poster for doing right
as Roosevelt. Other men have done things that were good to do, but the
very inmost muscle and marrow of goodness itself, goodness with teeth,
with a fist, goodness that smiled, that ha-ha'd, and that leaped and danced—
perpetual motion of goodness, goodness that reeked—has been reserved for
Theodore Roosevelt. We have had goodness that was bland or proper, and
goodness that was pious or sentimental and sang, "Nearer My God to
Thee," or goodness that was kind and mushy, but this goodness with a glad
look and bounding heart, goodness with an iron hand, we have not had
before. It is Mr. Roosevelt's goodness that has made him interesting in
Cairo, Paris, Rome, and Berlin. He has been conducting a grand tour of
goodness. He has been a colossal drummer of goodness, conducting an
advertising campaign. He has proved himself a master salesman for moral
values. And he has put the American character, its hope, its energy, on the
markets and on the credits of the world.
With all his faults, those big, daring, yawning fissures in him, he is
news about us, faults and all. Though I may be, as I certainly am much of
the time, standing and looking across at him, across an abyss of
temperament that God cut down between us thousands of years ago, and
while he may have a score of traits I would not like and others that no one
would like in any one else, there he is storming out at me with his
goodness! It is his way—God help him!—God be praised for him! There he
is!
I know an American when I see one. He is a man who is singing.
A man who is singing is a man who is so shrewd about people that he
sees more in them than they see in themselves and who does things so
shrewdly in behalf of God, that when God looks upon him he delights in
him. Then God falls to of course and helps him do them.
When American men saw that there was a man among them who was
taking a thing like the Presidency of the United States (that most people
never run risks with) and putting it up before everybody, and using it grimly
as a magnificent bet on the people, they looked up. Millions of men leaped
in their hearts and as they saw him they knew that they were like him!
So did Theodore Roosevelt become news about Us.
Chapter X.
American Temperament and Government
Table of Contents
I would like to say more specifically what I mean by an American or
singing government.
The thing that counts the most in a government is its temperament. A
German government succeeds by having the German temperament. An
American government must have the American temperament.
If we are fortunate enough to have in America a government with an
American temperament what would it be like? And how would it differ
from the traditional or conventional temperament, governments are usually
allowed to have?
If I were confined to one or two words I would put it like this:
If a government has the conventional temperament, it says "NO."
If it has the American Temperament it says, "YES, BUT ..."
The whole policy and temper of a true American government is summed
up in its saying as it looks about it—now to this business man and now to
that, just in time, "YES BUT."
Louis Brandeis, of Boston, when he was made attorney for the Gas
Company of Boston to defend the company from the criticisms of the
people, sent suddenly scores of men all about canvassing the city and
looking up people to find fault with the gas.
He spent thousands of dollars a month of the Gas Company's money for
a while in helping people to be disagreeable, until they had it attended to
and got over it.
The Gas Company had the canvassers show the people how they could
burn less gas for what they got for it, and tried to help them cut their bills in
two. Incidentally, of course, they got to thinking about gas and about what
they got for it, and about other ways they could afford to use it, and began
to have the gas habit—used it for cooking and heating.
The people found they wanted to use four times as much gas.
The Boston Gas Company smiled sweetly.
Boston smiled sweetly.
Not many months had passed and two things had happened in Boston.
The Boston Gas Company, with precisely the same directors in it, had
made over the directors into new men, and all the people in Boston (all who
used gas) apparently had been made over into new people.
What had happened was Brandeis—a man with an American
temperament.
Mr. Brandeis had defended his company from the people by going the
people's way and helping them until they helped him.
Mr. Brandeis gave gas a soul in Boston.
Before a gas corporation has a soul, it would be American for a
government to treat it in one way. After it has one it would be American to
treat it in another. There are two complete sets of conduct, principles, and
visions in dealing with a corporation before and after its having a soul.
Preserving the females of the species and killing males as a method of
discrimination has been applied to all animals except human beings. This is
suggestive of a method of discrimination in dealing with corporations. A
corporation that has a soul and that is the most likely to keep reproducing
souls in others should be treated in one way, and a corporation that has not
should be treated in another.
There are two assumptions underneath everybody's thought, underneath
every action of our government: Which is the American assumption?
People are going to be bad if they can.
People are going to be good if they can.
Men who want to arrange laws and adjust life on the assumption that
business men will be bad if they can, it seems to some of us, are inefficient
and unscientific. It seems to us that they are off on the main and controlling
facts in American human nature. It is not true that American business men
will be bad if they can. They will be good if they can.
This is my assertion. I cannot prove it.
What we seem to need next in this country in order to be clear-headed
and to go ahead, is to prove it. We want a competent census of human
nature.
Lacking a census of human nature, the next best thing we can do is to
watch the men who seem to know the most about human nature.
We put ourselves in their hands.
These men seem to believe, judging from their actions, that there is
really nothing that suits our temperament better in America than being
good. If we can manage to have some way of being good that we have
thought of ourselves, we like it still better. We dote on goodness when it is
ours and when we are allowed to put some punch into it. We want to be
good, to express our practical, our doing-idealism, but we will not be driven
to being good and people who think they can drive us to being good in a
government or out of it are incompetent people. They do not know who we
are.
We say they shall not have their way with us.
Let them get us right first. Then they can do other things.
What is our American temperament?
Here are a few American reflections.
The government of the next boys' school of importance in this country
is going to determine the cuts and free hours, and privileges not by marks,
but by its genius for seeing through boys.
And instead of making rules for two hundred pupils because just twenty
pupils need them, they will make the rules for just twenty pupils.
Pupils who can use their souls and can do better by telling themselves
what to do, will be allowed to do better. Why should two hundred boys who
want to be men be bullied into being babies by twenty infants who can
scare a school government into rules, i.e., scare their teachers into being
small and mean and second-rate?
A government that goes on this principle with business men, and that
does it in a spirit of mutual understanding for those who are not yet free
from rules, and in a spirit of confidence and expectation and of talking it
over, will be a government with an American temperament.
The first trait of a great government is going to be that it will recognize
that the basis of a true government in a democracy is privilege and not
treating all people alike. It is going to see that is it a cowardly, lazy, brutal,
and mechanical-minded thing for a government which is trying to serve a
great people—to treat all the people alike. The basis of a great government
like the basis of a great man (or even the basis of a good digestion) is
discrimination, and the habit of acting according to facts. We will have rules
or laws for people who need them, and men in the same business who
amount to enough and are American enough to be safe as laws to
themselves, will continue to have their initiative and to make their business
a profession, a mould, an art form into which they pour their lives. The
pouring of the lives of men like this into their business is the one thing that
the business and the government want.
Several things are going to happen when what a good government seeks
each for a man's business, is to let him express himself in it.
When a man has proved conclusively that he has a higher level of
motives, and a higher level of abilities to make his motives work, the
government is going to give him a higher level of rights, liberties, and
immunities. The government will give special liberties on a sliding scale
and with shrewd provision for the future. The government will not give
special liberties to the man with higher motives than other men have, who
has not higher abilities to make his motives work, nor will it give special
liberties to the man who has higher abilities which could make higher
motives work, but who has not the higher motives.
Men who are new kinds and new sizes of men and who have proved
that they can make new kinds and new sizes of bargains, that they can make
(for the same money) new kinds and new sizes of goods, and who
incidentally make new kinds and new sizes of people out of the people who
buy the goods, men who have achieved all these supposed visionary feats
by their own initiative, will be allowed by the government to have all the
initiative they want, and immunities from fretful rules as long as they
resemble themselves and keep on doing what they have shown they can do.
The government will deal with each man according to the facts, the
scientific facts, that he has proved about himself.
The government acts according to scientific facts in everything except
men, in pure food, in cholera, and the next thing the government is going to
do is to be equally efficient in dealing with scientific facts in men.
It is going to give some men inspected liberty. If these men say they can
be more efficient, as a railroad sometimes is, by being a monopoly, by being
a vast, self-visioned, self-controlled body the government will have enough
character, expert courage and shrewdness about human nature to provide a
way for them to try it.
When the other people come up and ask why they cannot have these
special immunities and why they cannot be a monopoly, or nearly a
monopoly, too, the government will tell them why.
Telling them why will be governing them.
When we once reckon with new kinds and new sizes of men, everything
follows. The first man who organizes a true monopoly for public service
and who does it better than any state could do it, because he thinks of it
himself, glories in it and has a genius for it, will be given a peerage in
England perhaps. But he would not really care. The thing itself would be a
peerage enough and either in America or England he would rather be
rewarded by being singled out by the government for special rights and
distinctions in conducting his business. The best way a democracy can
honour a man who has served it is not to give him a title or to make a
frivolous, idle monument of bronze for him, but to let him have his own
way.
The way to honour any artist or any creative man, any man a country is
in need of especially, is to let him have his own way.
We are told that the way to govern trusts is to untrammel competition.
But the way to untrammel competition is not to try to untrammel it in its
details with lists of things men shall not do.
This is cumbersome.
We would probably find it very much more convenient in specifying
979 detailed things trusts cannot do, if we could think of certain sum-totals
of details.
Then we could deal with the details in a lump.
The best sum totals of details in this world that have ever been invented
yet, are men.
We will pick out a man who has a definite, marked character, who is a
fine, convenient sum-total that any one can see, of things not to do.
We will pick out another man in the same line of business who is a fine,
convenient sum-total of things that people ought to do.
The government will find ways, as the Coach of Business as the Referee
of the Game for the people, to stand by this man until he whips the other,
drives him out of business or makes him play as good a game as he does.
When a child finds suddenly that his father is not merely keeping him from
doing things, that his father has a soul, the father begins to get results out of
the child.
As a rule a child discovers first that his father has a soul by noticing that
he insists on treating him as if he had one.
Of course a corporation that has not a soul yet does not propose to be
dictated to by a government that has not a soul yet. When corporations
without souls see overwhelmingly that a government has a soul, they will
be filled with a wholesome fear. They will always try at first to prevent it
from having a soul if they can.
But the moment it gets one and shows it, they will be glad. They will
feel on firm ground. They will know what they know. They will act.
In the hospital on the hill not far from my house, one often sees one
attendant going out to walk with twelve insane men. One would think it
would not be safe for twelve insane men to go out to walk with one sane
man, with one man who has his soul on.
The reason it is safe, is, that the moment one insane man or man who
has not his soul on, attacks the man who has a soul, all of the other eleven
men throw themselves upon him and fling him to the ground. Men whose
souls are not on, protect, every time, the man who has his soul on because
the man who has a soul is the only defence they have from the men who
have not.
It is going to be the same with governments. We believe in a
government's having as much courage in America as a ten-dollar-a-week
attendant in an insane asylum. We want a government that sees how
courage works.
We are told in the New Testament that we are all members one of
another.
If society has a soul and if every member of it has a soul, what is the
relation of the social soul to the individual soul?
A man's soul is the faculty in him for seeing the Whole in relation to the
part—his vision for others in relation to his vision for himself.
My forefinger's soul in writing with this fountain pen is the sense my
forefinger has of its relation to my arm, my spinal column, and my brain.
The ability and efficiency of my forefinger depends upon its soul, that is, its
sense of relation to the other members of the body. If my forefinger tries to
act like a brain all by itself, as it sometimes does, nobody reads my writing.
The government in a society is the soul of all the members and it treats
them according to their souls.
The one compulsion a government will use if it has a soul, will be
granting charters in business in such a way as to fix definite responsibility
and definite publicity upon a few men.
If a corporation has a soul, it must show. It must have a face. Anybody
can tell a face off-hand or while going by. Anybody can keep track of a
corporation if it has a face.
The trouble with the average corporation is that all that anybody can see
is its stomach. Even this is anonymous.
Whose Stomach is it? Who is responsible for it? If we hit it, whom will
we hit? Let the government find out. If the time the government is now
spending in making impossibly minute laws for impossibly minute men,
were spent in finding out what size men were, and who they were and then
giving them just as many rights from the people, as they are the right kind
and the right size to handle for the people, it would be an American
government.
If there is one thing rather than another that an American or an
Englishman loves, it is asserting himself or expressing his character in what
he does. The typical dominating Englishman or American is not as
successful as a Frenchman or as an Italian in expressing other things, as he
is in expressing his character.
He cares more about expressing his character and asserting it. If he is
dealing with things, he makes them take the stamp of who he is. If he is
dealing with people, he makes them see and acknowledge who he is. They
must take in the facts about what he is like when they are with him. They
must deal with him as he is.
This trait may have its disadvantages, but if an Englishman or an
American is on this earth for anything, this is what he is for—to express his
character in what he does—in strong, vigorous, manly lines draw a portrait
of himself and show what he is like in what he does. This may be called on
both sides of the sea to-day as we stand front to front with the more graceful
nations, Anglo-Saxon Art.
It is because this particular art in the present crisis of human nature on
this planet is the desperate, the almost reckless need of a world that the
other nations of the world with all their dislike of us and their superiorities
to us, with all our ugliness and heaviness and our galumphing in the arts,
have been compelled in this huge, modern thicket of machines and crowds
to give us the lead.
And now we are threading a way for nations through the moral
wilderness of the earth.
This position has been accorded us because it goes with our
temperament, because we can be depended upon to insist on asserting
ourselves and on expressing ourselves in what we do. If the present
impromptu industrial machinery which has been handed over to us
thoughtlessly and in a hurry, does not express us, everybody knows that we
can be depended on to assert ourselves and that we will insist on one that
will. The nations that are more polite and that can dance and bow more
nicely than we can in a crisis like this would be dangerous. It is known
about us throughout a world that we are not going to be cowed by wood or
by iron or by steel and that we are not going to be cowed by men who are
all wood and iron and steel inside. If wood, iron, or steel does not express
us, we are Englishmen and we are Americans. We will butt our character
into it until it does.
If the American workman were to insist upon butting his American
temperament into his labour union machinery, what would his labour
machinery in America soon begin to show that an American labourer was
like?
I imagine it might work out something like this:
The thoughtful workman looks about him. He discovers that the
workman pays at least two times as much for coal as he needs to because
miners down in Pennsylvania work one third as hard as they might for the
money.
When he comes to think of it, all the labouring men of America are
paying high prices because they have to pay all the other workmen in
America for working as little as they can. He is working one third less than
he can and making his own class pay for it. He sees every workman about
him paying high prices because every other workman in making things for
him to eat and for him to wear, is cheating him—doing a third less a day for
him than he ought.
At this point the capitalists pile in and help. They shove the prices up
still higher because capital is not interested in an industry in which the
workmen do six hours' work in nine. It demands extra profits. So while the
workmen put up the prices by not working, the capitalists put up the prices
because they are afraid the workmen will not work. Half work, high prices.
Then the American workman thinks. He begins to suppose.
Suppose that the millers' workmen and the workmen in the woollen
mills in America see how prices of supplies for labouring men are going up
and suppose they agree to work as hard as they can? Suppose the wool
workers of the world want cheap bread. The flour mill workers want cheap
clothes. We will say to the bread people, "We will bring down the price of
wool for you if you will bring down the price of bread for us."
Then let Meat and Potatoes do the same for one another. Then two
industries at a time, industries getting brains in pairs, until like the animals
going into the ark, little by little (or rather very fast, almost piling in, in fact,
after the first pair have tried it), at last our true, spirited, practical minded
American workmen will have made their labour machines as natural and as
human and as American as they are. They will stop trying to lower prices by
not working, each workman joining (in a factory) the leisure classes and
making the other workmen pay for it.
The American workman, as things are organized now, finds himself
confronted with two main problems. One is himself. How can he get
himself to work hard enough to make his food and clothes cheap? The other
is his employer.
What will the American workman do to express his American
temperament through his labour union to his employer? The American
workmen will go to their employers and say: "Instead of doing six hours'
work in nine hours, we will do nine hours' work in nine hours." The millers,
for instance, will say to the flour mill owners: "We will do a third more
work for you, make you a third more profit on our labour if you will divide
your third more profit like this:
"First, by bringing down the price of flour to everybody;
"Second, by bringing up our wages. Third, by taking more money
yourselves."
American labouring men who did this would be acting like Americans.
It is the American temperament.
They will insist on it: The labour men will continue to say to their
employers, "We will divide the proceeds of our extra work into three sums
of money—ours, yours, and everybody's." In return we will soon find the
employers saying the same thing to the labour men. Employers would like
to arrange to be good. If they can get men who earn more, they want to pay
them more.
The labourers would like to be good, i.e., work more for employers who
want to pay them more.
But being good has to be arranged for.
Being good is a matter of mutual understanding, a matter of
organization, a matter of butting our American temperament into our
industrial machines.
All that is the matter with these industrial machines is that they are not
like us.
Our machines are acting just now for all the world as if they were the
Americans and as if we were the machines.
Are we for the machines, or are the machines for us?
All that the American labourers and that the American capitalists have
to do is to show what they are really like, organize their news about
themselves so that they get it through to one another, and our present great
daily occupation in America (which each man calls his "business") all the
workmen going down to the mills and all the employers going down to their
offices, and then for six, eight, nine hours a day being chewed on by
machines, will cease.
We make our industrial machines. We are Americans. Our machines
must have our American temperament.
If an American employer were to insist on butting his American
temperament into his industrial machine, what would his industrial
machine, when it is well at work at last, show an American employer's
temperament to be like?
The first thing that would show in his machine, I think, would be its
courage, its acting with boldness and initiative, originality and freedom,
without being cluttered up by precedents or running and asking Mama, its
clear-headedness in what it wants, its short-cut in getting to it, and above all
a kind of ruthless faith in human nature, in the American people, in its
goods and in itself.
The typical American business man of the highest class—the man who
is expressing his American temperament best in his business—is the one
who is expressing in it the most courage for himself and for others and for
his government. He has big beliefs every few minutes a day, and he acts on
them with nonchalance.
If he is running a trust—our most characteristic, recklessly difficult
American invention for a man to show through, and if he tries to get his
American temperament to show through in it, tries to make his trust like a
vast portrait, like a kind of countenance on a country, of what a big
American business is like, what will he do?
He will take a little axiom like this and act as if it were so.
If in any given case the producers by collusion and combination can be
efficient in lowering wages to employees and raising prices and cheating
the public, this same combination or collusion would be efficient in raising
the wages of employees, lowering prices and serving the public.
He will then, being an American, turn to his government and say "I am a
certain sort of man. If I am allowed to be an exception and to combine in
this matter, I can prove that I can raise wages, lower prices for a whole
nation in these things that I make. I am a certain sort of man. Do you think I
am, or do you think that I am not? I want to know."
The government looks noncommittally at him. It says it cannot
discriminate.
He says nothing for a time, but he thinks in his heart that it is
incompetent and cowardly to run a great government of a great nation as a
vast national sweep or flourish of getting out of brains and of evading
vision. It seems to him lazy and effeminate in a government to treat all
combinations and all monopolies alike. He says: "Look me in the eyes! I
demand of you as a citizen of this country the right to be looked by my
government in the eyes. What sort of man am I? Here are all my doors
open. My safes are your safes and my books are your books. Am I or am I
not a man who can conduct his business as a great profession, one of the
dignities and energies and joys of a great people?
"What am I like inside? Is what I am like inside—my having a small
size or a big size of motive, my having a right kind or a wrong kind of
ability of no consequence to this government? Does the government of this
country really mean that the most important things a country like this can
produce, the daily, ruling motives of the men who are living in it, have no
weight with the government? Am I to understand that the government does
not propose to avail itself of new sizes and new kinds of men and new sizes
and new kinds of abilities in men? What I am trying to do in my product is
to lower the prices and raise the wages for a nation. Will you let me do it?
Will you watch me while I do it?"
This will be the American trust of to-morrow. The average trust of this
country has not yet found itself, but the moral and spiritual history, the
religious message to a government of The Trust That Has Found Itself will
be something like this.
Perhaps when we have a trust that has found itself, we will have a
government that has dared to find itself, that has the courage to use its
insight, its sense of difference between men, as it means of getting what it
wants for the people.
As it is now, the government has not found itself and it falls back on
complex rules or machines for getting out of seeing through people.
Where courage is required, it proceeds as it proceeds with automobile
speeding laws. Everybody knows that one man driving his car three miles
an hour may be more dangerous than another kind of man who is driving
his car thirty.
When our government begins to be a government, begins to express the
American temperament, it will be a government that will devote its energy,
its men, and its money to being expert in divining, and using differences
between men. It will govern as any father, teacher, or competent business
man does by treating some people in one way and others in another, by
giving graded speed licenses in business, to labour unions, trusts, and
business men.
The government will be able to do this by demanding, acquiring, and
employing as the servants of the people, men who are experts in human
nature, masters in not treating men alike—Crowbars, lemonade-straws,
chisels, and marshmallows, powerhouses and Æolian harps by the people,
for the people, and of the people, will be rated for what they are and will be
used for what they are for.
This will be democracy. It will be the American temperament in
government.
Is President Wilson or is he not going to fall back into a mere lawyer
Moseslike way of getting people to be good, or is he going to be a man like
David, half poet, half soldier, who got his way with the nation half by
appreciating the men in it and being a fellow human being with them, and
half by fighting them when they would not let him be a fellow human being
with them, and would not let him appreciate them?
Almost any nation or government can get some kind of Moses to-day
but the men that America is producing would not particularly notice a
Moses probably now. A Moses might do for a Rockefeller, but he could not
really do anything with a man like Theodore N. Vail who has the telephones
and telegraphs of a country talking and ticking to us all, all night, all day,
what kind of a man he is.
A big affirmative, inspirational man like David or even Napoleon who
inspires people with one breath and fights hard with the next, a man who
swings his hat for the world, a man who goes on ahead and says "Come!" is
the only man who can be practical in America to-day in helping real live
American men like McAdoo, like Edison and Acheson,—men who can
express a people in a business—to express them.
The people have spoken. A man in the White House who cannot say
"Come" goes.
We want a poet in the White House. If we can not have a poet for the
White House soon, we want a poet who will make us a poet for the White
House.
I do not believe it is too much to expect a President to be a poet. We
have had a poet for President once in one supreme crisis of this nation and
the crisis that is coming now is so much deeper, so much more human and
world-wide than Lincoln's was that it would almost seem as if a place like
the White House (where one's poetry could really work) would make a poet
out of anybody.
A President who has not a kind of plain, still, homely poetry in him, a
belief about people that sings, in the present appalling crisis of the world is
impracticable or visionary.
So we do not say, "Have we a President that can get our Bells, Edisons,
McAdoos, Achesons to be good by toeing a line?"
We say, "Have we a President who can swing into step, who can join in
the singing, who can catch up?"
Tunnel McAdoo, when he lifted up his will against the sea and against
the seers of Wall Street, was singing. When he conceived those steel cars,
those roaring yellow streaks of light ringing through rocks beneath the river,
streets of people flashing through under the slime and under the fish and
under the ships and under the wide sunshine on the water, he was singing!
He raised millions of dollars singing.
Of course he sang the way Americans usually sing, and had to do as
well as he could in talking to bankers and investors not to look as if he were
singing, but there it all was singing inside him, the seven years of digging,
the seven years of dull thundering on rocks under the city, and at last the
happy steel cars all green and gold, the streams of people all yellow light
hissing and pouring through—those vast pipes for people beneath the sea!
If we have a President, let him sing like McAdoo, or like Luther
Burbank, or like Theodore N. Vail, or like Colonel Goethals, picking up a
little isthmus like Panama, a string between two continents, playing on it as
if it were a harp; or like Edward Ripley playing with the Santa Fé Railroad
for all the world like Homer with a lute, all his seven thousand men, all his
workmen, all their wives and their children, all the cities along the line
striking up and joining in the chorus or like Carborundum Acheson, backed
up by his little Niagara Falls oiling the wheels of a world, weaving
diamonds into steel, hardening the bones of the earth into skyscrapers, into
railroads, into the mighty thighs of flying locomotives....
Any man who is seen acting in this world with a thing, as if he believed
in the thing, as if he believed in himself and believed in other people, is
singing.
Moses striking out with a rod, as we are told, a path along the sea for his
people may have done a more showy thing from a religious point of view,
hitting the water on top so, making a great splash with an empty place in it
for people to march through, but he was not essentially more religious than
McAdoo, with all those modest but mighty columns of figures piling up
behind him, with all those splendid, dumb, still glowing engineers behind
him, lifting up his will against cities, lifting up his will against herds of
politicians, haughty newspapers, against the flocks of silly complacent old
ferry-boats waddling in the bay, against the wind and the rain and the cold
on the water, and all the banks of Wall Street....
When we want to tell News to our President about ourselves in
America, we point to William G. McAdoo.
The first news that we, the American people, must contrive to get into
the White House about ourselves is that we do not want to be improved, and
that we do not like an improving tone in our government. We want to be
expressed the way McAdoos express us. We want a government that
expresses our faith in one another, in what we are doing, and in ourselves,
and in the world.
We are singing over here on this continent. We would not all of us put it
in just this way. But our singing is the main thing we can do, and a
government that is trying to improve us feebly, that is looking askance at us
and looking askance at our money, and at our labour, and that does not
believe in us and join in with us in our singing does not know what we are
like.
Our next national business in America is to get the real news over to the
President of what we are like.
It is news that we want in the White House. A missionary in the White
House, be he ever so humble, will not do.
Mr. Roosevelt, himself, with the word Duty on every milepost as he
whirled past, with suggestions of things for other people to do buzzing like
bees about his head, acquired his tremendous and incredible power with us
as a people because, in spite of his violent way of breaking out into a
missionary every morning and every evening when he talked, it was not his
talking but his singing that made him powerful—his singing, or doing
things as if he believed in people, his I wills and I won'ts, his assuming
every day, his acting every day, as if American men were men. He sang his
way roughly, hoarsely, even a little comically at times into the hearts of
people, stirred up in the nation a mighty heat, put a great crackling fire
under it, put two great parties into the pot, boiled them, drew off all that was
good in them, and at last, to-day, as I write (February 1913), the prospect of
a good square meal in the White House (with some one else to say grace) is
before the people.
The people are waiting to sit down once more in the White House and
refresh themselves.
At least, the soup course is on the table.
Who did it, please? Who bullied the cook and got everybody ready?
Theodore Roosevelt, singing a little roughly, possibly hurrahing "I will,
I will, I won't, I won't," and acting as if he believed in the world.
Bryan in the village of Chicago sitting by at a reporter's table saw him
doing it.
Bryan saw how it worked.
Bryan had it in him too.
Bryan heard the shouts of the people across the land as they gloried in
the fight. He saw the signals from the nations over the sea.
Then Armageddon moved to Baltimore.
And now table is about to be spread.
It is to be Mr. Wilson's soup.
But the soup will have a Roosevelt flavour or tang to it. And we will
wait to see what Mr. Wilson will do with the other courses.
A poet in words, with two or three exceptions, America has not produced.
The only touch of poetry or art as yet that we have in America is—
acting as if we believed in people. This particular art is ours. Other people
may have it, but it is all we have.
This is what makes or may make any moment the common American a
poet or artist.
Speaking in this sense, Mr. Roosevelt is the first poet America has
produced that European peoples and European governments have noticed
for forty years, or had any reason to notice. We respectfully place Mr.
Roosevelt with Mr. McAdoo (and if Mr. Brandeis will pardon us, with Mr.
Brandeis) as a typical American before the eyes of the new President. We
ask him to take Mr. Roosevelt as a very important part of the latest news
about us.
The true imaginative men of our modern life, the poets of crowds and
cities are not to-day our authors, preachers, professors or lawyers or
philosophers. The poets of crowds are our men like this, our vision-doers,
the men who have seen visions and dreamed dreams in the real and daily
things, the daring Governors like Wilson and like Hughes, the daring
inventors of great business houses, the men who have invented the
foundations on which nations can stand, on which railroads can run, the
men whose imaginations, in the name of heaven, have played with the earth
mightily, watered deserts, sailed cities on the seas, the men who have
whistled and who have said "Come!" to empires, who have thought
hundred-year thoughts, taken out nine hundred and ninety-nine year leases,
who have thought of mighty ways for cities to live, for cities to be cool, to
be light, to be dark, who have conceived ways for nations to talk, who have
grasped the earth and the sky like music, like words, and put them in the
hands of the people, and made the people say, "O earth," and "O sky, thou
art great, but we also are great! Come earth and sky, thou shalt praise God
with us!"
Who are these men?
Let the President catch up!
Who are these men? Here is Edward A. Filene, who takes up the pride,
joy, beauty, self-respect, and righteousness of a city, swings it into a Store,
and makes that Store sing about the city up and down the world! Here is
Alexander Cassatt, imperturbable, irrepressible, and like a great Boy
playing leapfrog with a Railroad—Cassatt who makes quick-hearted,
dreamy Philadelphia duck under the Sea, bob up serenely in the middle of
New York and leap across Hell Gate to get to Boston! Let the parliaments
droning on their benches, the Congresses pile out of their doors and catch
up.
Let the lawyers—the little swarms of dark-minded lawyers, wondering
and running to and fro, creeping in offices, who have tried to run our world,
blurred our governments, and buzzed, who have filled the world with piles
of old paper, Congressional Records, with technicalities, words, droning,
weariness, despair, and fear ... let them come out and look! Let them catch
up!
Let a man in this day in the presence of men like these sing. If a man
cannot sing, let him be silent. Only men who are singing things shall do
them.
I go out into the street, I go out and look almost anywhere, listen
anywhere, and the singing rises round me!
It was singing that spread the wireless telegraph like a great web across
the sky.
It was singing that dug the subways under the streets in New York.
It was singing, a kind of iron gladness, hope and faith in men, that has
flung up our skyscrapers into the lower stories of the clouds, and made
them say, "I will! I will! I will!" to God.
Ah, how often have I seen them from the harbour, those flocking,
crowded skyscrapers under that little heaven in New York, lifting
themselves in the sunlight and in the starlight, lifting themselves before me,
sometimes, it seems, like crowds of great states, like a great country piled
up, like a nation reaching, like the plains and the hills and the cities of my
people standing up against heaven day by day—all those flocks of the
skyscrapers saying, "I will! I will! I will!" to God.
The skyscrapers are news about us to our President. He shall reckon
with skyscraper men. He shall interpret men that belong with skyscrapers.
And as he does so, I shall watch the people answer him, now with a glad
and mighty silence and now with a great solemn shout.
The skyscrapers are their skyscrapers.
The courage, the reaching-up, the steadfastness that is in them is in the
hearts of the people.
If the President does not know us yet in America, does not know
McAdoo as a representative American, we will thunder on the doors of the
White House until he does.
My impression is he would be out in the yard by the gate asking us to
come in.
We are America. We are expressing our joy in the world, our faith in
God, and our love of the sun and the wind in the hearts of our people.
In America the free air breathes about us, and daily the great sun climbs
our hillsides, swings daily past our work. There are ninety million men with
this sun and this wind woven into their bodies, into their souls. They stand
with us.
The skyscrapers stand with us.
All singing stands with us.
Ah, I have waked in the dawn and in the sun and the wind have I seen
them!
That sun and that wind, I say before God, are America! They are the
American temperament.
I will have laws for free men, laws with the sun and the wind in them!
I have waked in the dawn and my heart has been glad with the iron and
poetry in the skyscrapers.
I will have laws for men and for American men, laws with iron and
poetry in them!
The way for a government to get the poetry in is to say "Yes" to
somebody.
The way for a government to get the iron in is not by saying "No." It is
not American in a government to keep saying "No." The best way for our
government in America to say "No" to a man, is to let him stand by and
watch us saying "Yes" to some one else.
Then he will ask why.
Then he will stand face to face with America.
Chapter XI.
News-Books
Table of Contents
The most practical thing that could happen now in the economic world in
America would be a sudden, a great national, contemporary literature.
America, unlike England, has no recognized cultured class, and has no
aristocracy, so called, with which to keep mere rich men suitably miserable
—at least a little humble and wistful. Our greatest need for a long time has
been some big serene, easy way, without half trying, of snubbing rich men
in America. All these overgrown, naughty fellows one sees everywhere like
street boys on the corners or on the curbstones of society, calling society
names and taking liberties with it, tripping people up; hoodlums with
dollars, all these micks of money!—O, that society had some big, calm,
serene way like some huge hearty London policeman, of taking hold of
them—taking hold of them by the seats of their little trousers if need be,
and taking them home to Mother—some way of setting them down hard in
their chairs and making them thoughtful! Nothing but a national literature
will do this. "Life," (which is, with one exception, perhaps, the only
religious weekly we have left in America) succeeds a little and has some
spiritual value because it succeeds in making American millionaires look
funny, and in making them want to get away and live in Europe. But "Life"
is not enough; it merely hitches us along from day to day and keeps our
courage up. We want in America a literature, we want the thing done
thoroughly and forever and once for all. We want an Aristophanes, a master
who shall go gloriously laughing through our world, through our chimneys
and blind machines, pot-bellied fortunes, empty successes, all these tiny,
queer little men of wind and bladder, until we have a nation filled with a
divine laughter, with strong, manful, happy visions of what men are for.
All we have to do is to have a News-book—a bookful of the kind of rich
men we want, then we will have them. We will see men piling over each
other all day to be them. Men have wanted to make money because making
money has been supposed to mean certain things about a man. The moment
it ceases to mean them, they will want to make other things.
Where is the news about what we really want?
——, when I took him to the train yesterday, spoke glowingly of the
way the Standard Oil Trust had reduced oil from twenty-nine cents to
eleven cents.
There was not time to say anything. I just thought a minute of how they
did it.
Why is it that people—so many good people will speak of oil at eleven
cents in this way, as if it were a kind of little kingdom of heaven?
I admit that eleven cents from twenty-nine cents leaves eighteen cents.
I do not deny that the Standard Oil Trust has saved me eighteen cents.
But what have they taken away out of my life and taken out of my sense of
the world and of the way things go in it and out of my faith in human nature
to toss me eighteen cents?
If I could have for myself and others the sense of the world that I had
before, would I not to-day, day after day, over and over, gallon by gallon, be
handing them their eighteen cents back?
What difference does it make to us if we are in a world where we can
buy oil for eleven cents a gallon instead of twenty-nine, if we do not care
whether we are alive or dead in it and do not expect anything from
ourselves or expect anything of anybody else? I submit it to your own
common sense, Gentle Reader. Is it any comfort to buy oil to light a room in
which you do not want to sit, in which you would rather not see anything, in
which you would rather not remember who you are, what you do, and what
your business is like, and what you are afraid your business is going to be
like?
I have passed through all this during the last fifteen years and I have
come out on the other side. But millions of lives of other men are passing
through it now, passing through it daily, bitterly, as they go to their work
and as they fall asleep at night.
The next thing in this world is not reducing the price of oil. It is raising
the price of men and putting a market-value on life.
What makes a man a man is that he knows himself, knows who he is,
what he is for and what he wants. Knowing who he is and knowing what he
is about, he naturally acts like a man, knows what he is about like a man,
and gets things done.
A nation that does not know itself shall not be itself.
A nation that has a muddle-headed literature, a nation that to say
nothing of not being able to express what it has, has not even made a
beginning at expressing what it wants; a nation that has not a great, eager,
glowing literature, a sublime clear-headedness about what it is for—a
nation that cannot put itself into a great book, a nation that cannot weave
itself together even in words into a book that can be unfurled before the
people like a flag where everybody can see it and everybody can share it,
look up to it, live for it, sleep for it, get up in the morning and work for it—
work for the vision of what it wants to be—cannot be a great nation.
A masterpiece is a book that has a thousand years in it. No man has a
right to say where these thousand years in it shall lie, whether in the past or
in the future. It is the thousand years' worth in it that makes a masterpiece a
masterpiece. In America we may not have the literature of what we are or of
what we have been, but the literature of what we are bound to be, the
literature of what WE WILL, we will have, and we will have to have it
before we can begin being it.
First the Specifications, then the House.
From the practical or literary point of view the one sign we have given
in this country so far, that the stuff of masterpieces is in us and that we are
capable of a great literature, is that America is bored by its own books.
We let a French parson write a book for us on the simple life. We let a
poor suppressed Russian with one foot in hell reach over and write books
for us about liberty which we greedily read and daily use. We let a
sublimely obstinate Norwegian, breaking away with his life, pulling himself
up out of the beautiful, gloomy, morose bog of romance he was born in—
express our American outbreak for facts, for frank realism in human nature.
America is bored by its own books because every day it is demanding
gloriously from its authors a literature—books that answer our real
questions, the questions the people are asking every night as they go to
sleep and every morning when they crowd out into the streets—Where are
we going? Who are we? What are we like? What are we for?
A—— C——, the little stoopy cobbler on —— street in ——, bought some
machines to help him last year before I went away and added two or three
slaves to do the work. I find on coming back that he has moved and has two
show windows now, one with the cobbling slaves in it cobbling, and the
other (a kind of sudden, impromptu room with a show window in it) seems
to be straining to be a shoe store. When you go in and show C—— in his
shirt sleeves,—your old shoes hopefully, he slips over from his shining
leather bench to the shoe-store side and shows you at the psychological
moment a new pair of shoes.
He is in the train now with me this morning, across the aisle, looking
out of the window for dear life, poor fellow, for all the world as if he could
suck up dollars and customers—and people who need shoes—out of the
fields as he goes by, the way the man does mists, by looking hard at them.
I watched him walking up and down the station platform before I got
on, with that bent, concentrated, meek, ready-to-die-getting-on look. I saw
his future while I looked. I saw, or thought I saw, windows full of bright
black shoes, I saw the cobbler's shop moved out into the ell at the back, and
two great show windows in front. A—— C—— looks like an edged tool.
Millions of Americans are like A—— C——, like chisels, adzes, saws,
scoops. You talk with them, and if you talk about anything except scooping
and adzing, you are not talking with just a man, but a man who is for
something and who is not for anything else. He is not for being talked with
certainly, and alas! not for being loved. At best he is a mere feminine
convenience—a father or a cash secreter; until he wears out at last, buzzes
softly into a grave.
An Englishman of this type is a little better, would be more like one of
these screw-driver, cork-screw arrangements—a big hollow handle with all
sorts of tools inside.
Is this man a typical American? Does he need to be?
What I want is news about us.
All an American like C—— needs is news. His eagerness is the making
of him. He is merely eager for what he will not want.
All he needs is the world's news about people, about new inventions in
human beings, news about the different and happier kinds of newly
invented men, news about how they were thought of, and how they are
made, and news about how they work.
I demand three things for A—— C——:
I want a novel that he will read which will make him see himself as I
see him.
I want a moving picture of him that he will go to and like and go to
again and again.
I want a play that will send him home from the theatre and keep him
awake with what he might be all that night.
I want a news-book for A—— C——, a news-book for all of us.
I read a book some years ago that seemed a true news-book and which was
the first suggestion I had ever received that a book can be an act of colossal
statesmanship, the making or remaking of a people—a masterpiece of
modern literature, laying the ground plan for the greatness of a nation.
When I had read it, I wanted to rush outdoors and go down the street
stopping people I met and telling them about it. Once in a very great while
one does come on a book like this. One wants to write letters to the reviews.
One does not know what one would not do to go down the long aimless
Midway Plaisance of the modern books, to call attention to it. One wishes
there were a great bell up over the world.... One would reach up to it, and
would say to all the men and the women and to the flocks of the smoking
cities, "Where are you all?" The bell would boom out, "What are you
doing? Why are you not reading this book?" One wonders if one could not
get a coloured page in the middle of the Atlantic or the North American
Review or Everybody's and at least make a great book as prominent as a
great soap—almost make it loom up in a country like a Felt Mattress or a
Toothbrush.
The book that has made me feel like this the most is Charles Ferguson's
"Religion of Democracy." I have always wondered why only people here
and there responded to it. The things it made me vaguely see, all those huge
masses of real things, gigantic, half-godlike, looming like towers or
mountains in a mist.... Well, it must have been a little like this that
Columbus felt that first morning!
But as Columbus went on, what he struck after all was real land, some
piece of real land in particular. The mist of vision did precipitate into
something one could walk on, and I found as I went on with Mr. Ferguson's
book that if there was going to be any real land, somebody would have to
make some.
But for the time being Charles Ferguson's book—all those glorious
generalizings in behalf of being individual, all those beautiful, intoned,
chanted abstractions in behalf of being concrete—came to me in my
speechless, happy gratitude as a kind of first sign in the heavens, as a pillar
of cloud by day and of fire by night, up over the place in the waste of water
where land, Land! At last! Land again! will have to be.
If we ever have a literature in America, it will be found somewhere
when the mist rolls away, right under Charles Ferguson's book.
It may be too soon just now in this time of transition in our land of piles
and of derricks against the sky, for the book. All we are competent for now
is to say that we want such a book, that we see what it will do for us.
When we want it, we will get it. Let the American people put in their
order now.
In the meantime the Piles and the Derricks.
All these young and mighty derricks against the sky, all these soaring
steel girders with the blue through them—America!
Ah, my God! is it not a hoping nation? Three thousand miles of Hope,
from Eastport, Maine, to San Francisco—does not the very sun itself racing
across it take three hours to get one look at our Hope?
Here it is!—Our World.
Let me, for one, say what I want.
It is already as if I had seen it—one big, heroic imagination at work at
last like a sea upon our world, poetry grappling with the great cities, with
their labour, with their creative might, full of their vast joys and sorrows,
full of their tussle with the sea and with the powers of the air and with the
iron in the earth!—the big, speechless cities that no one has spoken for yet,
so splendid, and so eager, and so silent about their souls!
It is true we are crude and young.
Behold the Derricks like mighty Youths!
In our glorious adolescence so sublime, so ugly, so believing, will no
one sing a hymn to the Derricks?
Where are the dear little Poets? Where are they hiding?
Playing Indian perhaps, or making Parthenons out of blocks.
Perhaps they might begin faintly and modestly at first.
Some dear, hopeful, modest American poet might creep up from under
them, out from under the great believing, dumb Derricks standing on tiptoe
of faith against the sky, and write a book and call it "Beliefs American Poets
Would Like to Believe if They Could."
Chapter XII.
News-Books II
Table of Contents
A nation's religion is its shrewdness about its ideals, its genius for stating its
ideals or news about itself, in the terms of its everyday life.
A nation's literature is its power of so stating its ideals that we will not
need to be shrewd for them—its power of expressing its ideals in words, of
tracing out ideals on white paper, so that ideals shall enthrall the people, so
that ideals shall be contagious, shall breathe and be breathed into us, so that
ideals shall be caught up in the voices of men and sung in the streets.
Ideals, intangible, electric, implacable irresistible, all-enfolding ideals,
shall hold and grip a continent the way a climate grips a continent, like
sunshine around a helpless thing, in the hollow of its hand, and possess the
hearts of the people.
What our government needs now is a National band in Washington.
America is a Tune.
America is not a formula. America is not statistics, even graphic
statistics. A great nation cannot be made, cannot be discovered, and then be
laid coldly together like a census. America is a Tune. It must be sung
together.
The next thing statesmen are going to learn in this country is that from a
practical point of view in making a great nation only our Tune in America
and only our singing our Tune can save us. A great nation can be made out
of the truth about us. The truth may be—must be probably,—plain. But the
truth must sing.
It will not be the government that first gets the truth that will govern us.
The government that gets the truth big enough to sing first, and sings it, will
be the government that will govern us. The political party in this country
that will first be practical with the people, and that will first get what it
wants, will be the political party that first takes Literature seriously. Our
first great practical government is going to see how a great book, searching
the heart of a nation, expressing and singing the men in it, governs a people.
Being a President in a day like this, if it does not consist in being a poet,
consists in being the kind of President who can be, at least, in partnership
with a poet.
It is not every President who can be his own David, who can rule with
one hand and write psalms and chants for his people with the other.
The call is out, the people have put in their order to the authors of
America, to the boys in the colleges, and to the young women in the great
schools—Our President wants a book.
Before much time has passed, he is going to have one.
Being a President in this country has never been expressed in a book.
The President is going to have a book that expresses him to the people
and that says what he is trying to do. He will live confidentially with the
book. It shall be in his times of trial and loneliness like a great people
coming to him softly. He shall feel with such a book, be it day or night, the
nation by him, by his desk, by his bedside, by his silence, by his
questioning, standing by, and lifting.
In the book the people shall sing to the President. He shall be kept
reminded that we are there. He shall feel daily what America is like.
America shall be focussed into melody. We shall have a literature once
more and the singers, as in Greece, as in all happy lands and in all great
ages, shall go singing through the streets.
There is no singing for a President now. All a President can do when he
is inaugurated, when he begins now, is to kiss helplessly some singing four
thousand years old in a Bible by another nation.
When David sang to his people, he sang the news, the latest news, the
news of what was happening to people about him from week to week.
Why is no one singing 1913, our own American 1913?
Why is no one stuttering out our Bible—one the President could have to
refer to, our own Bible in our own tongue from morning to morning in the
symbols that breathe to us out of the sounds in the street, out of the air, out
of the fresh, bright American sky, and out of the new ground beneath our
feet?
It is easy for a President to pile up three columns a morning of news about
himself to us, show each man his face in the morning, but what is there he
can do with twenty thousand newspapers at his breakfast table, to pick out
the real news about us? Who shall paint the portrait of a people?
One could go about in the White House and study the portraits of the
presidents, but where is the portrait of the people? The portrait of the people
comes in little bits to the president like a puzzle picture. Each man brings in
his little crooked piece, jig-sawed out from Iowa, South Dakota, Oklahoma
or Aroostook County, Maine. This picture or vision of a nation, this
wilderness of pieces, can be seen every day when one goes in, lying in
heaps on the floor of the White House.
A literature is the expression on the face of a nation. A literature is the
eyes of a great people looking at one.
It seems to be as we look, looking out of the past and faraway into the
future.
A newspaper can set a nation's focus for a morning, adjusting it one way
or the other. A President can set the focus for four years. But only a book
can set the focus for a nation's next hundred years so that it can act
intelligently and steadfastly on its main line from week to week and
morning to morning. Only a book can make a vast, inspiring, steadfast,
stage-setting for a nation. Only a book, strong, slow, reflective, alone with
each man, and before all men, can set in vast still array the perspective, the
vision of the people, can give that magnificent self-consciousness which
alone makes a great nation, or a mighty man. At last humble, imperious,
exalted, it shall see Itself, its vision of its daily life lying out before it,
threading its way to God!
Chapter XIII.
News-Papers
Table of Contents
I went one day six months ago to the Mansion House and heard Lord Grey,
and Lord Robert Cecil, and Mr. T.C. Taylor and others address the annual
meeting of the Labour Copartnership Association.
I found myself in the presence of a body of men who believe that
Englishmen are capable of bigger and better things than many men believe
they are capable of. They refuse to evade the issue of the coal strike and to
agree with the socialists who have given up believing that English
employers can be competent and who merely believe that we will have to
rely on our governments now to be employers, and they refuse to agree with
the syndicalists, who believe in human nature still less and have given up
on employers and on governments both.
I have retained three impressions as a result of the meeting.
The first was that it was the most significant and impressive event since
the coal strike, that it brought the whole industrial issue to a point and
summed the coal strike up.
The second impression was one of surprise that the hall was not full.
The third impression came the next day when I looked through the
papers for accounts of what had been said and of what it stood for.
It was noted pleasantly and hurriedly as one of the day's events. It was
just one more of those shadowy things that flicker on the big foolish,
drifting, rolling attention of a world a second and are gone.
People were given a few inches.
I read in the papers that same day a quite long account of a discussion of
nine bishops for five hours (meeting at the same time) on a matter of proper
clothes for clergymen.
I would have said of that meeting of the Labour Copartnership
Association—that it was a meeting of a Society for Defence and Protection
of Longer Possible Religion on the Earth—but the clergy out of all the
invitations, did not seem very largely to have had time to be there.
I wondered too a little about the papers, as I hunted through them.
It set one to thinking if anything serious to the nation would have
happened, if possibly during the coal strike the London papers had devoted
as much attention to T.C. Taylor—a mutual interest employer—and to how
he runs his business—as to Horatio Bottomley?
Possibly too what Mr. Sandow prefers to have people drink is not so
important—perhaps whole pages of it at a time—as Amos Mann and how
he runs his shoe business without strikes, or as Joseph Bibby and how he
makes oil cakes and loyal workmen together.
I read the other day of a clergyman in New Jersey—who was organizing
a league of all the left-handed men in the world. Everything is being
organized, whether or no. Some one has financed him. There will be some
one very soon now who will pay the bill for organizing the attention of a
world and for deciding the fate of human nature. It would be worth while
spending possibly one fortune on getting human nature to settle decisively
and once for all whether it has any reason to believe in itself or not. Why
have a world at all—one like this? Do we want it? Who wants it? What do
we want instead? We will advertise and find out. We will spend millions of
pounds and Dreadnoughts, even national beer-bills on it, if necessary, on
making everybody know that mentally competent business men—mutual-
interest employers, and mentally competent workmen—mutual-interest
workmen, can be produced by the human race. When everybody knows that
this is true, nine out of ten Parliamentary questions would be settled, the
Churches would again have a chance to be noticed, and education and even
religion could be taken seriously. There would be some object in being a
teacher perhaps once more and in making teaching again a great profession.
There would be some object perhaps in even being an artist. The world
would start off on a decent, self-respecting theory or vision about itself.
Things could begin to be done in society once more, soundly, permanently,
humanly and from the bottom up.
We would go out on the streets again—rich and poor—and look in each
other's faces. We would take up our morning papers without a sinking at the
heart.
And the men who have stopped believing in men and who merely
believe in machines would be indicted before the bar of mankind. We would
see them slowly filing back, one by one, to where they belong—on the back
seats of the world.
The newspapers in England and America seem to think that in their
business of rolling the world along, what they find themselves confronted
with just now is an economic problem.
The problem that the newspapers are really confronted with, as a matter
of fact, is one with which newspaper men big and little are more competent
to deal than they would be with an expert problem in economics. The real
problem that newspapers are confronted with every night, every morning,
to-day, is a problem in human nature.
Some people believe that human nature can be believed in, and others
do not. The socialists, the syndicalists, the trades unionists, as a class, and
the capitalists as a class, are acting as if they did not. A great many
inventors, and a great many workmen, all the more bold and inventive
workmen, and many capitalists and great organizers of facts and of men, are
acting as if they believed in human nature.
Which are right? Can a mutual-interest employer, can a mutual-interest
worker, be produced by the human race? There are some of us who answer
that this is a matter of fact, that this type of man can be produced, is already
produced, and is about to be reproduced indefinitely.
The moment we can convince trades unions and convince employers
that this is true we will change the face of the earth.
Why not change the face of the earth now?
In this connection I respectfully submit three considerations:
1st. If all employers of the world to-morrow morning knew what Lord
Grey (as President of the Labour Copartnership Association) knows to-day
about copartnership—the hard facts about the way copartnership works in
calling out human nature—in nerving and organizing labour, every
employer in the world to-morrow would begin to take an attitude toward
labour which would result in making strikes and lockouts as impracticable,
as incredible, as moony, as visionary forever as ideals of a world without
strikes look now.
2nd. If all the workmen of the world to-morrow morning knew what
Frederick Taylor (the American engineer) knows about planning workmen's
work so that they receive, for the same expenditure of strength, a third more
wages every day, the whole attitude of labour in every nation and of the
trades unions of the world—the attitude of doing as little work as possible,
of labouring and studying and slaving away to discover ways of not being
of any use to employers—would face about in a day.
3rd. What Lord Grey knows about copartnership and the way it works is
in the form of ascertainable, communicable, and demonstrable facts. What
Frederick Taylor knows and what he has been doing with human beings and
with steel and pig iron and with bricks and other real things is in the form of
history that has been making for thirty years—and that can be looked up
and proved.
Why should not everybody who employs labour know what Lord Grey
knows?
And why should not all workmen know what a few thousand workmen
who have been trained under Frederick Taylor to work under better
conditions and with more wages, know?
If I were an inspired millionaire the first thing I would do to-morrow
would be to supply the funds and find the men who should take up what
Lord Grey knows about employers, and what Frederick Taylor knows about
workmen, and put it where all who live shall see it and know it. I would
spend my fortune in proving to the world, in making everybody know and
believe that the mutual-interest business man and the mutual-interest
workman have been produced and can be produced and shall be produced
by the human race.
The problem of the fate of the world in its essential nature and in its
spiritual elements and gifts—has come to be in this age of the press a huge
advertising problem—a great adventure in human attention.
The most characteristic and human and natural way, and the only
profound and permanent way to handle the quarrel between Capital and
Labour is by placing certain facts—certain rights-of-all-men-to-know, into
the hands of some disinterested and powerful statesman of publicity—some
great organizer of the attention of a world. He would have to be a practical
passionate psychologist, a man gifted with a bird's-eye view of publics—a
discoverer of geniuses and crowds, a natural diviner or reader of the hearts
of men. He shall search out and employ twenty men to write as many books
addressed to as many classes and types of employers and workers. He shall
arrange pamphlets for every dooryard that cannot help being read.
He shall reach trades unions by using the cinema, by having some
master of human appeal take the fate of labour, study it out in pictures—and
the truth shall be thrown night after night and day after day on a hundred
thousand screens around a world. He shall organize and employ wide
publicity or rely on secret and careful means on different aspects of the
issue according to the nature of the issue, human nature and common sense,
and organize his campaign to reach every type of person, every
temperament, and order of circumstance, each in its own way.
What Lord Grey knows and what Frederick Taylor's workmen know
shall be put where all who live shall see it where every employer, every
workman, every workman's wife and every growing boy and girl that is
passing by, as on some vast billboard above the world, shall see it—shall
see and know and believe that employers that are worth believing in—and
that workmen who can work and who are skilled and clever enough to love
to work—can still be produced by the human race.
If I were a newspaper man I would start what might be called Pull
Together Clubs in every community, men in all walks of life, little groups of
crowdmen or men in the community who could not bear not to see a town
do team work.
I would use these Pull Together Clubs in every community as means of
gathering and distributing news—as local committees on the national
campaign of touching the imagination of labour and touching the
imagination of capital.
"Without Vision the People perish."
I would begin with spending five million dollars on a vision for the
people.
What would I do with a five-million-dollar fund for touching the
imagination of labour and touching the imagination of capital?
First: preliminary announcement in all papers and in all public ways,
asking names and addresses of workmen who have already proved and
established their belief in copartnership.
Names and addresses of employers in the same way.
Second: names and addresses of workmen who would believe in it if
they could; who believe in the principle theoretically and would be
interested in seeing how it could be practically and technically proved.
Names and addresses of employers in the same way.
Third: selection of one firm in each industry, the best and most
strategically placed to carry it out in that industry, and placing the facts
before them.
Selection of the leading workmen out of all the workmen in the nation
employed in that industry, who would be willing to work with such a firm.
Fourth: a selection of travelling secretaries to visit trades unions and get
provisional permission and toleration for these workmen so that they can
take copartnership places under such a firm with the consent of their
fellows and he set one side for experimental purposes, under the protection
of the trades union rules.
Fifth: I would find the most promising trades-union branch in each
industry and I would try to get this branch to take it up with the other
branches until all trades unions were brought to admit copartnership
members on special terms.
Sixth: after getting copartnership tolerated for certain workmen
employed in certain firms I would try to make copartnership a trades-union
movement.
I would then let the trades unions educate the employers.
Seventh: I would prepare a list of apparent exceptions to copartnership
as a working principle. I would investigate and try to see why they were
exceptions and why copartnership would not work, and I would find and set
inventors at work, and find in what way the spirit that is back of
copartnership could be applied.
Chapter XIV.
News-Machines
Table of Contents
We want to be good and the one thing we need to do is to tell each other.
Then we will be good. Our conveniences for being good in crowds are not
finished yet.
We have invented machines for crowds to see one another with and to
use in getting about in the dark. One engine whirls round and round all
night so that half a million people can be going about anywhere after sunset
without running into each other.
Crowds have vast machines for being somewhere else—run in
somewhat the same way all from one unpretentious building they put up
called a Power House.
A great many of our machines for allowing crowds of people to move
their bodies around with have been attended to, but our Intelligence-
Machine, our machine for knowing what other people really think, and what
they are like in their hearts so that we can know enough to be good to them,
and have brains enough to get them to be good to us, is not finished and set
up yet.
The industrial problem instead of being primarily an economic problem
is a news problem.
If a President were to appoint a Secretary of Labour and were to give
him as one of his conveniences, a news engineer—an expert at attracting
and holding the attention of labour unions and driving through news to
them about themselves that they do not know yet, who would be practically
at the head of the department in two years? The Secretary or the Secretary's
news engineer? News is all there is to such a department, finding out what it
is and distributing it. Any one can think of scores of labour-union fallacies,
news they do not know about themselves that they will want to know at
once when their attention is called to it.
If nine members of the President's Cabinet were national news agents,
experts in nationalizing news, one member could do with his subordinates
all the other things that Cabinet members do.
The real problem before each Cabinet member is a problem of news. If
the Secretary of Commerce, for instance, could get people to know certain
things, he would not need to do at all most of the things that he is doing
now. Neither would the Attorney General.
If everything in a Cabinet position turns on getting people to know
things, why not get them to know them? Why not take that job instead?
Why not take the job of throwing one's self out of a job? Every powerful
man has done it—thrown himself out of what he was doing, by making up
something bigger to do from the beginning of the world.
In every business it is the man who can recognize, focus, organize, and
apply news, and who can get news through to people, who soon becomes
the head of the business.
The man who can get news through to directors and to employees and
make them see themselves and see one another and the facts as they are,
soon gets to be Head of the factory.
The man who can get news through to the public, the salesman of news
to people about what they want to buy and about how they are to spend
their money—very personal, intimate news to every man—soon rises to be
Head of the Head of the factory and of the entire business.
It will probably be the same in a cabinet or in a government. If the
Secretary of the Department of Commerce has a news engineer as a
subordinate in his department and begins to study and observe how to do
his work best, how to solve his problem in the nation, we will soon see the
head of the department, if he really is the head of the department, quietly
taking over his news engineer's job and letting his news engineer have his.
It is a news engineering job, being a Secretary of Commerce.
Every member of the Cabinet has a news engineering job.
And the fact seems to be that the moment the news is attended to in
each member's department—applied news, special and private news, turned
on and set to work where it is called for—most members of cabinets,
secretaries of making people do things, and for that matter, the Presidents of
making people do things will be thrown out of employment. The Secretaries
of What People Think, and the President of What People Think—the
engineers of the news in this nation—will be the men who govern it.
Chapter XV.
News-Crowds
Table of Contents
I
I have tried to express in the last chapter, some kind of tentative working
vision or hope of what authors and of what newspaper men can do in
governing a country.
This chapter is for anybody, any plain human being.
Governments all over the world to-day are groping to find out what
plain human beings are like.
It does not matter very long what other things a government gets wrong,
if it gets the people right.
This suggests something that each of us can do.
I was calling on ——, Treasurer of ——, in his new bank, not long ago
—a hushed, reverent place with a dome up over it and no windows on this
wicked world—a kind of heavenly minded way of being lighted from
above. It seemed to be a kind of Church for Money.
"This is new," I said, "since I've been away. Who built it?"
—— mentioned the name of Non-Gregarious as if I had never heard of
him.
I said nothing. And he began to tell me how Non built the bank. He said
he had wanted Non from the first, but that the directors had been set against
it.
And the more he told the directors about Non, he said, the more set they
were. They kept offering a good many rather vague objections, and for a
long time he could not really make them out.
Finally he got it. All the objections boiled down to one.
Non was too good to be true. If there was a man like Non in this world,
they said, they would have heard about it before.
When I was telling ex-Mayor ——, in ——, about Non, the first time, he
interrupted me and asked me if I would mind his ringing for his
stenographer. He was a trustee and responsible, either directly or indirectly,
for hundreds of buildings, and he wanted the news in writing.
Of course there must be something the matter with it, he said, but he
wanted it to be true, if it could, and as the bare chance of its being true
would be very important to him, he was going to have it looked up.
Now ex-Mayor —— is precisely the kind of man (as half the world
knows) who, if he had been a contractor, instead of what he had happened
to be, would have been precisely the kind of contractor Non is. He has the
same difficult, heroic blend of shrewd faiths in him, of high motives and
getting what he wants.
But the moment ex-Mayor —— found these same motives put up to be
believed in at one remove, and in somebody else, he thought they were too
good to be true.
I have found myself constantly confronted in the last few years of
observation with a very singular and interesting fact about business men.
Nine business men out of ten I know, who have high motives, (in a
rather bluff simple way, without particularly thinking about it, one way or
the other) seem to feel a little superior to other people. They begin, as a
rule, apparently, by feeling a little superior to themselves, by trying to keep
from seeing how high their motives are, and when, in the stern scuffle of
life, they are unable any longer to keep from suspecting how high their
motives are themselves, they fall back on trying to keep other people from
suspecting it.
In ——'s factory in ——, the workers in brass, a few years ago, could
not be kept alive more than two years because they breathed brass filings.
When —— installed, at great expense, suction machines to place beside the
men to keep them from breathing brass, some one said, "Well surely you
will admit this time, that this is philanthropy?"
"Not at all."
The saving in brass air alone, gathered up from in front of the men's
mouths, paid for the machines. What is more he said that after he had gone
to the expense of educating some fine workmen, if a mere little sucking
machine like that could make the best workmen he had, work for him
twenty years instead of two years, it was poor economy to let them die.
Nearly all of the really creative business men make it a point, until they
get a bit intimate with people, to talk in this tone about business. One can
talk with them for hours, for days at a time, about their business—some of
them, without being able a single time to corner them into being decent or
into admitting that they care about anybody.
Now I will not yield an inch to —— or to anybody else in my desire to
displace and crowd out altruism in our modern life. I believe that altruism is
a feeble and discouraged thing from a religious point of view. I have
believed that the big, difficult and glorious thing in religion is mutualism, a
spiritual genius for finding identities, for putting people's interests together-
you-and-I-ness, and we-ness, letting people crowd in and help themselves.
And why not believe this and drop it? Why should nearly every business
man one meets to-day, try to keep up this desperate show, of avoiding the
appearance of good, of not wanting to seem mixed up in any way with
goodness—either his own or other people's?
In the present desperate crisis of the world, when all our governments
everywhere are groping to find out what business men are really like and
what they propose to be like, if a man is good (far more than if he is bad)
everybody has a right to know it. The President has a right to know it. The
party leaders have a right to know it.
It is a big businesslike thing for a man to make goodness pay, but what
is the man's real, deep, happy, creative, achieving motive in making
goodness pay? What is it in the man that fills him with this fierce desire,
this almost business-fanaticism for making goodness pay?
It is a big daily grim love of human nature in him, his love of being in a
human world, his passion for human economy, for world efficiency and
world-self-respect. This is what it is in him that makes him force goodness
to pay.
The business men of the bigger type who let themselves talk in this tone
to-day, do not mean it, they are letting themselves be insensibly drawn into
the tone of the men around them.
We have gone skulking about with our virtues so long, saying that we
have none, that we have believed it. We all know men finer than we are who
say they have none. So we have not, probably.
And so it goes on. I grow more and more tired every year of going
about the business world, at boards of trade and at clubs and at dinners, and
finding all this otherwise plain and manly world, all dotted over everywhere
with all these simple, good, self-deceived blundering prigs of evil, putting
on airs before everybody day and night, of being worse than they are!
It is not exactly a lie. It is a Humdrum. People do not deliberately lie
about human nature. They merely say pianola-minded things.
One goes down any business street, Oxford Street, Bond Street, or
Broadway. One hears the same great ragtime tune of business, dinging like
a kind of street piano, through men's minds, "Sh-sh-sh-sh-Oh, SH-SH! Oh,
do not let anybody know I'm being good!"
II
I am not going to try any longer to worm out of my virtues or to keep up an
appearance of having as low motives as other people are trying to make me
believe they have.
They have lied long enough.
I have lied long enough.
My motives are really rather high and I am going to admit it.
And the higher they are (when I have hustled about and got the
necessary brains to go with them) the better they have worked.
Nine times out of ten when they have not worked, it has been my fault.
Sometimes it is John Doe's fault.
I am going to speak to John Doe about it. I am going to tell him what I
am driving at. I have turned over a new leaf. In the crisis of a great nation
and as an act of last desperate patriotism, I am going to give up looking
modest.
For a long time now I have wanted to dare to come out and stand up
before this Modesty Bug-a-boo and have it out with it and say what I think
of it, as one of the great, still, sinister threats against our having or getting a
real national life in America.
I knew a boy once who grew so fast that his mother always kept him
wearing shoes three sizes too large, and big, hopeful-looking coats and
trousers. Except for a few moments a year he never caught up. Nobody ever
saw that boy and his long shoes when he was not butting bravely about,
stubbing his toes on the world and turning up his sleeves.
It was a great relief to him and everybody, finally, when he grew up.
I am going to let myself go around, for a while now, at least until our
present national crisis is over in business and in politics, like that boy.
There are millions of other men in this country who want to be like that
boy. Nations may smile at us if they want to. We will smile too—rather
stiffly and soberly, but for better or worse we propose from to-day on, to let
people see what we are trying to be daily, grimly, right along side of what
we are!
I have come to the conclusion that the only way, for me, at least, to keep
modest and kind, is to have my ideals all on. When one is going around in
sight of everybody with one's moral sleeves rolled up, and one's great
wistful, broad trousers that do not look as if they would ever get filled out,
it is awkward to find fault with other people for not filling out their moral
clothes. It may be a severe measure to take with one's self hut the surest
way to be kind is to live an exposed life.
I propose to live the next few years in a glass house. There are millions
of other men who want to. We want to see if we cannot at last live
confidentially with a world, live naïvely and simply with a world like boys
and like great men and like dogs!
What I have written, I have written. I propose to run the risk of being
good. When driven to it, I will run the risk of saying I am good.
My motives are fairly high. See! here is my scale of one hundred! I had
rather stand forty-five on my scale than ninety-eight on yours!
If there is any discrepancy between my vision and my action, I am not
going to be bullied out of my life and out of living my life the way I want
to, by the way I look. Though it mock me, I will not haul down my flag. I
will haul up my life!
Here it is right here in this paragraph, in black and white. I take it up
and look at it, I read it once more and lay it down.
What I have written, I have written.
III
People do not seem to agree in the present crisis of our American industrial
and national life, about the necessity of getting at the facts and at the real
news in this country about how good we are.
Last November in the national election, four and a half million men
(Republicans) said to Theodore Roosevelt, "Theodore! do not be good so
loud!"
Four and a half million other men, also Republicans, told him not to
mind what anybody said, but to keep right on being good as loud as he
liked, for as long as it seemed necessary.
They wanted to be sure our goodness in America such as we had, was
being loud enough to be heard, believed in, and acted on in public.
The other set of men, last November (who were really very good too, of
course), were more sedate and liked to see goodness modulated more. They
stood out for what might be called a kind of moral elegance.
The governing difference between the Roosevelt type and the Taft type
in America has not been a mere difference of temperament but a difference
in news-sense, in a sense of crisis in the nation.
Thousands of men of all parties, with the nicest, easiest stand-pat Taft
temperaments in the world, with soft, low voices and with the most
beautiful moral manners, have let themselves join in a national attempt to
shock this nation into seeing how good it is. A great temporary crisis can
only be met by a great temporary loudness.
This is what has been happening in America during the last six months.
At last, all men in all parties are engaged in trying to find out: Is it true or
not true that we want to be good?
We are trying to get the news through. It may not be very becoming to
us and we know as well as any one, that loudness, except when morally
deaf people drive us to it is in bad taste. We are looking forward, every one
of us, to being as elegant as any one is, and the very first minute we get the
morally deaf people out of office where we will not have to go about
shouting out at them we will tone down in our goodness. We will modulate
beautifully!
IV
There are three other bug-a-boos, besides the Modesty Bug-a-boo that
America will have to face and drive out of the way before it can be truly
said to have a national character or to have grown up and found itself. There
is the Goody-good Bug-a-boo, the Consistency Bug-a-boo, and the Bug-a-
boo that Thomas Jefferson if he were living now, would never never ride in
a carriage.
Each of these bug-a-boos in the general mistiness and muddle-headiness
of the time can be seen going about, saying, "Boo! Boo!" to this democracy
from day to day and year to year, keeping it scared into not getting what it
wants.
There is not one of them that will not evaporate in ten minutes the first
morning we get some real news through in this country about ourselves and
about what we are like.
What is the real news about us, for instance, as regards being goody-
good?
I can only begin with the news for one.
For years, I have held myself back from taking a plain or possibly loud
stand for goodness as a shrewd, worldly-wise program for American
business and public life, because I was afraid of people, and afraid people
would think I was trying to improve them.
What was worse, I was afraid of myself too. I was afraid I really would.
I am afraid now, or rather I would be, if I had not drilled through to the
news about myself and about other people and about human nature that I
am putting into this chapter.
I have written five hundred pages in this book on an awkward and
dangerous subject like the Golden Rule, and I appeal to the reader—I ask
him humbly, hopefully, gratefully if he can honestly say (except for a
minute here and there when I have been tired and slipped up), if he has
really felt improved or felt that I was trying to improve him in this book.
On your honour, Gentle Reader—you who have been with me five
hundred pages!
You say "Yes"?
Then I appeal to your sense of fairness. If you truly feel I have been
trying to improve you in this book, turn this leaf down here and stop. It is
only fair to me. Close the book with your improved and being improved
feeling and never open it again until it passes over. You have no right to go
on page after page calling me names, as it were, right in the middle of my
own book in this way behind my back, you!—hundreds and thousands of
miles away from me, by your own lamp, by your own window—you come
to me here between these two helpless pasteboard covers where I cannot get
out at you, where I cannot answer back, and you say that I am trying to
improve you!
Ah, Gentle Reader, forgive me! God forgive me! Believe me, I never
meant, not if it could possibly be helped, to improve you! If you insist on it
and keep saying that I have been improving you, all I can say is that I was
merely looking as if I were improving you. You did it. I did not. God help
me if I am trying to improve you! I am trying to find out in this book who I
am. If, incidentally, while I am quietly working away on this for five
hundred pages, you find out who you are yourself, and then drop into a
gentle glowing improved feeling all by yourself, do not mix me up in it. I
deny that I have tried to improve you or anybody. I have written this book
to get my own way, to express my America. I have written it to say "i," to
say "I," to say (the first minute you let me), "you and I," to say we, WE
about America—to drive the news through to a President of what America
is like.
I am not improving you. I am telling you what may or may not be news
about you.
Take it or leave it.
V
I want to be good.
I do not feel superior to other men.
And I do not propose, if there is anything I can do about it, to be
compelled to feel superior.
I believe we all want to be good.
The one thing I want in this world is to prove it. I want my own way.
I am not going to slump into being a beautiful character. I have written
this book to get my own way.
I have said I will not be mixed up in the fate of people who do not know
where they are going, who have not decided what they are like, who do not
know who they are. What do the people want? Some people tell me they
want nothing. They tell me it would only make things worse and stir things
up for me to want to be good.
Or perhaps they think it is beautiful to lower the price of oil. They want
oil at seven cents a gallon.
Do they? Do you? Do I?
I say no. Let oil wait. I want to raise the price of men and to put a
market value on human life. I find as I look about me that there are two
classes of statesmen offering to be helpful in making life worth living in
America.
There are the statesmen who think we are going to be good and who
believe in a program which trusts and exalts the people and the leaders of
the people.
There are the statesmen who seem to believe that American human
nature does not amount to enough to be good. They are planning a program
on the principle that the best that can be done with human nature in
America in business and public life is to have it expurgated.
Which class of statesmen do we want?
In some of our state prisons men who are not considered fit to reproduce
themselves are sterilized. The question that is now up before this country is,
Do we or do we not want American business sterilized? Are we or are we
not going to put a national penalty on all initiative in all business men
because some men abuse it?
There is but one thing that can save us, namely, proving to one another
and to our public men, that we are good, that we are going to be good and
that we know how. We face the issue to-day. Two definite programs are
before the country.
Those who have put their faith in being afraid of one another as a
national policy have devised several By-laws for an Expurgated America.
They say, eliminate the right of a man to do wrong. Deny him the right
of moral experiment because some of his experiments do not work. We say
let him try. We can look out for ourselves or we will have bigger men than
he is, to look out for us.
They say, eliminate the right of a man to be an owner, because nobody
has the courage to believe that a man can express his best self in property.
We say that property may express a man's religion, and that the way a man
has of being rich or of being poor may be an art-form.
Most men can express themselves better in property than in anything
else.
They say, eliminate all monopoly indiscriminately and the occasional
logical efficiency of monopoly because it has not worked well for the
people the first few times and because we have not learned how to handle it.
We say learn how to handle it.
They say eliminate the middleman. They say that the one strategic man
in every industry who can represent everybody if he wants to, who can be a
great man and who can make a great industry serve everybody, must be
eliminated because nobody believes America can produce a middleman. We
say instead of weakly and helplessly giving up a great spiritual and morally-
engineering institution like the middleman because the average middleman
does not know his job, we say: Exalt the middleman raise him to the nth
power, make him—well—do you remember, Gentle Reader, the walking
beams on the old sidewheel steamers? We say do not eliminate him—lift
him up—make him what he naturally is and is in position to be—the
walking beam of Business!
If the average middleman does not know how to be a real middleman
we will make one who does.
And all the other eliminations that we have watched people being scared
into, one by one, we will turn into exaltations—each in its own kind and
place. There is not one of our fears that is not the suggestion, the mighty
outline, the inspiration for the world's next new size and new kind of
American man. We say place the position before the man—with its fears,
with its songs, with its challenge. We say, tell him what we expect of him
and demand of him. Put him in a high place on a platform before the world!
There with the truth about him written on his forehead in the sight of all the
people, call him by name, glorify him or behead him! We are men and we
are Americans. We will stand up to each of our dangers one by one. Each
and every danger of them is a romance, a sublime adventure, a nation-
maker. Our threats, our very by-words and despairs, we will take up, and, in
the sight of the world, forge them into shrewd faiths and into mighty men!
This is my news or vision. I say that this is where we are going in
America. I compel no man to follow my news but I will pursue him with
my news until he gives me his!
This news, I am telling, Gentle Reader, is perhaps news about you.
If it is not true news, say so. Say what is. We all have a right to know.
The one compulsion of modern life is our right to know, our right to compel
people who live on the same continent or who live in the same country with
us, to open up their hearts, to furnish us with their share of the materials for
a mutual understanding, or for a definite mutual misunderstanding, on
which to live.
It is the one compulsion of which we will be guilty. All liberty is in it.
These people who have to live with us and that we have to live with, these
people who breathe the same moral air with us, drink the same water with
us, these people who have their moral dumps, who throw away their moral
garbage with us—these people who will not help provide some daily,
mutual understanding for these common decencies for our souls to live
together these people we defy and challenge! We will compel them to
reveal themselves. We will drive them away, or we will drive them into
driving us away, if they will not yield to us what is in their hearts—Mars,
hell, anywhere we go, it matters not to us where we go, except that we
cannot and we will not live with men about us who thrust down their true
feelings and their real desires into a kind of manhole under them, and sit on
the lid and smile. Some seem to have manholes and some have safes or
spiritual banks, and there are others who have convenient, dim, beautiful
clouds in the sky to hide their feelings in. But whatever their real feelings
are, and wherever they keep them, they belong to us.
We insist on having or on making mutual arrangements to have, if we
live in crowds, some kind of spiritual rapid transit system for getting our
minds through to one another. We demand a system for having the streets of
our souls decently lighted, some provision for moral sewers, for air or
atmosphere—and all the common conveniences for having decent and self-
respecting souls in crowds—all the intelligence-machines, the love-
machines, the hope-machines, and the believing-machines that the crowds
must have for living decently, for living with beauty, living with
considerateness and respect in this awful daily sublime presence of one
another's lives!
We shall still have our splendid isolations when we need them, some of
us, and our little solitudes of meanness, but the main common fund of
motives for living together, for growing up into a world together, the
desires, motives, and intentions in men's hearts, their desires toward us and
ours toward them, we are going to know and compel to be made known. We
will fight men to the death to know them.
Have we not fought, you and I, Gentle Reader, all of us, each man of us,
all our years, all our days, to drive through to some sort of mutual
understanding with our own selves? Now we will fight through to some
mutual understanding with one another and with the world.
We will knock on every door, make a house to house canvass of the
souls of the world, pursue every man, sing under his windows. We will
undergird his consciousness and his dreams. We will make the birds sing to
him in the morning, "Where are you going?" We will put up a sign at the
foot of his bed for his eyes to fall on when he awakes, "Where are you
going?"
Whatever it is that works best, if we blow it out of you with dynamite or
love or fear or draw it out of you with some mighty singing going past—ah,
brother, we will have it out of you! You shall be our brother! We will be
your brother though we die!
We will live together or we will die together.
What do you really want? What do you really like? Who are you?
We may pile together all our funny, fearful, little Dreadnoughts, our
stodgy dead lumps of men called armies, and what are they? And what do
they amount to and what can they do, as compared with truth, the real news
about what people want in this world, and about where we are going?
I say—they shall be as nothing as a rending force, as a glory to tear
down and rebuild a world, as compared with the truth, with the news about
us, that shall come out at last (God hasten the day!) from the open—the
pried-open hearts of men! And I have seen that men shall go forth with
shouts in that day and with glad and solemn silence, to build a world!
I wonder if I have faced down the Goody-good Bug-a-boo.
I speak for five million men.
We have got this book written between us (under the name of one of
us), because we want our own way. We are not improving people. We are
not even trying to improve ourselves. Many of us started in on it once and
the first improvement we thought of was not to try any more.
It is a great deal harder to try to live. Few people want us to—most
people get in the way. And when people get in the way we lay about us a
little—We hit them. We have written this book, because we want to hit a
great many people at once. We find them everywhere about us, in monster
cities, huge thoughtless anthills of them, and they will not let us live a larger
and a richer life. We say to them, We resent your houses your shoes, your
voices, your fears, your motives, your wills, the diseases you make us walk
past every day, the rows of things you seem to think will do, and that you
think we must get used to, and we do not propose, if we can help it, to get
used to what you think will do for Churches; nor to what you think will do
for a government or to the little lonely, scattered, toyschool-houses, that
when you come into the world, fresh and strange and happy you all proceed
solemnly to coop your souls in. Nor do we want to get used to your hem-
and-haw parliaments and your funny little perfumed prophets—your
prophets lying down or propped up with pillows or your poets wringing
their hands. Nor will we be put off with all your gracefully feeble, watery,
lovely little pastel religions for this grim and mighty modern world. We are
American men. We do not propose to be driven out to sea, to stand face to
face every day with what is true and full of beauty and magic, or to have
skies and mountains and stars palmed off on us as companions instead of
men!
This is what five million men are trying to express in writing this book.
If people deny that I have the right to give the news about America for five
million men; if they say that this is not true about American human nature,
that this is not the news, then I will say, I am the news! I am this sort of an
American! God helping me, I say it! "Look at me!" I am this sort of man of
whom I am writing! If I am not this sort of man this afternoon, I will be in
the morning! Though I go down as a hiss and as laughter and as a by-word
and a mocking to the end of my days—I am this sort of man! I say, "Look at
me!"
If you will not believe me—that this is an American, if you say that I
cannot prove that there are five million of men like this in America, then I
will still say, "Here is one! What will you do with ME?" Though I die in
laughter, all my desires and all my professions in a tumult about my soul, I
say it to this nation, "Your laws, your programs, your philosophies, your I
wills, and I won'ts, I say, shall reckon with me! Your presidents and your
legislatures shall reckon with Me!"
Here I am. The man is here. He is in this book!
I will break through to the five million men. I will make the five million
men look at me until they recognize themselves. If no one else will attend to
it for me, and if there shall be no other way, I will have a brass band go
through the streets of New York and of a thousand cities, with banners and
floats and great hymns to the people, and they shall go up and down the
streets of the people with signs saying, "Have you read Crowds?" I will
have the Boston Symphony Orchestra tour the country singing—singing
from kettledrums to violins to a thousand silent audiences, "Have yon read
'CROWDS'?"
I live in a nation in which we are butting through into our sense of our
national character, working our way up into a huge mutual working
understanding. In our beautiful, vague, patriotic, muddleheadedness about
what we want and whether we really want to be good, and about what being
good is like and I say, for one, half-laughing, half-praying, God helping me
—Look at ME!
VI
I was much interested some time ago when I had not been long landed in
England, and was still trying in the hopeful American way to understand it
—to see the various attitudes of Englishmen toward the discussions which
were going on at that time in the Spectator and elsewhere, of Mr. Cadbury's
inconsistency; and while I had no reason, as an American, fresh-landed
from New York, to be interested in Mr. Cadbury himself, I found that his
inconsistency interested me very much. It insisted on coming back into my
mind, in spite of what I would have thought, as a strangely important
subject—not merely as regards Mr. Cadbury, which might or might not be
important, but as regards England and as regards America, as regards the
way a modern man struggling day by day with a huge, heavy machine
civilization like ours, can still manage to be a live, useful, and possibly even
a human, being in it.
There are two astonishing facts that stand face to face with all of us to-
day, who are labouring with civilization.
The first fact is that almost without exception all the men in it who
mean the most in it to us and to other people for good or for evil—who stir
us deeply and do things—all fall into the inconsistent class.
The second fact is that this is a very small, select distinguished, and
astonishingly capable class.
A man who is in a grim, serious business like being good, must expect
to give up many of his little self-indulgences in the way of looking good.
Looking inconsistent, possibly even inconsistency itself, may be sometimes,
temporarily, a man's most important public service to his time.
One needs but a little glance at history, or even at one's own personal
history. It is by being inconsistent that people grow, and without meaning
to, give other people materials for growing. For the particular purpose of
making the best things grow, of pointing up truths, of giving definite edges
to right and wrong, an inconsistent man—a man who is trying to pry
himself out a little at a time from an impossible situation in an impossible
world, is likely to do the world more good than a very large crowd of angels
who have made up their minds that they are going to be consistent and
going to keep up a consistent look in this same world—whatever happens to
it.
If one is marking people on consistency, and if one takes a scale of 100 as
perfect, perhaps one should not always insist on 98. One does not always
insist on 98 for one's self. And when one does and does not get it, one feels
forgiving sometimes.
In dealing with public men and with other people that we know less
than we know ourselves—if they really do things, it is well to make
allowances, and let them off at 65.
In some cases, in fact, when men are doing something that no one else
volunteers to do for a world, I find I get on very well with letting them off
at 51. I have sometimes wished, when I have been in England, that Tories
and Liberals and Socialists and the Wise and the Good would consider
letting George Cadbury off at 51.
Perhaps people are being more safely educated by George Cadbury in
his journals than they might be by other people in what seem to seem to
many of us unfamiliar and dangerous ideas.
Perhaps posterity, in 1953, looking down this precipice of revolution
England did not fall into in 1913, may mark George Cadbury 73—possibly
89.
If, in any way, in the crisis of England, George Cadbury can crowd in
and can keep thousands and thousands of Englishmen and women from
being educated by John Bottomley Bull or by Mrs. John Bottomley Bull
and hosts of other would-be friends of the people—by Tom Mann, Ben
Tillett, and Vernon Hartshorn, does it really seem after all a matter of grave
national importance that George Cadbury—a professional non-better—in
educating these people should allow them to keep on in his paper, having a
betting column?
So long as he really helps stave off John Bottomley Bull and Mrs. John
Bottomley Bull, let him slump into being a millionaire, if he cannot very
well help it! We say, some of us, let him even make cocoa! or have family
prayers! or be a Liberal!
At least this is the way one American visiting England feels about it, if
he may be permitted.
Perhaps I would not, if I were an angel.
I do not want to be an angel.
I am more ambitious. I want my ideals to do things, and I want to stand
by people who are doing things with their ideals, whether their ideals are
my ideals or not.
Let us suppose. Suppose the reader were in Mr. Cadbury's place. What
would he do? Here are two things, let us suppose, he wishes very much. He
wishes a certain class of people would not bet, and he also wishes to
convince these same people of certain important social and political ideas
for which he stands. If he told them that he would have nothing to do with
them unless they stopped betting, there would be no object in his publishing
their paper at all. There would be nothing that they would let him tell them.
If, on the other hand, he begins merely as one more humble, fellow-human
being, and puts himself definitely on record as not betting himself, and still
more definitely as wishing other people would not bet, and then admits
honestly that these other people have as good a right to decide to bet as he
has to decide not to; and if he then deliberately proceeds to do what every
real gentleman who does not smoke and wishes other people did not, does
without question—namely, offers them the facilities for doing it why should
people call him inconsistent?
Perhaps a man's consistency consists in his relation to his own smoking
and betting and not in his rushing his consistency over into the smoking and
betting of other people. Perhaps being consistent does not need to mean
being a little pharisaical, or using force, or cutting people off and having no
argument with them, in one matter, because one cannot agree with them in
another. Of course, I admit it would be better if Mr. Cadbury would publish
in a parallel column (if he could get a genius to write it) an extremely
tolerant, human, comrade-like series of objections to betting, which people
could read alongside, and which would persuade people as much as
possible not to read the best betting tips in the world in the column next
door, but certainly the act of furnishing the tips in the meantime and of
being sure that they are the best tips in the world, is a very real, human,
courageous act. It even has a kind of rough and ready religion in it. It may
be too much to expect, but even in our goodness perhaps we ought to do as
we would be done by. We must be righteous, but on the whole, must we not
be righteous toward others as we would have them righteous toward us?
What many of us find ourselves wishing most of all, when we come
upon some specially attractive man is, that we could discover some way, or
that he could discover some way, in which the idealist in him, and the
realist in him could be got to act together.
There are some of us who have come to believe that in the dead earnest,
daily, almost desperate struggle of modern life, the real solid idealist will
have to care enough about his ideals to arrange to have two complete sets,
one set which he calls his personal ideals, which are of such a nature that he
can carry them out alone and rigidly and quite by himself, and another
which he calls his bending or coöperative ideals, geared a little lower and
adjusted to more gradual usage, which he uses when he asks other men to
act with him.
It may take a very single-hearted and strong man to keep before his own
mind and before other people's his two sets of ideals, his "I" faiths, and his
you-and-I faiths, keeping each in strict proportion, but it would certainly be
a great human adventure to do it. Saying "God and I," and saying "God and
you and I" are two different arts. And it is clear-headedness and not
inconsistency in a man that keeps him so.
This is not a mere defence of Mr. Cadbury; it is a defence of a type of
man, of a temperament in our modern life, of men like Edward A. Filene, of
Boston, of a man like Hugh Mac Rae, one of the institutions of North
Carolina, of Tom L. Johnson of Cleveland, of nine men out of ten of the
bigger and more creative sort who are helping cities to get their way and
nations to express themselves. I have believed that the principle at stake, the
great principle for real life in England and in America, of letting a man be
inconsistent if he knows how—must have a stand made for it.
There is no one thing, whether in history, or literature, or science, or
politics that can be more crucial in the fate of a nation to-day than the
correct, just, and constructive judgment of Contemporary Inconsistent
People.
VII
If I could have managed it, I would have had this book printed and written
—every page of it—in three parallel columns.
The first column would be for the reader who believes it, who keeps
writing a book more or less like it as he goes along. I would put in one
sentence at the top for him and then let him have the rest of the space to
write in himself. In other words I would say 2 plus 2 equals 4 and drop it.
The second column would be for the reader who would like to believe it
if he could, and I would branch out a little more—about half a column.
2 + 2 = 4
20 + 20 = 40
The third column would be for the reader who is not going to believe it
if it can be helped. It would be in fine type, bitterly detailed and statistical
and take nothing for granted.
2 + 2 = 4
20 + 20 = 40
200 + 200 = 400
2,000 + 2,000 = 4,000
20,000 + 20,000 = 40,000
etc.
This arrangement would make the book what might be called a Moving
Sidewalk of Truth. First sidewalk rather quick (six miles an hour). Second,
four miles an hour. Third, two miles an hour. People could move over from
one sidewalk to the other in the middle of an idea any time, and go faster or
slower as they liked to, needed to.
No one would accuse me—though I might like or need for my own
personal use at one time or another, a slower sidewalk or a faster one than
others—no one would accuse me of being inconsistent if I supplied extra
sidewalks for people of different temperaments to move over to suddenly
any time they wanted to. I have come to some of my truth by a bitterly slow
sidewalk—slower than other people need, and sometimes I have come by a
fast one (or what some would say was no sidewalk at all!) but it cannot
fairly be claimed that there is anything inconsistent in my offering people
every possible convenience I can think of—for believing me.
Mr. Cadbury is not inconsistent if he tells truth at a different rate to
different people, or if he chooses to put truths before people in Indian file.
A man is not inconsistent who does not tell all the news he knows to all
kinds of people, all at once, all the time.
There is nothing disingenuous about having an order for truth.
It is not considered compromising to have an order in moving railway
trains. Why not allow an order in moving trains of thought? And why
should a schedule for moving around people's bodies be considered any
more reasonable than a schedule or timetable or order for moving around
their souls?
Truth in action must always be in an order. Nine idealists out of ten who
fight against News-men, or men who are trying to make the beautiful work,
and who call them hypocrites, would not do it if they were trying
desperately to make the beautiful work themselves. It is more comfortable
and has a fine free look, to be blunt with the beautiful—the way a Poet is—
to dump all one's ideals down before people and walk off. But it seems to
some of us a cold, sentimental, lazy, and ignoble thing to do with ideals if
one loves them—to give everybody all of them all the time without
considering what becomes of the ideals or what becomes of the people.
Chapter XVI.
Crowd-Men
Table of Contents
MARCH 4, 1913.
As I write these words, I look out upon the great meadow. I see the poles
and the wires in the sun, that long trail of poles and wires I am used to,
stalking across the meadow. I know what they are doing.
They are telling a thousand cities and villages about our new President,
the one they are making this minute, down in Washington, for these United
States. With his hand lifted up he has just taken his oath, has sworn before
God and before his people to serve the destinies of a nation. And now along
a hundred thousand miles of wire on dumb wooden poles, a hope, a prayer,
a kind of quiet, stern singing of a mighty people goes by. And I am sitting
here in my study window wondering what he will be like, what he will
think, and what he will believe about us.
What will our new President do with these hundreds of miles of prayer,
of crying to God, stretched up to him out of the hills and out of the plains?
Does he really overhear it—that huge, dumb, half-helpless, half-defiant
prayer going up past him, out of the eager, hoarse cities, out of the slow,
patient fields, to God?
Does he overhear it, I wonder? What does he make out that we are like?
I should think it would sound like music to him.
It would come to seem, I should think, when he is alone with his God
(and will he not please be alone with his God sometimes?), like some vast
ocean of people singing, a kind of multitudinous, faraway singing, like the
wind—ah, how often have I heard the wind like some strange and mighty
people in the pine treetops go singing by!
I do not see how a President could help growing a little like a poet—
down in his heart—as he listens.
If he does, he may do as he will with us.
We will let him be an artist in a nation.
As Winslow Homer takes the sea, as Millet takes the peasants in the
fields, as Frank Brangwyn lifts up the labour in the mills and makes it
colossal and sublime, the President is an artist, in touching the crowd's
imagination with itself—in making a nation self-conscious.
He shall be the artist, the composer, the portrait painter of the people—
their faith, their cry, their anger, and their love shall be in him. In him shall
be seen the panorama of the crowd, focused into a single face. In him there
shall be put in the foreground of this nation's countenance the things that
belong in the foreground. And the things that belong in the background
shall be put in the background, and the little ideas and little men shall look
little in it, and the big ones shall look big.
They do not look so now. This is the one thing that is the matter with
America. The countenence of the nation is not a composed countenance. All
that we want is latent in us, everything is there in our Washington face. The
face merely lacks features and an expression.
This is what a President is for—to give at last the Face of the United
States an expression!
If he is a shrewd poet and believes in us, we shall accept him as the
official mind reader of the nation. He focuses our desires. In the weariness
of the day he looks away—he looks up—he leans his head upon his hand—
through the corridors of his brain, that little silent Main street of America,
the thoughts and the crowds and the jostling wills of the people go.
If he is a shrewd poet about us, he becomes the organic function, the
organizer of the news about our people to ourselves. He is the public made
visible, the public made one. He is a moving picture of us. He speaks and
gestures the United States—if he is a poet about us—when he beckons or
points or when he puts his finger on his lips, or when he says, "Hush!" or
when he says, "Wait a moment!" he is the voice of the people of the United
States.
I am sitting and correcting, one by one, as they are brought to me, these last
page proofs in the factory. The low thunder on the floors of the mighty
presses, crashing down into paper words I can never cross out—rises
around me. In a minute more—minute by minute that I am counting, that
low thunder will overtake me, will roar down and fold away these last
guilty, hopeful, tucked-in words with you, Gentle Reader, and you will get
away! And the book will get away!
There is no time to try to hold up that low thunder now, and to say what
I have meant to say about false simplicity and democracy, and about our all
being bullied into being little old faded Thomas Jeffersons a hundred years
after he is dead.
But I will try to suggest what I hope that some one who has no printing-
presses rolling over him—will say:
One cannot help wishing that our socialists to-day would outgrow Karl
Marx, and that our individualists would outgrow Emerson. Democrats by
this time ought to grow a little, too, and outgrow Jefferson, and Republicans
ought to be able by this time to outgrow Hamilton.
Why not drop Karl Marx and Emerson and run the gamut of both of
them, on a continent 3,000 miles wide? Why should we live Thomas
Jefferson's and Alexander Hamilton's lives? Why not drop Jefferson and
Hamilton and live ours?
The last thing that Jefferson would do, if he were here, would be to be
Jefferson over again. It is not fair to Jefferson for anybody to take the
liberty of being like him, when he would not even do it himself. If Jefferson
were here, he would break away from everybody, lawyers, statesmen and
Congress and go outdoors and look at 1913 for himself.
I like to imagine how it would strike him. I am not troubled about what
he would do. Let Jefferson go out and listen to that vast machine, to the
New York Central Railway smoothing out and roaring down crowds, rolling
and rolling and rolling men all day and all night into machines. Let
Jefferson go out and face the New York Central Railway! Jefferson in his
time had not faced nor looked down through those great fissures or chasms
of inefficiency in what he chose to call democracy, the haughty, tyrannical
aimlessness and meaninglessness of crowds, too mean-spirited and full of
fear and machines to dare to have leaders!
He had not faced that blank staring hell of anonymousness, that
bottomless, weak, watery muck of irresponsibility—that terrific, devilish
vagueness which a crowd is and which a crowd has to be without leaders.
Jefferson did not know about or reckon with Inventors, as a means of
governing, as a means of getting the will of the people.
A whole new age of invention, of creation, has flooded the world since
Jefferson. This is the main fact about the modern man, that he is gloriously
self-made. He is practising democracy, inventing his own life, making his
own soul before our eyes.
If we have a poet in the White House, this is the main fact he is going to
reckon with: He will not be seen taking sides with the Alexander Hamilton
model or with the Thomas Jefferson model or with Karl Marx or Emerson.
We will see him taking Karl Marx and Emerson and Hamilton and Jefferson
and melting them down, glowing them and fusing them together into one
man—the Crowd-Man—who shall be more aristocratic than Hamilton ever
dreamed, and be filled with a genius for democracy that Jefferson never
guessed. America to-day, on the face of the earth and in the hearts of men, is
a new democracy, as new as Radium, Copernicus, the Wireless Telegraph,
as new and just beginning to be noticed and guessed at as Jesus Christ!
Copernicus, Marconi, Wilbur Wright, and Christianity have turned
men's hearts outward. Men live for the first time in a wide daily
consciousness of one another.
Alexander Hamilton, had really a rather timid and polite idea of what an
aristocrat was and Jefferson had merely sketched out a ground plan for a
democrat. If Hamilton had been aristocratic in the modern sense, he would
have devoted half his career to expressing a man like Jefferson; and if
Jefferson had been more of a democrat, he would have had room in himself
to tuck in several Alexander Hamiltons. Either one of them would have
been a Crowd-Man.
By a Crowd-Man I do not mean a pull-and-haul man, a balance of
equilibrium between these two men, I mean a fusion, a glowed together
interpenetration of them both. They did not either of them believe in the
people as much as a man made out of both of them would—a really
wrought-through aristocrat, a really wrought-through democrat or Crowd-
Man, or Hero or Saviour.
I am afraid that some of us do not like the word Saviour as people think we
ought to. There seems to be something about the way many people use the
word Saviour which makes it seem as if it had been dropped off over the
edge of the world—of a real world, of a man's world.
I do not believe that Christ spent five minutes in His whole life in
feeling like a Saviour. He would have felt hurt if He had found any one
saying He was a Saviour in the tone people often use. He wanted people to
feel as if they were like Him. And the way He served them was by making
them feel that they were.
I do not believe that Thomas Jefferson, if he were here to-day, would
object to a hero, or aristocrat, a special expert or a genius in expressing
crowds, if he lived and wrought in this spirit.
The final objection that people commonly make to heroes or to men of
marked and special vision or courage is that they are not good for people,
because people put them on pedestals and worship them. They look up at
them wistfully. And then they look down on themselves.
But I have never seen a hero on a pedestal.
It is only the Carlyle kind of hero who could ever be put on a pedestal,
or who would stay there if put there.
And Carlyle—with all honour be it said—never quite knew what a hero
was. A hero is either a gentleman, or a philosopher, or an inventor.
The gentleman—on a pedestal—feels hurt and slips down.
The philosopher laughs.
The inventor thinks up some way of having somebody else get up so
that it will not really be a pedestal at all.
I agree with all the socialists' objections to heroes, if they mean by a
hero the kind of man that Thomas Carlyle, with all his little glorious hells,
all his little cold, lonesome, select heavens, his thunderclub view of life,
and his Old Testament imagination, called a hero. There is always
something a little strained and competitive about Carlyle's heroes as he
conceives them except possibly one or two.
Being a hero with Carlyle consisted in conquering and displacing other
heroes. Even if you were a poet, being a hero consisted in a kind of spiritual
standing on some other poet's neck. According to Carlyle, one must always
be a hero against other men. Modern heroism consists in being a hero with
other men. The hero Against comes in the Twentieth Century to be the hero
With, and the modern hero is known, not by cutting his enemies down, but
by his absorbing and understanding them. He drinks up what they wish they
could do into what he does, or he states what they believe better than they
can state it. Combination or coöperation is the tremendous heroism of our
present life.
I admit that I would be afraid of Carlyle's heroes having pedestals. They
have already—many of them—done a good deal of harm because they have
had pedestals, and because they would not get down from them.
But mine would.
With a man who is being a hero by coöperation, getting down is part of
the heroism. And there is never any real danger in allowing a pedestal for a
real hero. He never has time to sit on it.
One sees him always over and over again kicking his pedestal out from
under him and using it to batter a world with. As the world does not take to
enjoying its heroes' pedestals in this way, a pedestal is quite safe. Most
people feel the same about a hero's halo. They prefer to have him wear it
like a kind of glare around his head, and if he uses it as a searchlight upon
them, if he makes his halo really practical and lights up the world a little
around him instead, he is not likely to be spoiled, is almost always safe
from any danger of having any more halo crowded upon him than he wants,
or than anybody wants him to have. One might put it down as a motto for
heroes, "Keep your halo busy and it won't hurt you." Modern democracy
will never have a chance of being what it wants to be as long as it keeps on
throwing away great natural forces like halos and pedestals. There is no
reason why we should not believe in halos and pedestals, not to wear or
stand on, but when used strictly for butting and seeing purposes.
We may know a real hero by the fact that we always have to keep
rediscovering him. One knows the real hero by the fact that in his relation to
people who put him on a pedestal he is always kicking his pedestal away
and substituting his vision.
There is something about any real heroism that we see to-day which
makes heroes out of the people who see it, A real hero has his back to the
people and the crowd looks over his shoulders with him at his work and he
feels behind him daily, with joy and strength, thousands of heroes pressing
up to take his place. And he is daily happy with a strange, mighty,
impersonal joy in all these other people who could do it, too. He lives with
a great hurrah for the world in his heart. The hero he worships is the hero he
sees in others. A man like this would feel cramped if he were merely being
himself, or if he were being imprisoned by the people in his own glory, or
were being cooped up into a hero.
It is in this sense that I have finally come again to believe that hero
worship is safe, that in some form as one of the great elemental energies in
human nature it must be saved, that it must be regulated and used, that it has
an incalculable power which was meant to be turned on to run a nation
with.
And I believe that Thomas Jefferson, confronted in this desperate,
sublime 1913, with the new socialized spirit of our time, placed face to face
at last with a Christian aristocrat or Crowd-Man, would want him saved and
emphasized too.
It is because in democracies saviours are being kept by crowds and by
millionaires and by machines very largely in the position of hired men, or of
ordered about men, that ninety-nine one-hundredths of the saving or of the
man-inventing and man-freeing in crowds, is not being attended to.
I have wanted to suggest in this book that the moment the Saviours in
any nation will organize quietly and save themselves first, the less difficult
thing (with men to attend to it) like saving the rest of us, will be a mere
matter of detail.
The only thing that stands in the way is the Thomas Jefferson bug-a-
boo. People seem to have a kind of left-over fear that the moment these
saviours or experts or inventors or heroes, call them what you will, get the
chance that they have been working to get to save us, they will not want to
use it.
It does not seem to me that anything will be allowed to interfere with it
—with their saving us, or making detailed arrangements for our saving
ourselves.
Being a great man (if as democracies seem to think being a great man is
a disease) is at least a self-limiting disease. Inventors when they get their
first chance are going to save us, because they could not endure living with
us unless we were saved.
Inventors could not enjoy inventing—inventing their greater, more
noble inventions, until they had attended to a little rudimentary thing in the
world like having people half alive on it to live with and to invent for.
It does not interest a really inspired man—inventing flying machines for
people who have not time to notice the sky, wireless telegraph for people
who have nothing to say, symphonies for tone-deaf crowds, or ambrosia for
people who prefer potatoes.
This is the whole issue in a nutshell. When people say that our
inventors, or Crowd-Men or saviours, when they have fulfilled or saved
themselves, cannot be trusted to save us, the reply that will have to be made
is that only people who do not know how inventors feel or how they are
made or what it is in them that drives them to do things, or how they do
them, will be afraid to let men who give us worlds and who express worlds
for us and who make us express ourselves in worlds the freedom to help
shape them and run them.
Men who have the automatic courage, the helpless bigness and
disinterestedness that always goes with invention, with creative power, can
be trusted by crowds.
The prejudice against the hero is due to the fact that heroes in days gone
by have been by a very large majority fighters, expressing themselves
against the world, or expressing one part of the world against another.
The moment the hero becomes the artist and begins expressing himself
and expressing the crowd together, the crowd will no longer be touched
with fear and driven back upon itself by the Thomas Jefferson bug-a-boo.
Epilogue
Table of Contents
France is threatened by her childless women, Germany by her machines,
Russia is beginning the Nineteenth Century. It is to England and America,
struggling still sublimely with their sins, the nations look—for the time
being—for the next big free lift upon the world.
Looked at in the large, in their historic import and their effect on the
time, the English temperament and the American temperament are
essentially the same. As between ourselves, England and America are apt to
seem different, but as between us and the world, we blend together. One
could go through in what I have been saying about Oxford Street and the
House of Commons in this book, strike out all after Oxford Street and read
Broadway, and all after the House of Commons and read Congress, and it
would be essentially true with the necessary English or American
modulation. In the same way it would be possible to go through and strike
out all after the President and read Prime Minister or the Government.
England and America have the individualistic temperament, and if we
cannot make a self-expressive individualism noble, and if we are not men
enough to sing up our individualism into the social and the universal, we
perish.
It is our native way. We are to be crowdmen or nobodies.
The English temperament or the American temperament, whichever we
may call it, is the same tune, but played with a different and almost
contrasting expression.
England is being played gravely and massively like a violoncello, and
America—played more lightly, is full of the sweeps and the lulls, the
ecstasy, the overriding glory of the violins.
But it is the same tune, and God helping us, we will not and we shall not
be overwhelmed under the great dome of the world, by Germany with all
her faithful pianolas, or by France with her cold sweet flutes, or by Russia
with her shrieks and her pauses, pounding her splendid kettledrums in that
awful silence!
Our song is ours—England and America, the 'cello, and the bright
violins!
And no one shall sing it for us.
And no one shall keep us from singing it.
The skyscrapers are singing, "I will, I will!" to God, and Manchester
and London and Port Sunlight are singing, "I will, I will!" to God. I have
heard even Westminister Abbey and York—those beautiful old fellows—
altering, "I will, I will!" to God!
And I have seen, as I was going by, Trinity Church at the head of Wall
Street repenting her sins and holding noonday prayer meetings for
millionaires.
Our genius is a moral genius, the genius of each man for fulfilling
himself. Our religion is the finding of a way to do it beautifully.
Let Russian men be an army if they like—death and obedience. Let
German men keep on with their faithful, plodding, moral machines if they
want to, and let all French men be artists, go tra-la-laing up and down the
Time to the beautiful—furnishing nudes, clothes, and academies to a world.
But we—England and America—will stand up on this planet in the way
we like to stand on a planet and sing, "I will, I will!" to God.
If we cannot do better, we will sing, "I won't, I won't!" to God. Our
wills and our won'ts are our genius among the sons of men. They are what
we are for. With England and America I will and I won't are an art form, our
means of expressing ourselves, our way of invention and creation, of
begetting an age, of begetting a nation upon a world.
We do not know (like great men and children) who we are at first. We
begin saying vaguely—will—will!
Then i will!
Then I will!
Then WE WILL!
THE BEGINNING.
The Group Mind: A Sketch of the Principles of
Collective Psychology
(William McDougall)
Table of Contents
“Une nation est une âme, un principe spirituel. Deux choses qui, à vrai
dire, n’en font qu’une constituent cette âme, ce principe spirituel.
L’une est dans le passé, l’autre dans le présent. L’une est la possession
en commun d’un riche legs de souvenirs; l’autre est le consentement
actuel, le désir de vivre ensemble, la volonté de continuer à faire valoir
l’héritage qu’on a reçu indivis.”
Ernest Renan.
TO
Professor L. T. HOBHOUSE
in admiration of his work in philosophy, psychology, and sociology,
and in the hope that he may discern in this book some traces of the
spirit by which his own writings have been inspired.
Table of Contents
Preface
Part I. General Principles of Collective Psychology
Chapter I. Introduction
Chapter II. The Mental Life of the Crowd
Chapter III. The Highly Organised Group
Chapter IV. The Group Spirit
Chapter V. Peculiarities of Groups of Various Types
Part II. The National Mind and Character
Chapter VI. Introductory
Chapter VII. The Mind of a Nation
Chapter VIII. Freedom of Communication as a Condition of National
Life
Chapter IX. The Part of Leaders in National Life
Chapter X. Other Conditions of National Life
Chapter XI. The Will of the Nation
Chapter XII. Ideas in National Life
Chapter XIII. Nations of the Higher Type
Part III. The Development of National Mind and Character
Chapter XIV. Introductory
Chapter XV. The Race-Making Period
Chapter XVI. The Race-Making Period (continued)
Chapter XVII. The Race-Making Period (continued)
Chapter XVIII. Racial Changes During the Historic Period
Chapter XIX. The Progress of Nations in Their Youth
Chapter XX. The Progress of Nations in Their Maturity
Preface
Table of Contents
In this book I have sketched the principles of the mental life of groups and
have made a rough attempt to apply these principles to the understanding of
the life of nations. I have had the substance of the book in the form of
lecture notes for some years, but have long hesitated to publish it. I have
been held back, partly by my sense of the magnitude and difficulty of the
subject and the inadequacy of my own preparation for dealing with it, partly
because I wished to build upon a firm foundation of generally accepted
principles of human nature.
Some fifteen years ago I projected a complete treatise on Social
Psychology which would have comprised the substance of the present
volume. I was prevented from carrying out the ambitious scheme, partly by
the difficulty of finding a publisher, partly by my increasing sense of the
lack of any generally accepted or acceptable account of the constitution of
human nature. I found it necessary to attempt to provide such a foundation,
and in 1908 published my Introduction to Social Psychology. That book has
enjoyed a certain popular success. But it was more novel, more
revolutionary, than I had supposed when writing it; and my hope that it
would rapidly be accepted by my colleagues as in the main a true account
of the fundamentals of human nature has not been realised.
All this part of psychology labours under the great difficulty that the
worker in it cannot, like other men of science, publish his conclusions as
discoveries which will necessarily be accepted by any persons competent to
judge. He can only state his conclusions and his reasonings and hope that
they may gradually gain the general approval of his colleagues. For to the
obscure questions of fact with which he deals it is in the nature of things
impossible to return answers supported by indisputable experimental
proofs. In this field the evidence of an author’s approximation towards truth
can consist only in his success in gradually persuading competent opinion
of the value of his views. My sketch of the fundamentals of human nature
can hardly claim even that degree of success which would be constituted by
an active criticism and discussion of it in competent quarters. Yet there are
not wanting indications that opinion is turning slowly towards the
acceptance of some such doctrine as I then outlined. Especially the
development of psycho-pathology, stimulated so greatly by the esoteric
dogmas of the Freudian school, points in this direction. The only test and
verification to which any scheme of human nature can be submitted is the
application of it to practice in the elucidation of the concrete phenomena of
human life and in the control and direction of conduct, especially in the two
great fields of medicine and education. And I have been much encouraged
by finding that some workers in both of these fields have found my scheme
of use in their practice and have even, in some few cases, given it a cordial
general approval. But group psychology is itself one of the fields in which
such testing and verification must be sought. And I have decided to delay
no longer in attempting to bring my scheme to this test. I am also impelled
to venture on what may appear to be premature publication by the fact that
five of the best years of my life have been wholly given up to military
service and the practical problems of psycho-therapy, and by the reflection
that the years of a man’s life are numbered and that, even though I should
delay yet another fifteen years, I might find that I had made but little
progress towards securing the firm foundation I desired.
It may seem to some minds astonishing that I should now admit that the
substance of this book was committed to writing before the Great War; for
that war is supposed by some to have revolutionised all our ideas of human
nature and of national life. But the war has given me little reason to add to
or to change what I had written. This may be either because I am too old to
learn, or because what I had written was in the main true; and I am naturally
disposed to accept the second explanation.
I wish to make it clear to any would-be reader of this volume that it is a
sequel to my Introduction to Social Psychology, that it builds upon that
book and assumes that the reader is acquainted with it. That former volume
has been criticised as an attempted outline of Social Psychology. One critic
remarks that it may be good psychology, but it is very little social; another
wittily says “Mr McDougall, while giving a full account of the genesis of
instincts that act in society, hardly shows how they issue into society. He
seems to do a great deal of packing in preparation for a journey on which he
never starts.” The last sentence exactly describes the book. I found myself,
like so many of my predecessors and contemporaries, about to start on a
voyage of exploration of societies with an empty trunk, or at least with one
very inadequately supplied with the things essential for successful
travelling. I decided to avoid the usual practice of starting without
impedimenta and of picking up or inventing bits of make-shift equipment as
each emergency arose; I would pack my trunk carefully before starting. And
now although my fellow travellers have not entirely approved my outfit, I
have launched out to put it to the test; and I cannot hope that my readers
will follow me if they have not at their command a similar outfit—namely,
a similar view of the constitution of human nature.
I would gratefully confess that the resolve to go forward without a
further long period of preparation has been made possible for me largely by
the encouragement I have had from the recently published work of Dr
James Drever, Instinct in Man. For the author of that work has carefully
studied the most fundamental part of my Social Psychology, in the light of
his wide knowledge of the cognate literature, and has found it to be in the
main acceptable.
The title and much of the substance of the present volume might lead a
hasty reader to suppose that I am influenced by, or even in sympathy with,
the political philosophy associated with German ‘idealism.’ I would,
therefore, take this opportunity both to prevent any such erroneous
inference and to indicate my attitude towards that system of thought in
plainer language than it seemed possible to use before the war. I have
argued that we may properly speak of a group mind, and that each of the
most developed nations of the present time may be regarded as in process of
developing a group mind. This must lay me open to the suspicion of
favouring the political philosophy which makes of the state a super-
individual and semi-divine person before whom all men must bow down,
renouncing their claims to freedom of judgment and action; the political
philosophy in short of German ‘idealism,’ which derives in the main from
Hegel, which has been so ably represented in this country by Dr Bosanquet,
which has exerted so great an influence at Oxford, and which in my opinion
is as detrimental to honest and clear thinking as it has proved to be
destructive of political morality in its native country. I am relieved of the
necessity of attempting to justify these severe strictures by the recent
publication of The Metaphysical Theory of the State by Prof. L. T.
Hobhouse. In that volume Prof. Hobhouse has subjected the political
philosophy of German ‘idealism,’ and especially Dr Bosanquet’s
presentation of it, to a criticism which, as it seems to me, should suffice to
expose the hollowness of its claims to all men for all time; and I cannot
better define my own attitude towards it than by expressing the
completeness of my sympathy with the searching criticism of Mr
Hobhouse’s essay. In my youth I was misled into supposing that the
Germans were the possessors of a peculiar wisdom; and I have spent a large
part of my life in discovering, in one field of science after another, that I
was mistaken. I can always read the works of some German philosophers,
especially those of Hermann Lotze, with admiration and profit; but I have
no longer any desire to contend with the great systems of ‘idealism,’ and I
think it a cruel waste that the best years of the lives of many young men
should be spent struggling with the obscure phrases in which Kant sought to
express his profound and subtle thought. My first scientific effort was to
find evidence in support of a new hypothesis of muscular contraction; and,
in working through the various German theories, I was dismayed by their
lack of clear mechanical conceptions. My next venture was in the
physiology of vision, a branch of science which had become almost
exclusively German. Starting with a prepossession in favour of one of the
dominant German theories, I soon reached the conclusion that the two
German leaders in this field, Helmholtz and Hering, with their hosts of
disciples, had, in spite of much admirable detailed work, added little of
value and much confusion to the theory of vision left us by a great
Englishman,—namely, Thomas Young; and in a long series of papers I
endeavoured to restate and supplement Young’s theory. Advancing into the
field of physiological psychology, I attacked the ponderous volumes of
Wundt with enthusiasm; only to find that his physiology of the nervous
system was a tissue of unacceptable hypotheses and that he failed to
connect it in any profitable manner with his questionable psychology. And,
finding even less satisfaction in such works as Ziehen’s Physiologische
Psychologie, with its crude materialism and associationism, or in the
dogmatic speculations of Verworn, I published my own small attempt to
bring psychology into fruitful relations with the physiology of the nervous
system. This brought me up against the great problem of the relations
between mind and body; and, having found that, in this sphere, German
‘idealism’ was pragmatically indistinguishable from thorough-going
materialism, and that those Germans who claimed to reconcile the two did
not really rise much above the level of Ernst Haeckel’s wild flounderings, I
published my History and Defense of Animism. And in this field, though I
found much to admire in the writings of Lotze, I derived most
encouragement and stimulus from Prof. Bergson. In working at the
foundations of human nature, I found little help in German psychology, and
more in French books, especially in those of Prof. Ribot. In psycho-
pathology I seemed to find that the claims of the German and Austrian
schools were far outweighed by those of the French writers, especially of
Prof. Janet. So now, in attacking the problems of the mental life of societies,
I have found little help from German psychology or sociology, from the
elaborations of Wundt’s Völkerpsychologie or the ponderosities of Schäffle,
and still less from the ‘idealist’ philosophy of politics. In this field also it is
French authors from whom I have learnt most and with whom I find myself
most in sympathy, especially MM. Fouillée, Boutmy, Tarde, and Demolins;
though I would not be thought to hold in low esteem the works of many
English and American authors, notably those of Buckle, Bagehot, Maine,
Lecky, Lowell, and of many others, to some of which I have made reference
in the chapters of this book.
I have striven to make this a strictly scientific work, rather than a
philosophical one; that is to say, I have tried to ascertain and state the facts
and principles of social life as it is and has been, without expressing my
opinion as to what it should be. But, in order further to guard myself against
the implications attached by German ‘idealism’ to the notion of a collective
mind, I wish to state that politically my sympathies are with individualism
and internationalism, although I have, I think, fully recognised the great and
necessary part played in human life by the Group Spirit and by that special
form of it which we now call ‘Nationalism.’
I know well that those of my readers whose sympathies are with
Collectivism, Syndicalism, or Socialism in any of its various forms will
detect in this book the cloven foot of individualism and leanings towards
the aristocratic principle. I know also that many others will reproach me
with giving countenance to communistic and ultra-democratic tendencies. I
would, therefore, point out explicitly at the outset that, if this book affords
justification for any normative doctrine or ideal, it is for one which would
aim at a synthesis of the principles of individualism and communism, of
aristocracy and democracy, of self-realization and of service to the
community. I can best express this ideal in the wise words of Mr F. H.
Bradley, which I extract from his famous essay on ‘My Station and its
Duties.’ “The individual’s consciousness of himself is inseparable from the
knowing himself as an organ of the whole; ... for his nature now is not
distinct from his ‘artificial self.’ He is related to the living moral system not
as to a foreign body; his relation to it is ‘too inward even for faith,’ since
faith implies a certain separation. It is no other-world that he can not see but
must trust to; he feels himself in it, and it in him; ... the belief in this real
moral organism is the one solution of ethical problems. It breaks down the
antithesis of despotism and individualism; it denies them, while it preserves
the truth of both. The truth of individualism is saved, because, unless we
have intense life and self-consciousness in the members of the state, the
whole state is ossified. The truth of despotism is saved, because, unless the
member realizes the whole by and in himself, he fails to reach his own
individuality. Considered in the main, the best communities are those which
have the best men for their members, and the best men are the members of
the best communities.... The two problems of the best man and best state are
two sides, two distinguishable aspects of the one problem, how to realize in
human nature the perfect unity of homogeneity and specification; and when
we see that each of these without the other is unreal, then we see that
(speaking in general) the welfare of the state and the welfare of its
individuals are questions which it is mistaken and ruinous to separate.
Personal morality and political and social institutions can not exist apart,
and (in general) the better the one the better the other. The community is
moral, because it realizes personal morality; personal morality is moral,
because and in so far as it realizes the moral whole.”
Since correcting the proofs of this volume I have become acquainted
with two recent books whose teaching is so closely in harmony with my
own that I wish to direct my readers’ attention to them. One is Sir Martin
Conway’s The Crowd in Peace and War, which contains many valuable
illustrations of group life. The other is Miss M. P. Follett’s The New State;
Group Organization the Solution of Popular Government, which expounds
the principles and advantages of collective deliberation with vigour and
insight.
I am under much obligation to the general editor of this series, Prof. G.
Dawes Hicks. He has read the proofs of my book, and has helped me
greatly with many suggestions; but he has, of course, no responsibility for
the views expressed in it.
W. McD.
Oxford,
March 1920.
Part I.
General Principles of Collective Psychology
Table of Contents
Chapter I.
Introduction
Table of Contents
The Province of Collective Psychology
To define exactly the relations of the several special sciences is a task which
can never be completely achieved so long as these sciences continue to
grow and change. It is a peculiarly difficult task in respect of the biological
sciences, because we have not yet reached general agreement as to the
fundamental conceptions which these sciences should employ. To illustrate
this difficulty I need only refer to a recent symposium of the Aristotelian
Society in which a number of distinguished philosophers and biologists
discussed the question “Are physical, biological and psychological
categories irreducible?” The discussion revealed extreme differences of
opinion, and failed to bring the disputants nearer to a common view. The
difficulty is still greater in respect of the human sciences—anthropology,
psychology, ethics, politics, economics, sociology, and the rest; and it is not
to be hoped that any general agreement on this difficult question will be
reached in the near future. Yet it seems worth while that each writer who
aspires to break new ground in any part of this field of inquiry should
endeavour to make clear to himself and others his conception of the
relations of that part to the rest of the field. It is, then, in no dogmatic spirit,
or with any belief in the finality of the position assigned to my topic, that I
venture the following definition of the province of psychology with which
this book is concerned.
I have chosen the title, “The Group Mind,” after some hesitation in
favour of the alternative, “Collective Psychology.” The latter has the
advantage that it has already been used by several continental authors, more
especially French and Italian psychologists. But the title I have chosen is, I
think, more distinctively English in quality and denotes more clearly the
topic that I desire to discuss.
An alternative and not inappropriate title would have been “An Outline
of Social Psychology”; but two reasons prevented the adoption of this. First,
my Introduction to Social Psychology has become generally known by the
abbreviated title Social Psychology. This was an unforeseen result and
unfortunate designation; for, as I have explained in the Preface to the
present volume, that other work was designed merely as a propaedeutic; it
aimed merely at clearing the ground and laying the foundations for Social
Psychology, while leaving the topic itself for subsequent treatment.
Secondly, I conceive Group Psychology to be a part only, though a very
large part, of the total field of Social Psychology; for, while the former has
to deal only with the life of groups, the latter has also to describe and
account for the influence of the group on the growth and activities of the
individual. This is the most concrete part of psychology and naturally
comes last in the order of development of the science; for, like other
sciences, psychology began with the most abstract notions, the forms of
activity of mind in general, and, by the aid of the abstract conceptions
achieved by the earlier workers, progresses to the consideration of more
concrete problems, the problems presented by actual living persons in all
their inexhaustible richness and complexity.
Until the later decades of the nineteenth century, psychology continued
to concern itself almost exclusively with the mind of man conceived in an
abstract fashion, not as the mind of any particular individual, but as the
mind of a representative individual considered in abstraction from his social
settings as something given to our contemplation fully formed and
complete.
Two important changes of modern thought have shown the necessity of
a more concrete treatment of psychological problems. The first has been the
coming into prominence of the problems of genesis which, although not
originated by Darwin, received so great an impetus from his work. The
second has been the increasing realisation of the need for a more synthetic
treatment of all fields of science, the realisation that analysis alone carries
us ever farther away from concrete problems and leads only to a system of
abstract conceptions which are very remote from reality, however useful
they may prove in the physical sciences. The biological and the human
sciences especially have been profoundly affected by these two changes of
modern thought. As Theodore Merz has so well shown in the fourth volume
of his monumental work1, the need has been increasingly felt of the vue
d’ensemble, of the synthetic mode of regarding organisms, men, and
institutions, not as single things, self-contained and complete in themselves,
but as merely nodes or meeting points of all the forces of the world acting
and reacting in unlimited time and space.
Psychology was, then, until recent years the science of the abstract
individual mind. Each worker aimed at rendering by the aid of introspection
an analytic description of the stream of his own consciousness, a consistent
classification of the elements or features that he seemed to discover therein,
and some general laws or rules of the order of succession and conjunction
of these features; postulating in addition some one or more explanatory
principles or active agencies such as ‘the will’ or the desire of pleasure, the
aversion from pain, or ‘the association of ideas,’ to enable him to account
for the flow of the distinguishable elements of consciousness. The
psychology achieved by these studies, necessary and valuable as they were,
was of little help to men who were struggling with the concrete problems of
human life and was therefore largely ignored by them. But, as I have
pointed out in the Introduction to my Social Psychology, those who
approached these problems were generally stimulated to do so by their
interest in questions of right and wrong, in questions of norms and
standards of conduct, the urgency of which demanded immediate answers
for the practical guidance of human life in all its spheres of activity, for the
shaping of laws, institutions, governments, and associations of every kind;
or, as frequently perhaps, for the justification and defence of standards of
conduct, modes of belief, and forms of institution, which men had learnt to
esteem as supremely good.
Thus the political science of Hobbes was the expression of his attempt
to justify the monarchy established by the Tudors and endangered by the
failings of the Stuart kings; while that of Locke was equally the outcome of
his desire to justify the revolution of 1668. Hobbes felt it worth while to
preface his magnum opus on political philosophy with a fanciful sketch of
human nature and of primitive society; yet, as Mr Gooch remarks, “neither
Hobbes nor his contemporaries knew anything of the actual life of primitive
communities2.” And it may be added that they knew as little of the
foundations of human nature. Again, the social doctrines of Rousseau, with
all their false psychology, were formulated in order to stir men to revolt
against the conditions of social life then prevalent in Europe. In a similar
way, in the development of all that body of social doctrine that went under
the name of Utilitarianism and which culminated in the political science and
economy of the Manchester School, every step was prompted by the desire
to find theoretical guidance or justification for rules governing human
activity. And, if we go back to the Politics of Aristotle, we find the
normative or regulative aim still more prominent.
Thus, in all the human sciences, we see that the search for what is has
been inextricably confused with and hampered by the effort to show what
ought to be; and the further back we go in their history, the more does the
normative point of view predominate. They all begin in the effort to
describe what ought to be; and incidentally give some more or less
fallacious or fantastic account of what is, merely in order to support the
normative doctrines. And, as we trace their history forward towards the
present time, we find the positive element coming more and more to the
front, until it tends to preponderate over and even completely to supplant
the normative aim. Thus even in Ethics there is now perceptible in some
quarters a tendency to repudiate the normative standpoint. All the social
sciences have, then, begun their work at what, from the strictly logical point
of view, was the wrong end; instead of first securing a basis of positive
science and then building up the normative doctrines upon that basis, they
have advanced by repeatedly going backwards towards what should have
been their foundations. Now the most important part of the positive basis of
the social sciences is psychology; we find accordingly the social sciences at
first ignoring psychology and then gradually working back to it; they
became gradually more psychological and, in proportion as they did so,
they became more valuable. Modern writers on these topics fall into two
classes; those who have attempted to work upon a psychological
foundation, and those who have ignored or denied the need of any such
basis. The earlier efforts of the former kind, among which we may reckon
those of Adam Smith, Bentham, and the Mills, although they greatly
influenced legislation and practice in general, have nevertheless brought the
psychological method into some disrepute, because they reasoned from
psychological principles which were unduly simplified and in fact
misleading, notably the famous principle of psychological hedonism on
which they so greatly relied. Their psychology was, in brief, too abstract; it
had not achieved the necessary concreteness, which only the introduction of
the genetic standpoint and the vue d’ensemble could give it. Other writers
on the social sciences were content to ignore the achievements of
psychology; but, since they dealt with the activities of human beings and
the products of those activities, such as laws, institutions and customs, they
could hardly avoid all reference to the human mind and its processes; they
then relied upon the crude unanalysed psychological conceptions of popular
speech; often they went further and, aspiring to explain the phenomena they
described, made vast assumptions about the constitution and working of the
human mind. Thus, for example, Renan, when he sought to explain some
feature of the history of a nation or society, was in the habit, like many
others, of ascribing it to some peculiar instinct which he postulated for this
particular purpose, such as a political or a religious instinct or an instinct of
subordination or of organisation. Comte made egoism and altruism the two
master forces of the mind. Sir Henry Maine asserted that “satisfaction and
impatience are the two great sources of political conduct,” and, after
asserting that “no force acting on mankind has been less carefully examined
than Party, and yet none better deserves examination,” he was content to
conclude that “Party is probably nothing more than a survival and a
consequence of the primitive combativeness of mankind3.” More recently
Prof. Giddings has discovered the principal force underlying all human
associations in Consciousness of Kind. Butler and the intuitive moralists
postulated ‘conscience’ or moral sense as something innately present in the
souls of men; while the creators of the classical school of political economy
were for the most part content to assume that man is a purely rational being
who always intelligently pursues his own best interest, a false premise from
which they deduced some conclusions that have not withstood the test of
time. Similar vague assumptions may be found in almost every work on the
social sciences,—all illustrating the need for a psychology more concrete
than the older individual psychology, as a basis for these sciences, a
positive science, not of some hypothetical Robinson Crusoe, but of the
mental life of men as it actually unfolds itself in the families, tribes, nations,
societies of all sorts, that make up the human world.
The general growth of interest in genetic problems, stimulated so
greatly by the work of Darwin, turned the attention of psychologists to the
problem of the genesis of the developed human mind,—the problem of its
evolution in the race and its development in the individual. Then it at once
became apparent that both these processes are essentially social; that they
involve, and at every step are determined by, interactions between the
individual and his social environment; that, while the growth of the
individual mind is moulded by the mental forces of the society in which it
grows up, those forces are in turn the products of the interplay of the minds
composing the society; that, therefore, we can only understand the life of
individuals and the life of societies, if we consider them always in relation
to one another. It was realised that each man is an individual only in an
incomplete sense; that he is but a unit in a vast system of vital and spiritual
forces which, expressing themselves in the form of human societies, are
working towards ends which no man can foresee; a unit whose chief
function it is to transmit these forces unimpaired, which can change or add
to them only in infinitesimal degree, and which, therefore, has but little
significance and cannot be accounted for when considered in abstraction
from that system. It became clear that the play of this system of forces at
any moment of history is predominantly determined by conditions which
are themselves the products of an immensely long course of evolution,
conditions which have been produced by the mental activities of countless
generations and which are but very little modified by the members of
society living at any one time; so that, as has been said, society consists of
the dead as well as of the living, and the part of the living in determining its
life is but insignificant as compared with the part of the dead.
Any psychology that recognises these facts and attempts to display the
reciprocal influences of the individual and the society in which he plays his
part may be called Social Psychology. Collective or Group Psychology is,
then, a part of this larger field. It has to study the mental life of societies of
all kinds; and such understanding of the group life as it can achieve has then
to be used by Social Psychology in rendering more concrete and complete
our understanding of the individual life.
Group Psychology itself consists properly of two parts, that which is
concerned to discover the most general principles of group life, and that
which applies these principles to the study of particular kinds and examples
of group life. The former is logically prior to the second; though in practice
it is hardly possible to keep them wholly apart. The present volume is
concerned chiefly with the former branch. Only when the general principles
of group life have been applied to the understanding of particular societies,
of nations and the manifold system of groups within the nation, will it be
possible for Social Psychology to return upon the individual life and give of
it an adequate account in all its concrete fulness.
The nature of Group Psychology may be illustrated by reference to
Herbert Spencer’s conception of sociology. Spencer pointed out that, if you
set out to build a stable pile of solid bodies of a certain shape, the kind of
structure resulting is determined by the shapes and properties of these units,
that for example, if the units are spheres, there are only very few stable
forms which the pile can assume. The same is true, he said, of such physical
processes as crystallisation; the form and properties of the whole or
aggregate are determined by the properties of the units. He maintained with
less plausibility that the same holds good of animal and vegetable forms
and of the elements of which they are composed. And he went on to argue
that, in like manner, the structure and properties of a society are determined
by the properties of the units, the individual human beings, of which it is
composed.
This last proposition is true in a very partial sense only. For the
aggregate which is a society has, in virtue of its past history, positive
qualities which it does not derive from the units which compose it at any
one time; and in virtue of these qualities it acts upon its units in a manner
very different from that in which the units as such interact with one another.
Further, each unit, when it becomes a member of a group, displays
properties or modes of reaction which it does not display, which remain
latent or potential only, so long as it remains outside that group. It is
possible, therefore, to discover these potentialities of the units only by
studying them as elements in the life of the whole. That is to say, the
aggregate which is a society has a certain individuality, is a true whole
which in great measure determines the nature and the modes of activity of
its parts; it is an organic whole. The society has a mental life which is not
the mere sum of the mental lives of its units existing as independent units;
and a complete knowledge of the units, if and in so far as they could be
known as isolated units, would not enable us to deduce the nature of the life
of the whole, in the way that is implied by Spencer’s analogies.
Since, then, the social aggregate has a collective mental life, which is
not merely the sum of the mental lives of its units, it may be contended that
a society not only enjoys a collective mental life but also has a collective
mind or, as some prefer to say, a collective soul.
The tasks of Group Psychology are, then, to examine the conception of
the collective or group mind, in order to determine whether and in what
sense this is a valid conception; to display the general principles of
collective mental life which are incapable of being deduced from the laws
of the mental life of isolated individuals; to distinguish the principal types
of collective mental life or group mind; to describe the peculiarities of those
types and as far as possible to account for them. More shortly, Group
Psychology has, first, to establish the general principles of group life (this is
general collective psychology); secondly, it has to apply these principles in
the endeavour to understand particular examples of group life. Group
Psychology, thus conceived, meets at the outset a difficulty which stands in
the way of every attempt of psychology to leave the narrow field of highly
abstract individual psychology. It finds the ground already staked out and
occupied by the representatives of another science, who are inclined to
resent its intrusion as an encroachment on their rights. The science which
claims to have occupied the field of Group Psychology is Sociology; and it
is of some importance that the claims of these sciences should be
reconciled, so that they may live and work harmoniously together. I have no
desire to claim for Group Psychology the whole province of Sociology. As I
conceive it, that province is much wider than that of Group Psychology.
Sociology is essentially a science which has to take a comprehensive and
synthetic view of the life of mankind, and has to accept and make use of the
conclusions of many other more special sciences, of which psychology, and
especially Group Psychology, is for it perhaps the most important. But other
special sciences have very important if less intimate contributions to make
to it. Thus, if it be true that great civilisations have decayed owing to
changes of climate of their habitats, or owing to the introduction of such
diseases as malaria into them, then Climatology and Epidemiology have
their contributions to make to Sociology. If peculiarities of diet or the
crossing of racial stocks may profoundly affect the vigour of peoples,
Physiology must have its say. General biology and the science of Genetics
are bringing to light much that must be incorporated in Sociology.
Economics, although needing to be treated far more psychologically than it
commonly has been, has its special contribution to make. These are only a
few illustrations of the fact that the field of Sociology is very much wider
and more general than that of Group Psychology, however important to it
the conclusions of the narrower science may be.
In this book it will be maintained that the conception of a group mind is
useful and therefore valid; and, since this notion has already excited some
opposition and criticism and is one that requires very careful definition,
some attempt to define and justify it may usefully be made at the outset;
though the completer justification is the substance of the whole book. Some
writers have assumed the reality of what is called the ‘collective
consciousness’ of a society, meaning thereby a unitary consciousness of the
society over and above that of the individuals comprised within it. This
conception is examined in Chapter II and provisionally rejected. But it is
maintained that a society, when it enjoys a long life and becomes highly
organised, acquires a structure and qualities which are largely independent
of the qualities of the individuals who enter into its composition and take
part for a brief time in its life. It becomes an organised system of forces
which has a life of its own, tendencies of its own, a power of moulding all
its component individuals, and a power of perpetuating itself as a self-
identical system, subject only to slow and gradual change.
In an earlier work, in which I have sketched in outline the program of
psychology4, I wrote: “When the student of behaviour has learnt from the
various departments of psychology ... all that they can teach him of the
structure, genesis, and modes of operation of the individual mind, a large
field still awaits his exploration. If we put aside as unproven such
speculations as that touched on at the end of the foregoing chapter (the view
of James that the human mind can enter into an actual union or communion
with the divine mind) and refuse to admit any modes of communication or
influence between minds other than through the normal channels of sense-
perception and bodily movement, we must nevertheless recognise the
existence in a certain sense of over-individual or collective minds. We may
fairly define a mind as an organised system of mental or purposive forces;
and, in the sense so defined, every highly organised human society may
properly be said to possess a collective mind. For the collective actions
which constitute the history of any such society are conditioned by an
organisation which can only be described in terms of mind, and which yet is
not comprised within the mind of any individual; the society is rather
constituted by the system of relations obtaining between the individual
minds which are its units of composition. Under any given circumstances
the actions of the society are, or may be, very different from the mere sum
of the actions with which its several members would react to the situation in
the absence of the system of relations which render them a society; or, in
other words, the thinking and acting of each man, in so far as he thinks and
acts as a member of a society, are very different from his thinking and
acting as an isolated individual.”
This passage has been cited by the author of a notable work on
Sociology5, and made by him the text of a polemic against the conception
of the group mind. He writes: “This passage contains two arguments in
favour of the hypothesis of super-individual ‘collective’ minds, neither of
which can stand examination. The ‘definition’ of a mind as ‘an organised
system of mental or purposive forces’ is totally inadequate. When we speak
of the mind of an individual we mean something more than this. The mind
of each of us has a unity other than that of such a system.” But I doubt
whether Mr Maciver could explain exactly what kind of unity it is that he
postulates. Is it the unity of soul substance? I have myself contended at
some length that this is a necessary postulate or hypothesis6, but I do not
suppose that Maciver accepts or intends to refer to this conception. Is it the
unity of consciousness or of self-consciousness? Then the answer is that
this unity is by no means a general and established function of the
individual mind; modern studies of the disintegration of personality have
shown this to be a questionable assumption, undermined by the many facts
of normal and abnormal psychology best resumed under Dr Morton
Prince’s term ‘co-consciousness.’
The individual mind is a system of purposive forces, but the system is
by no means always a harmonious system; it is but too apt to be the scene
of fierce conflicts which sometimes (in the graver psychoneuroses) result in
the rupture and disintegration of the system. I do not know how otherwise
we are to describe the individual mind than as a system of mental forces;
and, until Maciver succeeds in showing in what other sense he conceives it
to have “a unity other than that of such a system,” his objection cannot be
seriously entertained. He asks, of the alleged collective mind: “Does the
system so created think and will and feel and act7?” My answer, as set out
in the following pages, is that it does all of these things. He asks further: “If
a number of minds construct by their interactivity an organisation ‘which
can only be described in terms of mind,’ must we ascribe to the construction
the very nature of the forces which constructed it?” To this I reply—my
point is that the individual minds which enter into the structure of the group
mind at any moment of its life do not construct it; rather, as they come to
reflective self-consciousness, they find themselves already members of the
system, moulded by it, sharing in its activities, influenced by it at every
moment in every thought and feeling and action in ways which they can
neither fully understand nor escape from, struggle as they may to free
themselves from its infinitely subtle and multitudinous forces. And this
system, as Maciver himself forcibly insists in another connection, does not
consist of relations that exist external to and independently of the things
related, namely the minds of individuals; it consists of the same stuff as the
individual minds, its threads and parts lie within these minds; but the parts
in the several individual minds reciprocally imply and complement one
another and together make up the system which consists wholly of them;
and therefore, as I wrote, they can “only be described in terms of mind.”
Any society is literally a more or less organised mental system; the stuff of
which it consists is mental stuff; the forces that operate within it are mental
forces. Maciver argues further: “Social organisations occur of every kind
and every degree of universality. If England has a collective mind, why not
Birmingham and why not each of its wards? If a nation has a collective
mind, so also have a church and a trade union. And we shall have collective
minds that are parts of greater collective minds, and collective minds that
intersect other collective minds.” By this my withers are quite unwrung.
What degree of organisation is necessary before a society can properly be
said to enjoy collective mental life or have a group mind is a question of
degree; and the exponent of the group mind is under no obligation to return
a precise answer to this question. My contention is that the most highly
organised groups display collective mental life in a way which justifies the
conception of the group mind, and that we shall be helped to understand
collective life in these most complex and difficult forms by studying it in
the simpler less elaborated groups where the conception of a group mind is
less clearly applicable. As regards the overlapping and intersection of
groups and the consequent difficulty of assigning the limits of groups
whose unity is implied by the term group mind, I would point out that this
difficulty arises only in connexion with the lower forms of group life and
that a parallel difficulty is presented by the lower forms of animal life. Is
Maciver acquainted with the organisation of a sponge, or of the so-called
coral ‘insect,’ or with that of the Portuguese man-o’-war? Would he deny
the unity of a human being, or refuse to acknowledge his possession of a
mind, because in these lower organisms the limits of the unit are hard or
impossible to assign? Maciver goes on: “The second argument is an
obvious fallacy. If each man thinks and acts differently as a member of a
crowd or association and as an individual standing out of any such
immediate relation to his fellows, it is still each who thinks and acts; the
new determinations are determinations still of individual minds as they are
influenced by aggregation.... But this is merely an extreme instance of the
obvious fact that every mind is influenced by every kind of environment. To
posit a super-individual mind because individual minds are altered by their
relations to one another (as indeed they are altered by their relations to
physical conditions) is surely gratuitous8.” To this I reply—the environment
which influences the individual in his life as a member of an organised
group is neither the sum of his fellow members as individuals, nor is it
something that has other than a mental existence. It is the organised group
as such, which exists only or chiefly in the persons of those composing it,
but which does not exist in the mind of any one of them, and which
operates upon each so powerfully just because it is something indefinitely
greater, more powerful, more comprehensive than the mere sum of those
individuals. Maciver feels that “it is important to clear out of the way this
misleading doctrine of super-individual minds corresponding to social or
communal organisations and activities,” and therefore goes on to say that
“there is no more a great ‘collective’ mind beyond the individual minds in
society than there is a great ‘collective’ tree beyond all the individual trees
in nature. A collection of trees is a wood, and that we can study as a unity;
so an aggregation of men is a society, a much more determinate unity; but a
collection of trees is not a collective tree, and neither is a collection of
persons or minds a collective person or mind. We can speak of qualities of
tree in abstraction from any particular tree, and we can speak of qualities of
mind as such, or of some particular kind of mind in relation to some type of
situation. Yet in so doing we are simply considering the characteristic of
like elements of individual minds, as we might consider the characteristic or
like elements discoverable in individual trees and kinds of trees. To
conceive because of these identities, a ‘collective’ mind as existing beside
those of individuals or a collective tree beside the variant examples is to run
against the wall of the Idea theory.” Now, I am not proposing to commit
myself to this last-named theory. It is not because minds have much in
common with one another that I speak of the collective mind, but because
the group as such is more than the sum of the individuals, has its own life
proceeding according to laws of group life, which are not the laws of
individual life, and because its peculiar group life reacts upon and
profoundly modifies the lives of the individuals. I would not call a forest a
collective tree; but I would maintain that in certain respects a forest, a
wood, or a copse, has in a rudimentary way a collective life. Thus the forest
remains the same forest though, after a hundred or a thousand years, all its
constituent trees may be different individuals; and again the forest as a
whole may and does modify the life of each tree, as by attracting moisture,
protecting from violent and cold winds, harbouring various plants and
animals which affect the trees, and so on.
But I will cite an eloquent passage from a recent work on sociology in
support of my view. “The bonds of society are in the members of society,
and not outside them. It is the memories, traditions, and beliefs of each
which make up the social memories, traditions and beliefs. Society like the
kingdom of God is within us. Within us, within each of us, and yet greater
than the thoughts and understandings of any of us. For the social thoughts
and feelings and willings of each, the socialised mind of each, with the
complex scheme of his relation to the social world, is no mere reproduction
of the social thoughts and feelings and willings of the rest. Unity and
difference here too weave their eternal web, the greater social scheme
which none of us who are part of it can ever see in its entirety, but whose
infinite subtlety and harmony we may more and more comprehend and
admire. As a community grows in civilisation and culture, its traditions are
no longer clear and definite ways of thinking, its usages are no longer
uniform, its spirit is no longer to be summed up in a few phrases. But the
spirit and tradition of a people become no less real in becoming more
complex. Each member no longer embodies the whole tradition, but it is
because each embodies some part of a greater tradition to which the freely-
working individuality of each contributes. In this sense the spirit of a
people, though existing only in the individual members, more and more
surpasses the measure of any individual mind. Again, the social tradition is
expressed through institutions and records more permanent than the short-
lived members of community. These institutions and records are as it were
stored social values (just as, in particular, books may be called stored social
knowledge), in themselves nothing, no part of the social mind, but the
instruments of the communication of traditions from member to member, as
also from the dead past to the living present. In this way too, with the
increase of these stored values, of which members realise parts but none the
whole, the spirit of a people more and more surpasses the measure of any
individual mind. It is these social forces within and without, working in the
minds of individuals whose own social inheritance is an essential part of
their individuality, stored in the institutions which they maintain from the
past or establish in the present, that mould the communal spirit of the
successive generations. In this sense too a community may be called greater
than its members who exist at any one time, since the community itself
marches out of the past into the present, and its members at any time are
part of a great succession, themselves first moulded by communal forces
before they become, so moulded, the active determinants of its future
moulding.” An admirable statement! “The greater social scheme which
none of us can see in its entirety”—“the spirit of a people” which “more
and more surpasses the measure of any individual mind”—“the communal
spirit of the successive generations”—“the community” which is “greater
than its members who exist at any one time”; all these are alternative
designations of that organised system of mental forces which exists over
and above, though not independently of, the individuals in each of whom
some fragment of it is embodied and which is the group mind. And the
writer of this statement is Mr R. M. Maciver; the passage occurs in the
section of his book designed to “clear out of the way this misleading
doctrine of super-individual minds.” In the same section he goes on to say
that “every association, every organised group, may and does have rights
and obligations which are not the rights and obligations of any or all of its
members taken distributively but only of the association acting as an
organised unity.... As a unity the association may become a ‘juristic person,’
a ‘corporation,’ and from the legal standpoint the character of unity so
conceived is very important.... The ‘juristic person’ is a real unity, and
therefore more than a persona ficta, but the reality it possesses is of a totally
different order of being from that of the persons who establish it.” But,
perversely as it seems to me, Maciver adds “the unity of which we are
thinking is not mechanic or organic or even psychic.” I cannot but think
that, in thus denying the organic and psychic nature of this unity, Maciver is
under the influence of that unfortunate and still prevalent way of thinking of
the psychic as identical with the conscious which has given endless trouble
in psychology; because it has prompted the hopeless attempt, constantly
renewed, to describe the structure and organisation of the mind in terms of
conscious stuff, ignoring the all-important distinction between mental
activity, which is sometimes, though perhaps not always, consciousness,
and mental structure which is not. The structure and organisation of the
spirit of the community is in every respect as purely mental or psychic as is
the structure and organisation of the individual mind.
Maciver very properly goes on to bring his conclusions to the pragmatic
test, the test of practical results. He writes: “These false analogies ... are the
sources of that most misleading antithesis which we draw between the
individual and society, as though society were somehow other than its
individuals.... Analyse these misleading analogies, and in the revelation of
their falsity there is revealed also the falsity of this essential opposition of
individual and society. Properly understood, the interests of ‘the individual’
are the interests of society9.” But is it true that the interests of the individual
are identical with the interests of society? Obviously not. We have only to
think of the condemned criminal; of the mentally defective to whom every
enlightened society should deny the right of procreation; of the young
soldier who sacrifices his health, his limbs, his eyesight, or his life, and
perhaps the welfare of his loved ones, in serving his country. It is true that
the progress of society is essentially an approximation towards an ideal
state in which this identification would be completed; but that is an ideal
which can never be absolutely realised. Nor is it even true that the interests
of society are identical with the interests of the majority of its members
existing at any one time. It is, I think, highly probable that, if any great
modern nation should unanimously and wholeheartedly embark upon a
thorough-going scheme of state-socialism, the interests of the vast majority
of individuals would be greatly promoted; they would be enabled to live
more prosperously and comfortably with greater leisure and opportunity for
the higher forms of activity. It is, however, equally probable that the higher
interests of the nation would be gravely endangered, that it would enter
upon a period of increasing stagnation and diminishing vitality and, after a
few generations had passed away, would have slipped far down the slope
which has led all great societies of the past to destruction.
The question may be considered in relation to the German nation. As
will be pointed out in a later chapter, the structure of that nation was, before
the Great War, a menace to European civilisation. If the Germans had
succeeded in their aims and had conquered Europe or the world, their
individual interests would have been vastly promoted; they would have
enjoyed immense material prosperity and a proud consciousness of having
been chosen by God to rule the rest of mankind for their good. And this
would have confirmed the nation in all its vices and would have finally
crushed out of it all its potentialities for developing into a well-organised
nation of the higher type, fitted to play an honourable part in the future
evolution of mankind. The same truth appears if we consider the problem of
the responsibility of the German nation for the War. So long as that people
might retain its former organisation, which, I repeat, rendered it a menace to
the civilisation and culture of the whole world, its antagonists could only
treat it as a criminal and an outlaw to be repressed at all costs and punished
and kept down with the utmost severity. But, if it should achieve a new
organisation, one which will give preponderance to the better and saner
elements and traditions still preserved within it, then, although it will
consist of the same individuals in the main, it will have become a new or at
least a transformed nation, one with which the other nations could enter into
normal relations of amity or at least of mutual toleration, one which could
be admitted to a place in the greater society which the League of Nations is
to become. In other words, the same population would in virtue of a
changed organisation, have become a different nation.
Although Maciver, in making his attack upon the conception of the
group mind, has done me the honour to choose me as its exponent, I do not
stand alone in maintaining it. I am a little shy of citing in its support the
philosophers of the school of German ‘idealism,’ because, as I have
indicated in the Preface, I have little sympathy with that school. Yet, though
one may disapprove of the methods and of most of the conclusions of a
school of thought, one may still adduce in support of one’s opinion such of
its principles as seem to be well founded. I may, then, remind the reader that
the conception of the State as a super-individual, a superhuman quasi-divine
personality, is the central conception of the political philosophy of German
‘idealism.’ That conception has, no doubt, played a considerable part in
bringing upon Europe its present disaster. It was an instance of one of those
philosophical ideas which claim to be the product of pure reason, yet in
reality are adopted for the purpose of justifying and furthering some already
existing interest or institution. In this case the institution in question was the
Prussian state and those, Hegel and the rest, who set up this doctrine were
servants of that state. They made of their doctrine an instrument for the
suppression of individuality which greatly aided in producing the servile
condition of the German people. Yet the distortions and exaggerations of the
political philosophy of German ‘idealism’ should not prejudice us against
the germ of truth which it contains; and the more enlightened British
disciples of this school, from T.H. Green onwards, have sought with much
success to winnow the grain from the chaff of the doctrine; and I cannot
adduce better support for the conception of the group mind than the
sentences in which a recent English writer, a sympathetic student of
German ‘idealism,’ sums up the results of this winnowing process10.
Discussing the deficiencies of the individualist philosophy of the English
utilitarian school, he writes: “Not a modification of the old Benthamite
premises, but a new philosophy was needed; and that philosophy was
provided by the idealist school, of which Green is the greatest
representative. That school drew its inspiration immediately from Kant and
Hegel, and ultimately from the old Greek philosophy of the city-state. The
vital relation between the life of the individual and the life of the
community, which alone gives the individual worth and significance,
because it alone gives him the power of full moral development; the
dependence of the individual, for all his rights and for all his liberty, on his
membership of the community; the correlative duty of the community to
guarantee to the individual all his rights (in other words, all the conditions
necessary for his, and therefore for its own, full moral development)—these
were the premisses of the new philosophy. That philosophy could satisfy the
new needs of social progress, because it refused to worship a supposed
individual liberty which was proving destructive of the real liberty of the
vast majority, and preferred to emphasise the moral well-being and
betterment of the whole community, and to conceive of each of its members
as attaining his own well-being and betterment in and through the
community. Herein lay, or seemed to lie, a revolution of ideas. Instead of
starting from a central individual, to whom the social system is supposed to
be adjusted, the idealist starts from a central social system, in which the
individual must find his appointed orbit of duty. But after all the revolution
is only a restoration; and what is restored is simply the Republic of Plato11.”
The same writer reminds us that “both Plato and Hegel thus imply the idea
of a moral organism”; and he adds, “It is this conception of a moral
organism which Bradley urges. It is implied in daily experience, and it is
the only explanation of that experience. ‘In fact, what we call an individual
man is what he is because of and by virtue of community, and communities
are not mere names, but something real.’ Already at birth the child is what
he is in virtue of communities: he has something of the family character,
something of the national character, something of the civilised character
which comes from human society. As he grows, the community in which he
lives pours itself into his being in the language he learns and the social
atmosphere he breathes, so that the content of his being implies in its every
fibre relations of community. He is what he is by including in his essence
the relations of the social State.... And regarding the State as a system, in
which many spheres (the family, for instance) are subordinated to one
sphere, and all the particular actions of individuals are subordinated to their
various spheres, we may call it a moral organism, a systematic whole
informed by a common purpose or function. As such it has an outer side—a
body of institutions; it has an inner side—a soul or spirit which sustains that
body. And since it is a moral organism—since, that is to say, its parts are
themselves conscious moral agents—that spirit resides in those parts and
lives in their consciousness. In such an organism—and this is where it
differs from an animal organism, and why we have to use the word moral—
the parts are conscious: they know themselves in their position as parts of
the whole, and they therefore know the whole of which they are parts. So
far as they have such knowledge, and a will based upon it, so far is the
moral organism self-conscious and self-willing.... Thus, on the one hand,
we must recognise that the State lives; that there is a nation’s soul, self-
conscious in its citizens; and that to each citizen this living soul assigns his
field of accomplishment12.” On a later page of the same book we read
—“All the institutions of a country, so far as they are effective, are not only
products of thought and creations of mind: they are thought, and they are
mind. Otherwise we have a building without a tenant, and a body without a
mind. An Oxford college is not a group of buildings, though common
speech gives that name to such a group: it is a group of men. But it is not a
group of men in the sense of a group of bodies in propinquity: it is a group
of men in the sense of a group of minds. That group of minds, in virtue of
the common substance of an uniting idea, is itself a group-mind. There is no
group-mind existing apart from the minds of the members of the group; the
group-mind only exists in the minds of its members. But nevertheless it
exists. There is a college mind, just as there is a Trade Union mind, or even
a ‘public mind’ of the whole community; and we are all conscious of such a
mind as something that exists in and along with the separate minds of the
members, and over and above any sum of those minds created by mere
addition13.”
The political philosophers of the idealist school have not stood alone in
recognising the reality of the group mind. Some of the lawyers, notably
Maitland, have arrived at a very similar doctrine; and I cannot better
summarise their conclusions than Barker has done in the following passage
in the book from which I have already cited so freely. “The new doctrine,”
he writes, “runs somewhat as follows. No permanent group, permanently
organised for a durable object, can be regarded as a mere sum of persons,
whose union, to have any rights or duties, must receive a legal
confirmation. Permanent groups are themselves persons, group-persons,
with a group-will of their own and a permanent character of their own; and
they have become group-persons of themselves, without any creative act of
the State. In a word, group-persons are real persons; and just because they
are so, and possess such attributes of persons as will and character, they
cannot have been made by the State14.”
I am not alone, then, in postulating the reality of the group mind. And I
am glad to be able to cite evidence of this, because I know well that very
many readers may at first find themselves repelled by this notion of a group
mind, and that some of them will incline to regard it as the fantastic fad of
an academic crank.
I would say at once that the crucial point of difference between my own
view of the group mind and that of the German ‘idealist’ school (at least in
its more extreme representatives) is that I repudiate, provisionally at least,
as an unverifiable hypothesis the conception of a collective or super-
individual consciousness, somehow comprising the consciousness of the
individuals composing the group. I have examined this conception in the
following chapter and have stated my grounds for rejecting it. The
difference of practical conclusions arising from this difference of theory
must obviously be very great.
Several books dealing with collective psychology have been published
in recent years. Of these perhaps the most notable are G. le Bon’s
Psychology of the Crowd, his Evolution psychologique des peuples;
Sighele’s La foule criminelle; the Psychologie collective of Dr A. A. Marie;
and Alfred Fouillée’s La Science sociale contemporaine. It is noteworthy
that, with the exception of the last, all these books deal only with crowds or
groups of low organisation; and their authors, like almost all others who
have touched on this subject, are concerned chiefly to point out how
participation in the group life degrades the individual, how the group feels
and thinks and acts on a much lower plane than the average plane of the
individuals who compose it.
On the other hand, many writers have insisted on the fact that it is only
by participation in the life of society that any man can realise his higher
potentialities; that society has ideals and aims and traditions loftier than any
principles of conduct the individual can form for himself unaided; and that
only by the further evolution of organised society can mankind be raised to
higher levels; just as in the past it has been only through the development of
organised society that the life of man has ceased to deserve the epithets
‘nasty, brutish and short’ which Hobbes applied to it.
We seem then to stand before a paradox. Participation in group life
degrades the individual, assimilating his mental processes to those of the
crowd, whose brutality, inconstancy, and unreasoning impulsiveness have
been the theme of many writers; yet only by participation in group life does
man become fully man, only so does he rise above the level of the savage.
The resolution of this paradox is the essential theme of this book. It
examines and fully recognises the mental and moral defects of the crowd
and its degrading effects upon all those who are caught up in it and carried
away by the contagion of its reckless spirit. It then goes on to show how
organisation of the group may, and generally does in large measure,
counteract these degrading tendencies; and how the better kinds of
organisation render group life the great ennobling influence by aid of which
alone man rises a little above the animals and may even aspire to fellowship
with the angels.
Chapter II.
The Mental Life of the Crowd
Table of Contents
It is a notorious fact that, when a number of men think and feel and act
together, the mental operations and the actions of each member of the group
are apt to be very different from those he would achieve if he faced the
situation as an isolated individual. Hence, though we may know each
member of a group so intimately that we can, with some confidence,
foretell his actions under given circumstances, we cannot foretell the
behaviour of the group from our knowledge of the individuals alone. If we
would understand and be able to predict the behaviour of the group, we
must study the way in which the mental processes of its members are
modified in virtue of their membership. That is to say, we must study the
interactions between the members of the group and also those between the
group as a whole and each member. We must examine also the forms of
group organisation and their influence upon the life of the group.
Groups differ greatly from one another in respect of the kind and degree
of organisation they possess. In the simplest case the group has no
organisation. In some cases the relations of the constituent individuals to
one another and to the whole group are not in any way determined or fixed
by previous events; such a group constitutes merely a mob. In other groups
the individuals have certain determinate relations to one another which have
arisen in one or more of three ways:
(1) Certain relations may have been established between the individuals,
before they came together to form a group; for example, a parish council or
a political meeting may be formed by persons belonging to various
definitely recognised classes, and their previously recognised relations will
continue to play a part in determining the collective deliberations and
actions of the group; they will constitute an incipient organisation.
(2) If any group enjoys continuity of existence, certain more or less
constant relations, of subordination, deference, leadership and so forth, will
inevitably become established between the individuals of which it is
composed; and, of course, such relations will usually be deliberately
established and maintained by any group that is united by a common
purpose, in order that its efficiency may be promoted.
(3) The group may have a continued existence and a more or less
elaborate and definite organisation independently of the individuals of
which it is composed; in such a case the individuals may change while the
formal organisation of the group persists; each person who enters it being
received into some more or less well-defined and generally recognised
position within the group, which formal position determines in great
measure the nature of his relations to other members of the group and to the
group as a whole.
We can hardly imagine any concourse of human beings, however
fortuitous it may be, utterly devoid of the rudiments of organisation of one
or other of these three kinds; nevertheless, in many a fortuitous concourse
the influence of such rudimentary organisation is so slight as to be
negligible. Such a group is an unorganised crowd or mob. The unorganised
crowd presents many of the fundamental phenomena of collective
psychology in relative simplicity; whereas the higher the degree of
organisation of a group, the more complicated is its psychology. We shall,
therefore, study first the mental peculiarities of the unorganised crowd, and
shall then go on to consider the modifications resulting from a simple and
definite type of organisation.
Not every mass of human beings gathered together in one place within
sight and sound of one another constitutes a crowd in the psychological
sense of the word. There is a dense gathering of several hundred individuals
at the Mansion House Crossing at noon of every week-day; but ordinarily
each of them is bent upon his own task, pursues his own ends, paying little
or no regard to those about him. But let a fire-engine come galloping
through the throng of traffic, or the Lord Mayor’s state coach arrive, and
instantly the concourse assumes in some degree the character of a
psychological crowd. All eyes are turned upon the fire-engine or coach; the
attention of all is directed to the same object; all experience in some degree
the same emotion, and the state of mind of each person is in some degree
affected by the mental processes of all those about him. Those are the
fundamental conditions of collective mental life. In its more developed
forms, an awareness of the crowd or group as such in the mind of each
member plays an important part; but this is not an essential condition of its
simpler manifestations. The essential conditions of collective mental action
are, then, a common object of mental activity, a common mode of feeling in
regard to it, and some degree of reciprocal influence between the members
of the group. It follows that not every aggregation of individuals is capable
of becoming a psychological crowd and of enjoying a collective life. For
the individuals must be capable of being interested in the same objects and
of being affected in a similar way by them; there must be a certain degree of
similarity of mental constitution among the individuals, a certain mental
homogeneity of the group. Let a man stand on a tub in the midst of a
gathering of a hundred Englishmen and proceed to denounce and abuse
England; those individuals at once become a crowd. Whereas, if the
hundred men were of as many races and nations, their attention would
hardly be attracted by the orator; for they would have no common interest
in the topic of his discourse. Or let the man on the tub denounce the
establishment of the Church of England, and the hundred Englishmen do
not become a crowd; for, although all may be interested and attentive, the
words of the orator evoke in them very diverse feelings and emotions, the
sentiments they entertain for the Church of England being diverse in
character.
There must, then, be some degree of similarity of mental constitution, of
interest and sentiment, among the persons who form a crowd, a certain
degree of mental homogeneity of the group. And the higher the degree of
this mental homogeneity of any gathering of men, the more readily do they
form a psychological crowd and the more striking and intense are the
manifestations of collective life. All gatherings of men that are not purely
fortuitous are apt to have a considerable degree of mental homogeneity;
thus the members of a political meeting are drawn together by common
political opinions and sentiments; the audience in a concert room shares a
common love of music or a common admiration for the composer,
conductor, or great executant; and a still higher degree of homogeneity
prevails when a number of persons of the same religious persuasion are
gathered together at a great revival meeting. Consider how under such
circumstances a very ordinary joke or point made by a political orator
provokes a huge delight; how, at a concert, the admiration of the applauding
audience swells to a pitch of frantic enthusiasm; how, at the skilfully
conducted and successful revival meeting, the fervour of emotion is apt to
rise, until it exceeds all normal modes of expression and men and women
give way to loud weeping or even hysterical convulsions.
Such exaltation or intensification of emotion is the most striking result
of the formation of a crowd, and is one of the principal sources of the
attractiveness of the crowd. By participation in the mental life of a crowd,
one’s emotions are stirred to a pitch that they seldom or never attain under
other conditions. This is for most men an intensely pleasurable experience;
they are, as they say, carried out of themselves, they feel themselves caught
up in a great wave of emotion, and cease to be aware of their individuality
and all its limitations; that isolation of the individual, which oppresses
every one of us, though it may not be explicitly formulated in his
consciousness, is for the time being abolished. The repeated enjoyment of
effects of this kind tends to generate a craving for them, and also a facility
in the spread and intensification of emotion in this way; this is probably the
principal cause of the greater excitability of urban populations as compared
with dwellers in the country, and of the well-known violence and fickleness
of the mobs of great cities.
There is one kind of object in the presence of which no man remains
indifferent and which evokes in almost all men the same emotion, namely
impending danger; hence the sudden appearance of imminent danger may
instantaneously convert any concourse of people into a crowd and produce
the characteristic and terrible phenomena of a panic. In each man the
instinct of fear is intensely excited; he experiences that horrible emotion in
full force and is irresistibly impelled to save himself by flight. The terrible
driving power of this impulse, excited to its highest pitch under the
favouring conditions, suppresses all other impulses and tendencies, all
habits of self-restraint, of courtesy and consideration for others; and we see
men, whom we might have supposed incapable of cruel or cowardly
behaviour, trampling upon women and children, in their wild efforts to
escape from the burning theatre, the sinking ship, or other place of danger.
The panic is the crudest and simplest example of collective mental life.
Groups of gregarious animals are liable to panic; and the panic of a crowd
of human beings seems to be generated by the same simple instinctive
reactions as the panic of animals. The essence of the panic is the collective
intensification of the instinctive excitement, with its emotion of fear and its
impulse to night. The principle of primitive sympathy15 seems to afford a
full and adequate explanation of such collective intensification of
instinctive excitement. The principle is that, in man and in the gregarious
animals generally, each instinct, with its characteristic primary emotion and
specific impulse, is capable of being excited in one individual by the
expressions of the same emotion in another, in virtue of a special congenital
adaptation of the instinct on its Cognitive or perceptual side. In the crowd,
then, the expressions of fear of each individual are perceived by his
neighbours; and this perception intensifies the fear directly excited in them
by the threatening danger. Each man perceives on every hand the symptoms
of fear, the blanched distorted faces, the dilated pupils, the high-pitched
trembling voices, and the screams of terror of his fellows; and with each
such perception his own impulse and his own emotion rise to a higher pitch
of intensity, and their expressions become correspondingly accentuated and
more difficult to control. So the expressions of each member of the crowd
work upon all other members within sight and hearing of him to intensify
their excitement; and the accentuated expressions of the emotion, so
intensified, react upon him to raise his own excitement to a still higher
pitch; until in all individuals the instinct is excited in the highest possible
degree.
This principle of direct induction of emotion by way of the primitive
sympathetic response enables us to understand the fact that a concourse of
people (or animals) may be quickly turned into a panic-stricken crowd by
some threatening object which is perceptible by only a few of the
individuals present. A few persons near the stage of a theatre see flames dart
out among the wings; then, though the flames may be invisible to the rest of
the house, the expressions of the startled few induce fear in their
neighbours, and the excitement sweeps over the whole concourse like fire
blown across the prairie.
The same principle enables us to understand how a few fearless
individuals may arrest the spread of a panic. If they experience no fear, or
can completely arrest its expressions, and can in any way make themselves
prominent, can draw and hold the attention of their fellows to themselves,
then these others, instead of perceiving on every hand only the expressions
of fear, perceive these few calm and resolute individuals; the process of
reciprocal intensification of the excitement is checked and, if the danger is
not too imminent and obvious, the panic may die away, leaving men
ashamed and astonished at the intensity of their emotion and the violent
irrational character of their behaviour.
Other of the cruder primary emotions may spread through a crowd in
very similar fashion, though the process is rarely so rapid and intense as in
the case of fear16. And in every case the principal cause of the
intensification of the emotion is the reciprocal action between the members
of the crowd, according to the principle of sympathetic induction of
emotion in one individual by its expressions in others.
In panic, the dominance of the one emotion and its impulse is so
complete as to allow no scope for any of the subtler modes of collective
mental operation. But in other cases other conditions co-operate to
determine the character of the emotional response of the crowd. Of these
the most important are the awareness of the crowd as a whole in the mind of
each member of it and his consciousness of his membership in the whole.
When a common emotion pervades the crowd, each member becomes more
or less distinctly aware of the fact; and this gives him a sense of sharing in a
mighty and irresistible power which renders him reckless of consequences
and encourages him to give himself up to the prevailing emotion without
restraint. Thus, in the case of an audience swept by an emotion of
admiration for a brilliant singer, the thunder of applause, which shows each
individual that his emotion is shared by all the rest, intensifies his own
emotion, not only by way of sympathetic induction, but also because it frees
him from that restraint of emotion which is habitual with most of us in the
presence of any critical or adversely disposed spectators, and which the
mere thought of such spectators tends to maintain and strengthen. Again,
the oratory of a demagogue, if addressed to a large crowd, will raise angry
emotion to a pitch of intensity far higher than any it will attain if he is heard
by a few persons only; and this is due not only to accentuation of the
emotion by sympathetic induction, but also to the fact that, as the symptoms
of the emotion begin to be manifested on all sides, each man becomes
aware that it pervades the crowd, that the crowd as a whole is swayed by
the same emotion and the same impulse as he himself feels, that none
remains to criticise the violence of his expressions. To which it must be
added that the consciousness of the harmony of one’s feelings with those of
a mass of one’s fellows, and the consequent sense of freedom from all
restraint, are highly pleasurable to most men; they find a pleasure in letting
themselves go, in being swept away in the torrent of collective emotion.
This is one of the secrets of the fascination which draws many thousands of
spectators to a football match, and brings together the multitudes of base-
ball ‘fans’ bubbling over with eager anticipation of an emotional orgy.
The fact that the emotions of crowds are apt to be very violent has long
been recognised, and the popular mind, in seeking to account for it, has
commonly postulated very special and even supernatural causes. The negro
author of a most interesting book17 has given the following description of
the religious frenzy of a crowd of Christian negroes: “An air of intense
excitement possessed the mass of black folk. A suppressed terror hung in
the air and seemed to seize us,—a pythian madness, a demoniac possession,
that lent terrible reality to song and word. The massive form of the preacher
swayed and quivered as the words crowded to his lips. The people moaned
and fluttered and then a gaunt brown woman suddenly leaped into the air
and shrieked like a lost soul, while round about came wail and groan and
outcry, a scene of human passion such as I had never even imagined.” The
author goes on to say that this frenzy is attributed by the black folk to the
direct influence of the Spirit of the Lord, making mad the worshippers with
supernatural joy, and that this belief is one of the leading features of their
religion. Similar practices, depending upon the tendency of collective
emotion to rise to an extreme intensity, have been common to the peoples of
many lands in all ages; and similar supernatural explanations have been
commonly devised and accepted. I need only remind the reader of the
Dionysiac orgies of ancient Greece.
The facts are so striking that for the popular mind they remain
unaccountable, and not to be mentioned without some vague reference to
magnetism, electricity, hypnotism, or some mysterious contagion; and even
modern scientific writers have been led to adopt somewhat extravagant
hypotheses to account for them. Thus Dr Le Bon18 speaks of “the magnetic
influence given out by the crowd” and says that, owing to this influence, “or
from some other cause of which we are ignorant, an individual immerged
for some length of time in a crowd in action soon finds himself in a special
state, which much resembles the state of fascination in which the
hypnotised individual finds himself in the hands of the hypnotiser.” He goes
on to say that in the hypnotised subject the conscious personality disappears
and that his actions are the outcome of the unconscious activities of the
spinal cord. Now, crowds undoubtedly display great suggestibility, but great
suggestibility does not necessarily imply hypnosis; and there is no ground
for supposing that the members of a crowd are thrown into any such
condition, save possibly in very rare instances.
There are however two hypotheses, sometimes invoked for the
explanation of the peculiarities of collective mental life, which demand
serious consideration and which we may with advantage consider at this
point.
One is the hypothesis of telepathy. A considerable amount of respectable
evidence has been brought forward in recent years to prove that one mind
may directly influence another by some obscure mode of action that does
not involve the known organs of expression and of perception; and much of
this evidence seems to show that one mind may directly induce in another a
state of consciousness similar to its own. If, then, such direct interaction
between two minds can take place in an easily appreciable degree in certain
instances, it would seem not improbable that a similar direct interaction,
producing a lesser, and therefore less easily appreciable, degree of
assimilation of the states of consciousness of the minds concerned, may be
constantly and normally at work. If this were the case, such telepathic
interaction might well play a very important part in collective mental life,
and, where a large number of persons is congregated, it might tend to
produce that intensification of emotion which is so characteristic of crowds.
In fact, if direct telepathic communication of emotion in however slight a
degree is possible and normal, and especially if the influence is one that
diminishes with distance, it may be expected to produce its most striking
results among the members of a crowd; for the emotion of each member
might be expected to be intensified by the telepathic influence radiating
from every other member. Some slight presumption in favour of such a
mode of explanation is afforded by the fact that the popular use of the word
contagion in the present connexion seems to imply, however vaguely, some
such direct communication of emotion. But telepathic communication has
not hitherto been indisputably established; and the observations that afford
so strong a presumption in its favour indicate that, if and in so far as it
occurs, it does so sporadically and only between individuals specially
attuned to one another or in some abnormal mental state that renders them
specially sensitive to the influence19. And, while the acceptance of the
principle of sympathetic induction of an emotion, as an instinctive
perceptual response to the expressions of that emotion, renders unnecessary
any further principle of explanation, the consideration of the conditions of
the spread of emotion through crowds affords evidence that this mode of
interaction of the individuals is all-important and that telepathic
communication, if it occurs, is of secondary importance. For the spreading
and the great intensification of emotion seem to depend upon its being
given expressions that are perceptible by the senses. So long as its
expressions are suppressed, the emotion of an assembly does not become
excessive. It is only by eliciting and encouraging the expressions of
emotions that the revivalist, the political orator, or the comic man on the
music-hall stage, achieves his successes. That the expressions of an emotion
are far more effective in this way than the emotion itself is recognised by
the practice of the claqueurs. When an audience has once been induced to
give expression to a common emotion, its members are, as it were, set in
tune with one another; each man is aware that he is in harmony with all the
rest as regards his feelings and emotions, and, even in the periods during
which all expressions are suppressed by the audience, this awareness serves
to sustain the mood and to prepare for fresh outbursts. The mere silence of
an audience, the absence of coughs, shufflings, and uneasy movements,
suffices to make each member aware that all his fellows are attentive and
are responding with the appropriate emotion; but it is not until the applause,
the indignation, or the laughter, breaks out in free expression that the
emotion reaches its highest pitch. And a skilful orator or entertainer,
recognising these facts, takes care to afford frequent opportunities for the
collective displays of emotion.
We must recognise, then, that, even if telepathic communication be
proved to be possible in certain cases, there is not sufficient evidence of its
operation in the spread of emotion through crowds, and that the facts are
sufficiently explained by another principle of general and indisputable
validity, the principle of primitive sympathy.
The second hypothesis to be considered in this connexion is that of the
‘collective consciousness.’ The conception of a collective consciousness has
been reached by a large number of authors along several lines of
observation and reasoning and is seriously defended at the present time,
more especially by several French and German writers. They maintain that,
in some sense and manner, the consciousnesses of individuals are not
wholly shut off from one another, but may co-operate in the genesis of, or
share in the being of, a more comprehensive consciousness that exists
beside and in addition to them. The conception varies according to the route
by which it is reached and the use that is made of it; but in all its varieties
the conception remains extremely obscure; no one has succeeded in making
clear how the relation of the individual consciousness to the collective
consciousness is to be conceived. In the writings of many metaphysicians,
of whom Hegel is the most prominent, ‘the Absolute’ seems to imply such a
collective consciousness, an all-inclusive world-consciousness of which the
individual consciousness of each man is somehow but a constituent element
or fragmentary manifestation. But it would be unprofitable to attempt any
discussion of the conception. We are concerned only with the empirical
conception of a collective consciousness based on observation and
induction.
Such a conception finds its strongest support in the analogy afforded by
a widely current view of the nature and conditions of the psychical
individuality of men and animals; the view, namely, that the individual
consciousness of any man or animal is the collective consciousness of the
cells of which his body, or his nervous system, is composed. We know that
the nervous system is made up of cells each of which is a vital unit, capable
of living, of achieving its essential vital processes, independently of other
cells; and we see free living cells that in many respects are comparable with
these and to which we seem compelled, according to the principle of
continuity, to attribute some germ of psychical life however rudimentary.
What is known of the phylogenetic and ontogenetic development of the
multicellular animal seems to justify us in regarding it as essentially an
aggregate of such independent vital units, which, being formed by repeated
fission from a single cell, adhere together and undergo differentiation and
specialisation of functions. If then the parent cell, the germ cell, has a
rudimentary psychical life, it is difficult to deny it altogether to the cells
formed from it by fission; and it is argued that all these cells continue to
enjoy a psychical life and that the consciousness of the individual man or
animal is the collective consciousness of some or all of these cells. Now we
know that the consciousness of any one of the higher animals has for its
physical correlate at any moment processes going on simultaneously in
many different parts and elements of the brain. It is argued, then, that we
must suppose each cell of the brain to enjoy, whenever it is active, its own
psychical life, and at the same time to contribute something towards the
unitary ‘collective consciousness’ of the whole organism, which thus exists
beside, but not independently of, these rudimentary consciousnesses of the
cells. If the view be accepted, it affords a close analogy with the supposed
‘collective consciousness’ of a group of men or a society.
This conception of the collective nature of the consciousness of
complex organisms finds strong support in two classes of facts. First, it
finds support in the fact that, if individuals of many of the animal species of
an intermediate grade of complexity, such as some of the worms and some
of the radiate animals, be cut into two or more parts, each part may continue
to live and may become a complete organism by reconstitution of the lost
parts. Since, then, we can hardly deny some integrated psychical life to such
organisms, some rudimentary consciousness, we seem compelled to believe
that this consciousness may be divided into two or more consciousnesses,
each of them being associated with the vital activities of one of the parts
into which the organism is divided by the knife. Division of the organism
into two parts is also the normal mode of reproduction in the animal world.
Even the coming into existence of every human being seems to be bound up
with the separation of a cell from the parent organism; and his existence as
a separate psychical individual seems to result from the same process of
physical division. And if one cell, when thus separated from the parent
organism, can thus prove its possession of a psychical life by developing
into a fully conscious organism, it is difficult to deny that all other cells
have also their own psychical lives, even though they may be incapable of
making it manifest to us by growing up into complex organisms when
separated.
The second class of facts that seem to justify this conception of the
consciousness of complex organisms are facts which have been studied and
discussed widely in recent years under the head of mental dissociation or
disintegration of personalities. Such disintegration seems to occur
spontaneously as the essential feature of severe hysteria, and to be
producible artificially and temporarily in some subjects, when they are
thrown into deep hypnosis. In certain of these cases the behaviour of the
human being seems to imply that it is the expression of two separate
psychical individuals, formed by the splitting of the stream of
consciousness and of mental activity of the individual into two streams. The
two streams may be of co-ordinate complexity; but more frequently one of
them seems to be a mere trickle diverted from the main stream of personal
consciousness. Since it is, from the nature of the case, always impossible to
obtain any direct and certain proof that any behaviour other than one’s own
is the expression of conscious mental processes, it is not possible to prove
that such division or disintegration of the personal consciousness actually
takes place. But the facts appear to many of the psychologists who have
studied them most carefully20 to demand this interpretation; and this
psychical disintegration seems to be accompanied by a functional
dissociation of the nervous system into two or more systems each of which
functions independently of the others,—that is to say, a division of the
nervous system comparable with the division of the nervous system of the
worm by the stroke of the knife which seems to split the psychical
individual into two.
The facts of both these orders would appear, then, to indicate that the
physical organisation of the cells of a complex organism is accompanied by
an organisation of their psychical lives to form a ‘collective consciousness,’
which in the human being becomes a personal self-consciousness; and they
would seem to show that the unity of personal consciousness has for its
main condition the functional continuity of the protoplasm of the cells of
the nervous system.
Even before the facts of disintegration of personalities were known,
several authors, notably von Hartmann21 and G. T. Fechner22, did not
hesitate to make this last assumption; and to assert that, if the brain of a
man could be divided by a knife into two parts each of which continued to
function, 
his 
consciousness 
would 
thus 
be 
divided 
into 
two
consciousnesses; and conversely, that, if a functional bridge of nervous
matter could be established between the brains of two men, their
consciousnesses would fuse to a single consciousness. The discovery of
these facts has greatly strengthened the case for this view; and it has been
accepted by so sound a psychologist and sober a philosopher as Fouillée23.
It may be claimed that the consideration of the nature and behaviour of
animal societies points to a similar conclusion, and supplements in an
important manner the argument founded on the divisibility of individual
organisms. Such a line of reasoning has been most thoroughly pursued by
Espinas in his very interesting book on animal societies24. He begins by
considering the lower polycellular forms of animal life. Among them,
especially among the hydrozoa or polypes, we find compound or colonial
animals; such an animal is a single living mass of which all the parts are in
substantial and vital connexion with one another, but is yet made up of a
number of parts each of which is morphologically a complete or almost
complete creature; and these parts, though specialised for the performance
of certain functions subserving the economy of the whole animal or
coherent group of animals, are yet capable, if separated from the mass (as
they sometimes are by a natural process), of continuing to live, of growing,
and of multiplying. There are found among such creatures very various
degrees of specialisation of parts and of interdependence of parts; and in
those cases in which the specialisation and interdependence of parts is
great, the whole compound animal exhibits in its reactions so high a degree
of integration that we seem justified in supposing that a common or
‘collective consciousness’ is the psychical correlate of these integrated
actions of the separable parts. Why then, it is asked, should this ‘collective
consciousness’ cease to be, when the substantial continuity of the parts is
interrupted?
Espinas then goes on to describe animal societies of many types, and
shows how, as we follow up the evolutionary scale, association and intimate
interdependence and co-operation of their members tend to replace more
and more completely the individualistic antagonism and unmitigated
competition of the lowest free-living organisms. He considers first the type
of animal society which is essentially a family, a society of individuals all
of which are derived from the same parent by fission or by budding. He
argues that each such society of blood-relatives is a harmonious whole only
because it enjoys a ‘collective consciousness’ over and above the
consciousnesses of its constituent members; that, for example, a swarm of
bees, which exhibits so great a uniformity of feeling and action and of
which all the members come from the body of one parent, is in reality the
material basis of a ‘collective consciousness,’ which presides over and is
expressed by their collective actions; that the ants of one household have
such a collective consciousness, that they “are, in truth, a single thought in
action, like the various cellules and fibres of the brain of a mammal.” For,
as he maintains, “the consciousness of animals is not an absolute,
indivisible thing. It is on the contrary a reality capable of being divided and
diffused ... thought in general and the impulses illuminated by it, are, like
the forces of nature, susceptible of diffusion, of transmission, of being
shared, and can like these lie dormant where they are thinly diffused, or
become vivid and intensified by concentration. The beings that have these
attributes are no doubt monads; but these monads are open to and
communicate with one another.”
Espinas extends the view to other animal societies of which the
members are not all derived from one parent, including human societies;
and concludes that, except in the case of the Infusoria at the bottom of the
scale and of the highly organised societies at the top of it, every individual
consciousness is a part of a superior more comprehensive consciousness of
an individual of a higher order. He illustrates at length the fact with the
consideration and explanation of which this chapter is concerned, the fact
namely that, in all social groups, emotions and impulses are communicated
and intensified from one individual to another; and he asks—“If the
essential elements of consciousness add themselves together and
accumulate from one consciousness to another, how should the
consciousness itself of the whole not be participated in by each?” He argues
that to be real is not to be known to some other consciousness, but is to
exist for oneself, to be conscious of oneself; that, in this sense, the
‘collective consciousness’ of a society is the most real of all things; that
every society is therefore a living individual; and that, if we deny self-
conscious individuality to a society, we must deny it equally to the mass of
cells that make up an animal body; that, in short, we can find unity and
individuality nowhere.
This doctrine of the ‘collective consciousness’ of societies may seem
bizarre to those to whom it is altogether novel; but it is one that cannot be
lightly put aside; it demands serious consideration from any one who seeks
the general principles of Collective Psychology. We have no certain
knowledge from which its impossibility can be deduced; and the new light
thrown upon individuality by modern studies in psycho-pathology shows us
that the indivisibility and strictly bounded unity of the individual human
soul is a postulate that we must not continue to accept without critical
examination. Nor is the conception one that figures only in the writings of
philosophers and therefore to be regarded with contemptuous indulgence by
men of affairs as but one of the strange harmless foibles of such persons. It
has a certain vogue in more popular writings; thus Renan wrote—“It has
been remarked that in face of a peril a nation or a city shows, like a living
creature, a divination of the common danger, a secret sentiment of its own
being and the need of its conservation. Such is the obscure impulsion which
provokes from time to time the displacement of a whole people or the
emigration of masses, the crusades, the religious, political, or social
revolutions.” Phrases such as the soul of a people, the genius of a people,
have long been current, and in almost every newspaper one may find
important events and tendencies ascribed to the instinct of a people. It is
probable that these phrases are written in many instances without any
explicit intention to imply a ‘collective national consciousness,’ but merely
as well-sounding words that cloak our ignorance and give a vague
appearance of understanding. Nevertheless, from its application to the life
of nations, the doctrine of a collective consciousness mainly derives its
importance. It is seriously used by a number of vigorous contemporary
writers, of whom Schaeffle25 is perhaps the most notable, to carry to its
extreme the doctrine of Comte and Spencer that Society is an organism.
Spencer specifically refused to complete his analogy between society and
an animal organism by the acceptance of the hypothesis of a collective
consciousness; and he insisted strongly on the importance, for legislation
and social effort of every kind, of holding fast to the consciousness of
individual men as the final court of appeal, by reference to which the value
of every institution and every form of social activity must be judged, the
importance of regarding the welfare and happiness of individual men as the
supreme end, in relation to which the welfare of the State is but a means.
But those who, like Schaeffle, complete the analogy by acceptance of this
hypothesis, regard a nation as an organism in the fullest sense of the word,
as an organism that has its own pleasure and pain and its own conscious
ends and purposes and strivings; as in fact a great individual which is
conscious and may be more or less perfectly self-conscious, conscious of
itself, its past, its future, its purposes, its joys and its sorrows. And they do
not scruple to draw the logical conclusion that the welfare of the individual
should be completely subjected to that of the State; just as the welfare of an
organ or cell of the human body is rightly held to be of infinitesimal value
in comparison with that of the whole individual and to derive its importance
only from its share in the constitution of the whole. This conception of the
‘collective consciousness’ has thus been used as one of the supports of
‘Prussianism’ and has played its part in bringing about the Great War with
all its immense mass of individual anguish.
We must, then, examine the arguments upon which the doctrine is
based, and ask—Do they suffice to render it probable, or to compel our
acceptance of it, and to justify the complete subjection of the individual to
the State?
We have seen that a strong case is made out for the view that the
consciousness of a complex organism is the ‘collective consciousness’ of all
its cells, or of the cells of its nervous system; and it must be admitted that, if
this view could be definitely established, it would go far to justify the
doctrine of the collective consciousness of societies. Yet the view is by no
means established; there are great difficulties in the way of its acceptance.
There is the difficulty which meets a doctrine of ‘collective consciousness’
in all its forms from that of Haeckel to that of Hegel,—the difficulty that the
consciousness of the units is used twice over, once as the individual
consciousness, once as an element entering into the collective
consciousness; and no one has been able to suggest how this difficulty can
be surmounted. It has been argued also, most forcibly perhaps by Lotze26,
that what we know of the structure and functions of the brain compels us to
adopt a very different interpretation of the facts. It is said that, since we
cannot find any evidence of a unitary brain-process that might be regarded
as the immediate physical correlate of the unitary stream of consciousness
of the individual, but find rather that the physical correlate of the
individual’s consciousness at any moment is a number of discrete processes
taking place simultaneously in anatomical elements widely scattered in
different parts of the brain, we are compelled to assume that each of these
acts upon some unitary substance, some immaterial entity (which may be
called the soul) producing a partial affection of its state. According to this
view, then, the consciousness of any moment is the unitary resultant of all
these influences simultaneously exerted on the soul, the unitary reaction of
the soul upon these many influences27.
But, even if we could accept the view that the consciousness of the
complex organism is the ‘collective consciousness’ of its cells, the analogy
between an organism and a society, which constitutes the argument for the
‘collective consciousness’ of a society, would remain defective in one very
important respect. If we accept that view, we must believe that the essential
condition of the fusion of the consciousnesses of the cells is their spatial
continuity, no matter how utterly unintelligible this condition may seem; for
the apparent disruption of consciousness on the solution of material
continuity between the cells is the principal ground on which this view is
founded. Now, no such continuity of substance exists between the members
of any human group or society, and its absence constitutes a fatal flaw in the
analogical argument.
If we pass by these serious difficulties, others arise as soon as we
inquire what kinds of human groups have such ‘collective consciousness.’
Does the simple fortuitously gathered crowd possess it? Or is it confined to
highly organised groups such as the leading modern nations? If every
psychological crowd possesses it and owes its peculiarities of behaviour to
it, does it come into being at the moment the individuals have their attention
attracted to a common object and begin to be stirred by a common emotion?
And does it cease to be as soon as the crowd is resolved into its elements?
Or, if it is confined to nations or other highly organised groups, at what
stage of their development does it come into being, and what are the limits
of the groups of which it is the ‘collective consciousness’? Do the Poles
share in the ‘collective consciousness’ of the German nation, or the
Bavarians in that of Prussia? Or do the Irish or the Welsh contribute their
share to that of the English nation?
Coming now to close quarters with the doctrine, we may ask those who,
like Schaeffle and Espinas, regard the ‘collective consciousness’ as a bond
which unites the members of a society and makes of them one living
individual,—Is this ‘collective consciousness’ merely epiphenomenal in
character? Or are we to regard it as reacting upon the consciousnesses or
minds of the individuals of the group, and, through such reaction, playing a
part in determining the behaviour of the group, or rather of the individuals
of which the group is composed? For the actions of the group are merely
the sum of the actions of its individuals. If the former alternative be
adopted, then we may confidently say that the existence of a ‘collective
consciousness’ must from the nature of the case remain a mere speculation,
incapable of verification; and that, if it does exist, since it cannot make any
difference, cannot in any way affect human life and conduct, it is for us
unreal, no matter how real it may be for itself, as Espinas maintains; and we
certainly are not called upon to have any regard for it or its happiness, nor
can we invoke its aid in attempting to explain the course of history and the
phenomena of social life. If, on the other hand, the ‘collective
consciousness’ of groups and societies and peoples reacts upon individual
minds and so plays a part in shaping the conduct of men and societies, then
the conception is a hypothesis which can only be justified by showing that it
affords explanations of social phenomena which in its absence remain
inexplicable. If it were found that social aggregates of any kind really do
exhibit, as has often been maintained, great mass-movements, emigrations,
religious or political uprisings, and so forth, for which no adequate
explanations can be found in the mental processes of individuals and the
mental interactions of individuals by the ordinary means of expression and
perception, a resort to some such hypothesis would be permissible; but it is
an offence against the principles of scientific method to invoke its aid,
before we have exhausted the possibilities of explanation offered by well-
known existents and forces. That certainly has not yet been done, and the
upholders of the doctrine have hardly made any attempt to justify it in this
the only possible manner in which it could be justified. The only evidence
of this sort adduced by Espinas is the rapid spread of a common emotion
and impulse throughout the members of animal and human groups; and of
such phenomenon we have already found a sufficient explanation in those
special adaptations of the instincts of all gregarious creatures which are
unmistakably implied by the way in which the expression of an emotion
directly evokes a display of the same emotion in any onlooking member of
the species.
We may, then, set aside the conception of a ‘collective consciousness’ as
a hypothesis to be held in reserve until the study of group life reveal
phenomena that cannot be explained without its aid. For it may be
confidently asserted that up to the present time no such evidence of a
‘collective consciousness’ has been brought forward, and that there is no
possibility of any such evidence being obtained before the principles of
social psychology have been applied far more thoroughly than has yet been
done to the explanation of the course of history. In adopting a so far
unsympathetic attitude towards this doctrine, we ought to admit that, if
there be any truth in it, the ‘collective consciousness’ of even the most
highly organised society may be still in a rudimentary stage, and that it may
continue to gain in effectiveness and organisation with the further evolution
of the society in question.
After this digression we may return to the consideration of the
emotional characteristics of simple crowds. We have to notice not only that
the emotions of crowds are apt to be excessively strong, but also that certain
types of emotion are more apt than others to spread through a crowd,
namely the coarser simpler emotions and those which do not imply the
existence of developed and refined sentiments. For many of the individuals
of most crowds will be incapable of the more subtle complex emotions and
will be devoid of the more refined sentiments; while such sentiments as the
individuals possess will be in the main more diverse in proportion to their
refinement and special character; hence the chances of any crowd being
homogeneous as regards these emotions and sentiments is small. Whereas
the primary emotions and the coarser sentiments may be common to all the
members of a crowd; any crowd is likely to be homogeneous in respect to
them.
On the other hand, a crowd is more apt to be swayed by the more
generous of the coarser emotions, impulses, and sentiments than by those of
a meaner universally reprobated kind. For each member of the crowd acts in
full publicity; and his knowledge of, and regard for, public opinion will to
some extent incline him to suppress the manifestation of feelings which he
might indulge in private but would be ashamed of in public. Hence a crowd
is more readily carried away by admiration for a noble deed, or by moral
indignation against an act of cruelty, than by self-pity or jealousy or envy or
a meanly vengeful emotion.
At the same time, a crowd is apt to express feelings which imply less
consideration and regard for others than the individual, representing the
average morality and refinement of its members, would display when not
under the influence of the crowd. Thus men, when members of a crowd,
will witness with enjoyment scenes of brutality and suffering which, under
other circumstances, they would turn away from, or would seek to
terminate. To see a man thrown heavily to the ground is not pleasing to
most individuals; yet the spectacle provokes roars of delight from the crowd
at a football match. How many of the spectators, who, as members of a
crowd, hugely enjoy looking on at a prize-fight or a bull-fight, would shrink
from witnessing it as isolated individuals! How many boys will join with a
crowd of others in cruelly teasing another boy, an animal, an old woman, or
a drunken man, who individually are incapable of such ‘thoughtless’
conduct! It may be doubted whether even the depraved population of
Imperial Rome could have individually witnessed without aversion the
destruction of Christians in the Coliseum.
This character of crowds seems to be due to two peculiarities of the
collective mental state. In the first place, the individual, in becoming one of
a crowd, loses in some degree his self-consciousness, his awareness of
himself as a distinct personality, and with it goes also something of his
consciousness of his specifically personal relations; he becomes to a certain
extent depersonalised. In the second place, and intimately connected with
this last change, is a diminution of the sense of personal responsibility: the
individual feels himself enveloped and overshadowed and carried away by
forces which he is powerless to control; he therefore does not feel called
upon to maintain the attitude of self-criticism and self-restraint which under
ordinary circumstances are habitual to him, his more refined ideals of
behaviour fail to assert themselves against the overwhelming forces that
envelope him.
The Intellectual Processes of Simple Crowds
No fact has been more strongly insisted upon by writers on the psychology
of crowds than the low degree of intelligence implied by their collective
actions. Not only mobs or simple crowds, but such bodies as juries,
committees, corporations of all sorts, which are partially organised groups,
are notoriously liable to pass judgments, to form decisions, to enact rules or
laws, so obviously erroneous, unwise, or defective that anyone, even the
least intelligent member of the group concerned, might have been expected
to produce a better result.
The principal ground of the low order of intelligence displayed by
simple crowds is that the ideas and reasonings which can be collectively
understood and accepted must be such as can be appreciated by the lower
order of minds among the crowd. These least intelligent minds bring down
the intelligence of the whole to their own level. This is true in some degree
even of crowds composed of highly educated persons; for, as in the case of
the emotions and sentiments, the higher faculties are always more or less
specialised and differentiated in various ways through differences of nurture
and training; whereas the simpler intellectual faculties and tendencies are
common to all men.
A second condition, which co-operates with the foregoing to keep the
intellectual processes of crowds at a low level, is the increased
suggestibility of its members. Here is one of the most striking facts of
collective mental life. A crowd impresses each of its members with a sense
of its power, its unknown capacities, its unlimited and mysterious
possibilities; and these, as I have shown in Chapter III of my Social
Psychology, are the attributes that excite in us the instinct of subjection and
so throw us into the receptive suggestible attitude towards the object that
displays them. Mere numbers are capable of exerting this effect upon most
of us; but the effect of numbers is greatly increased if all display a common
emotion and speak with one voice; the crowd has then, if we are in its
presence, a well nigh irresistible prestige. Hence even the highly intelligent
and self-reliant member of a crowd is apt to find his critical reserve broken
down; and, when an orator makes some proposition which the mass of the
crowd applauds but which each more intelligent member would as an
individual reject with scorn, it is apt to be uncritically accepted by all alike;
because it comes to each, not as the proposition of the orator alone, but as a
proposition which voices the mind of the crowd, which comes from the
mass of men he sees around him and so comes with the power of a mass-
suggestion.
A further ground of the suggestibility of the crowd is that prevalence of
emotional excitement which was discussed in the foregoing pages. It is well
recognised that almost any emotional excitement increases the
suggestibility of the individual, though the explanation of the fact remains
obscure. I have suggested that the explanation is to be found in the principle
of the vicarious usage of nervous energy, the principle that nervous energy,
liberated in any one part of the nervous system, may overflow the channels
of the system in which it is liberated and re-enforce processes initiated in
other systems. If this be true, we can see how any condition of excitement
will favour suggestibility; for it will re-enforce whatever idea or impulse
may have been awakened and made dominant by ‘suggestion.’ The
principle requires perhaps the following limitation. Emotion which is
finding outlet in well-directed action is probably unfavourable to all such
‘suggestions’ as are not congruent with its tendencies. It is vague emotion,
or such as finds no appropriate expression in action, that favours
suggestibility. The most striking illustrations of the greatly increased
suggestibility of crowds are afforded by well-authenticated instances of
collective hallucination, instances which, so long as we fail to take into
account the abnormal suggestibility of the members of crowds, seem utterly
mysterious, incredible, and super-normal.
Again, the capacity of crowds to arrive at correct conclusions by any
process of reasoning is apt to be diminished in another way by the
exaltation of emotion to which, as we have seen, they are peculiarly liable.
It is a familiar fact that correct observation and reasoning are hampered by
emotion; for all ideas congruent with the prevailing emotion come far more
readily to consciousness and persist more stably than ideas incongruent
with it, and conclusions congruent with the prevailing emotion and desire
are accepted readily and uncritically; whereas those opposed to them can
hardly find acceptance in the minds of most men, no matter how simple and
convincing be the reasoning that leads to them.
The diminution or abolition of the sense of personal responsibility,
which results from membership in a crowd and which, as we have seen,
favours the display of its emotions, tends also to lower the level of its
intellectual processes. Wherever men have to come to a collective decision
or to undertake collective action of any sort, this effect plays an important
part. The weight of responsibility that would be felt by any one man,
deciding or acting alone, is apt to be divided among all the members of the
group; so that for each man it is diminished in proportion to the number of
persons taking part in the affair. Hence the attention and care devoted by
each man to the task of deliberation, observation, or execution, are less keen
and continuously sustained, and a judgment or decision is more lightly and
easily arrived at, grounds which the individual, deliberating alone, would
reject or weigh again and again serving to determine an immediate
judgment. The principle is well recognised in practical life. We do not set
ten men to keep the look-out on ship-board, but only one; though the safety
of the ship and of all that it carries depends upon his unremitting alertness.
We see the principle recognised in the institution of the jury. But for the
weakening of the individual sense of responsibility, juries would seldom be
found capable of finding a prisoner guilty of murder and so condemning
him to death; while, by the restriction of the jury to a comparatively small
number, the worst features of collective mental life are avoided.
We see the working of the principle not only in simple crowds, but also
in groups of very considerable degrees of organisation. We see it in the way
in which many a man, who would shrink from the responsibility of
directing a great and complicated commercial undertaking, will cheerfully
join a board of directors each of whom is perhaps no better qualified than
himself to conduct the business of the concern. We may recognise its effects
also in the cheerful levity, not to say hilarity, that frequently pervades our
House of Commons; for most of its well-meaning members would be
utterly crushed under the weight of their legislative responsibility, were it
not divided in small fractions among them.
But the low sense of responsibility of the crowd is not due to the
division of responsibility alone. In the case of the simple crowd, it is due
also in large part to the fact that such a crowd has but a very low grade of
self-consciousness and no self-regarding sentiment; that is to say, the
members of the crowd have but a dim consciousness of the crowd as a
whole, but very little knowledge of its tendencies and capacities, and no
sentiment of love, respect, or regard of any kind for it and its reputation in
the eyes of men. Hence, since the responsibility falls on the whole crowd,
and any loss or gain of reputation affects the crowd and hardly at all the
individuals who are merged in it, they are not stimulated to exert care and
self-restraint and critical deliberation in forming their judgments, in arriving
at decisions, or in executing any task collectively undertaken. The results of
these two conditions of collective mental life are well summed up in the
popular dictum that a corporation has no conscience.
Since all these factors co-operate to keep the intellectual activity of the
simple crowd on a low level, it follows that very simple intellectual
processes must be relied on by the orator who would sway a crowd; he must
rely on abuse and ridicule of opponents, or unmeasured praise of friends; on
flattery; on the argumentum ad hominem; on induction by simple
enumeration of a few striking instances; on obvious and superficial
analogies; on the evocation of vivid representative imagery rather than of
abstract ideas; and, above all, on confident assertion and reiteration, and on
a display of the coarser emotions.
Since the individuals comprised in a crowd are apt to be influenced in
all these ways by the mass of their fellows, it follows that the mental
processes, the thoughts and feelings and actions, of each one will be as a
rule very different from what they would be if he faced a similar situation as
an isolated individual; the mental processes of each one are profoundly
modified by his mental interactions with all the other members of the
crowd. Therefore the collective actions of a crowd are not simply the
resultants of all the tendencies to thought and action of the individuals, as
such, but may be very different from any such resultant. And they are not
merely the expression of the individual tendencies of the average member,
nor yet of the mass of least intelligent and refined members; they may be,
and often are, such as no one of the members acting alone would ever
display or attempt.
It must be added that all the peculiarities of collective mental process
mentioned above express themselves very readily in the actions of simple
crowds, because such a crowd is incapable of resolution and volition in the
true sense of the words. I have shown28 that individual resolution and
volition are only rendered possible by the possession of a well-developed
self-consciousness and self-regarding sentiment. But a simple crowd has at
the most only a rudimentary self-consciousness and has no self-regarding
sentiment. Hence its actions are the direct issue of the various impulses that
are collectively evoked; and, though it may be collectively conscious of the
end towards which it is impelled, and though all the individuals may desire
to effect or realise this end, and to that extent may be said to be capable of
purpose; yet such an impulse or desire cannot be steadied, strengthened,
renewed, or supported and maintained, in opposition to any other impulse
that may come into play, by an impulse springing from the self-regarding
sentiment in the way which constitutes resolution and volition. Just so far as
the self-regarding sentiment of individuals comes into play and they exert
their individual volitions, they cease to act as members of a crowd. The
actions of the simple crowd are thus not the outcome of a general will, nor
are they the resultant of the wills of all its members; they are simply not
volitional in the true sense, but rather impulsive. They are comparable with
the actions of an animal rather than with those of a man. It is the lack of the
conditions necessary to collective resolution and volition that renders a
crowd so fickle and inconsistent; so capable of passing from one extreme of
action to another, of hurrying to death the man whom it glorified at an
earlier moment, or of turning from savage butchery to tender and tearful
solicitude. Such incapacity of the crowd for resolution and volition,
together with the increased suggestibility of its members, accounts for the
fact that a crowd may be easily induced to follow as a leader any one who,
by means of the elementary reasoning processes suited to its intellectual
capacity, can succeed in suggesting to it the desirability of any course of
action.
We may sum up the psychological characters of the unorganised or
simple crowd by saying that it is excessively emotional, impulsive, violent,
fickle, inconsistent, irresolute and extreme in action, displaying only the
coarser emotions and the less refined sentiments; extremely suggestible,
careless in deliberation, hasty in judgment, incapable of any but the simpler
and imperfect forms of reasoning; easily swayed and led, lacking in self-
consciousness, devoid of self-respect and of sense of responsibility, and apt
to be carried away by the consciousness of its own force, so that it tends to
produce all the manifestations we have learnt to expect of any irresponsible
and absolute power. Hence its behaviour is like that of an unruly child or an
untutored passionate savage in a strange situation, rather than like that of its
average member; and in the worst cases it is like that of a wild beast, rather
than like that of human beings.
All these characteristics of the crowd were exemplified on a great scale
in Paris at the time of the great revolution, when masses of men that were
little more than unorganised crowds escaped from all control and exerted
supreme power; and writers on the topic have drawn many striking
illustrations from the history of the days of the Terror29. The understanding
of these more elementary facts and principles of group psychology will
prevent us falling into such an error as was committed by our greatest
political philosopher, Edmund Burke, when he condemned the French
people in the most violent terms on account of the terrible events of the
Revolution; for he attributed to the inhabitants of France in general, as
individuals, the capacities for violence and brutality and the gross defects of
intelligence and self-restraint that were displayed by the Parisian crowds of
the time; whereas the study of collective psychology has led us to see that
the actions of a crowd afford no measure of the moral and intellectual status
of the individuals of which it is composed. So, when we hear of minor
outrages committed by a crowd of undergraduates or suffragettes, a
knowledge of group psychology will save us from the error of attributing to
the individuals concerned the low grade of intelligence and decency that
might seem to be implied by the deeds performed by them collectively. The
same understanding will also resolve for us some seeming paradoxes; for
example, the paradox that, while in the year 1906 the newspapers contained
many reports of almost incredible brutalities committed by the peasants in
many different parts of Russia, an able correspondent, who was studying
the peasants at that very time, ascribed to them, as the most striking quality
of their characters, an exceptional humaneness and kindliness30.
It will be maintained on a later page that we may properly speak not
only of a collective will, but also of the collective mind of an organised
group, for example, of the mind and will of a nation. We must, then, ask at
this stage—Can we properly speak of the collective mind of an unorganised
crowd? The question is merely one as to the proper use of words and
therefore not of the first importance. If we had found reason to accept the
hypothesis of a ‘collective consciousness’ of a group, and to believe that the
peculiarities of behaviour of a crowd are due to a ‘collective
consciousness,’ then we should certainly have to admit the propriety of
regarding the crowd as having a collective mind. But we have provisionally
rejected that hypothesis, and have maintained that the only consciousness of
a crowd or other group is the consciousnesses of its constituent individuals.
In the absence of any ‘collective consciousness’ we may still speak of
collective minds; for we have defined a mind as an organised system of
interacting mental or psychical forces. This definition, while allowing us to
speak of the collective mind of such a group as a well-developed nation,
hardly allows us to attribute such a mind to a simple crowd: for the
interplay of its mental forces is not determined by the existence of an
organised system of relations between the elements in which the forces are
generated; and such determination is an essential feature of whatever can be
called a mind.
Chapter III.
The Highly Organised Group
Table of Contents
The peculiarities of simple crowds tend to appear in all group life; but they
are modified in proportion as the group is removed in character from a
simple crowd, a fortuitous congregation of men of more or less similar
tendencies and sentiments. Many crowds are not fortuitous gatherings, but
are brought together by the common interest of their members in some
object or topic. These may differ from the simple fortuitous crowd only in
being more homogeneous as regards the sentiments and interests of their
members; their greater homogeneity does not in itself raise them above the
mental level of the fortuitous crowd; it merely intensifies the peculiarities of
group life, especially as regards the intensity of the collective emotion.
There is, however, one condition that may raise the behaviour of a
temporary and unorganised crowd to a higher plane, namely the presence of
a clearly defined common purpose in the minds of all its members. Such a
crowd, for example a crowd of white men in one of the Southern States of
North America setting out to lynch a negro who is supposed to have
committed some flagrant crime, will display most of the characteristics of
the common crowd, the violence and brutality of emotion and impulse, the
lack of restraint, the diminished sense of responsibility, the increased
suggestibility and incapacity for arriving at correct conclusions by
deliberation and the weighing of evidence. But it will not exhibit the
fickleness of a common crowd, the easy yielding to distracting impressions
and to suggestions that are opposed to the common purpose. Such a crowd
may seize and execute its victim with inflexible determination, perhaps with
a brutality and a ruthless disregard of all deterrent considerations of which
no one of its members would be individually capable; and may then at once
break up, each man returning quietly and seriously to his home, in a way
which has often been described by witnesses astonished at the contrast
between the behaviour of the crowd and that of the individuals into which it
suddenly resolves itself.
The behaviour of a crowd of this kind raises the problem of the general
or collective will. It was said in the foregoing chapter that the actions of a
common crowd cannot properly be regarded as volitional, because they are
the immediate outcome of the primary impulses. Yet the actions of a crowd
of the kind we are now considering are the issue of true resolutions formed
by each member of the crowd, and are, therefore, truly volitional.
Nevertheless, they are the expression not of a general or collective will, but
merely of the wills of all the individuals; and, even if there arise differences
between the members and a conflict of wills as to the mode of achieving the
common end, and if the issue be determined simply by the stronger party
overbearing the weaker and securing their co-operation, that still does not
constitute the expression of a general will. For a collective or general will
only exists where some idea of the whole group and some sentiment for it
as such exists in the minds of the persons composing it. But we may with
advantage examine the nature of collective volition on a later page, in
relation to the life of a highly organised group, such as an army.
There are five conditions of principal importance in raising collective
mental life to a higher level than the unorganised crowd can reach, no
matter how homogeneous the crowd may be in ideas and sentiments nor
how convergent the desires and volitions of its members. These are the
principal conditions which favour and render possible the formation of a
group mind, in addition to those more fundamental conditions of collective
life which we have noted in the foregoing chapter.
The first of these conditions, which is the basis of all the rest, is some
degree of continuity of existence of the group. The continuity may be
predominantly material or formal; that is to say, it may consist either in the
persistence of the same individuals as an intercommunicating group, or in
the persistence of the system of generally recognised positions each of
which is occupied by a succession of individuals. Most permanent groups
exhibit both forms of continuity in a certain degree; for, the material
continuity of a group being given, some degree of formal continuity will
commonly be established within it. The most highly organised groups, such
as well-developed nations, exhibit both forms in the highest degree.
A second very important condition, essential to any highly developed
form of collective life, is that in the minds of the mass of the members of
the group there shall be formed some adequate idea of the group, of its
nature, composition, functions, and capacities, and of the relations of the
individuals to the group. The diffusion of this idea among the members of
the group, which constitutes the self-consciousness of the group mind,
would be of little effect or importance, if it were not that, as with the idea of
the individual self, a sentiment of some kind almost inevitably becomes
organised about this idea and is the main condition of its growth in richness
of meaning; a sentiment for the group which becomes the source of
emotions and of impulses to action having for their objects the group and its
relations to other groups.
A third condition very favourable to the development of the collective
mind of a group, though not perhaps absolutely essential, is the interaction
(especially in the form of conflict and rivalry) of the group with other
similar groups animated by different ideals and purposes, and swayed by
different traditions and customs. The importance of such interaction of
groups lies chiefly in the fact that it greatly promotes the self-knowledge
and self-sentiment of each group.
Fourthly, the existence of a body of traditions and customs and habits in
the minds of the members of the group determining their relations to one
another and to the group as a whole.
Lastly, organisation of the group, consisting in the differentiation and
specialisation of the functions of its constituents—the individuals and
classes or groups of individuals within the group. This organisation may
rest wholly or in part upon the conditions of the fourth class, traditions,
customs, and habits. But it may be in part imposed on the group and
maintained by the authority of some external power.
The capacity for collective life of an organised group whose
organisation is imposed upon it and wholly maintained by an external
authority is but little superior to that of a simple crowd. Such a group will
differ from the simple crowd chiefly in exhibiting greater control of its
impulses and a greater continuity of direction of its activities; but these
qualities are due to the external compelling power and are not truly the
expression of its collective mental life. An army of slaves or, in a less
complete degree, an army of mercenaries is the type of this kind of
organised group; and a people ruled by a strong despot relying on a
mercenary or foreign army approximates to it. The first aim of the power
that would maintain such an organisation must always be to prevent and
suppress collective life, by forbidding gatherings and public discussions, by
rendering communications between the parts difficult, and by enforcing a
rigid discipline. For such an organisation is essentially unstable.
We may illustrate the influence of these five conditions by considering
how in a group of relatively simple kind, in which they are all present, they
favour collective life and raise it to a higher level of efficiency. Such a
group is a patriot army fighting in a cause that elicits the enthusiasm of its
members; such were the armies of Japan in the late Russo-Japanese war;
they exhibited in a high degree and in relative simplicity the operation of all
the conditions we have enumerated.
Such an army exhibits the exaltation of emotion common to all
psychological crowds. This intensification of emotion enables men to face
danger and certain death with enthusiasm, and on other occasions may, even
in the armies of undoubtedly courageous and warlike nations, result in
panic and a rout. But in all other respects the characteristics of the simple
crowd are profoundly modified. The formal continuity of the existence of
the army and of its several units secures for it, even though its personnel be
changed at a rapid rate, a past and therefore a tradition, a self-consciousness
and a self-regarding sentiment, a pride in its past and a tradition of high
conduct and achievement; for past failures are discreetly forgotten and only
its past successes and glories are kept in memory. The traditional group
consciousness and sentiment are fostered by every wise commander, both in
the army as a whole and in each separate department and regiment. Is not
the superiority in battle of such bodies as the famous Tenth Legion due as
much to such self-conscious tradition and sentiment as to the presence of
veterans in its ranks? And is not the same true of such regiments as the
Black Watch, the Gordons, the Grenadier Guards, and the other famous
regiments of the British army?
The third of the conditions mentioned above is also very obviously
present in the case of an army in the field—namely, interaction with a
similar group having different purposes, traditions, and sentiments. And in
this case the interaction, being of the nature of direct competition and
conflict, is of the kind most favourable to the development of the collective
mind. It accentuates the self-consciousness of the whole; that is to say, it
defines more clearly in the mind of each individual the whole of which he is
a part, his position in, his organic connexion with, and his dependence
upon, the whole; with each succeeding stage of the conflict he conceives the
whole more clearly, obtains a fuller knowledge of the capacities and
weaknesses of the whole and its parts. Each soldier learns, too, something
of the character of the opposing army; and, in the light of this knowledge,
his conception of his own army becomes better defined and richer in
meaning. In short, through interaction with the opposing army, the army as
a whole becomes more clearly reflected in the mind of each of its members,
its self-consciousness is clarified and enriched. In a similar way, intercourse
and rivalry between the various regiments greatly promotes the growth of
the self-knowledge and self-sentiment of each of these lesser groups. A
standing army inevitably possesses a wealth of traditions, habits and
customs, over and above its formal organisation, and these play an
important part in promoting the smooth working of the whole organism; the
lack of these is one of the chief difficulties in the way of the creation of a
new army, as was vividly illustrated in the making of the ‘Kitchener army’
during the Great War. The customs of the various officers’ messes were but
a small part of this mass of custom which does so much to bind the whole
army together.
An army obviously possesses organisation, generally in a very high
degree. The formal continuity of its existence enables the organisation
impressed upon it by external authority to acquire all the strength that
custom alone can give; while its material continuity enables its organisation
to generate, in the individual soldiers, habits through which the inferior
members are raised, as regards the moral qualities required for efficiency in
the field, towards the level of the best.
The organisation of the whole army has two aspects and two main
functions; the one is executive, the securing of the co-ordination of action
of the parts in the carrying out of the common plan; the other is recipient
and deliberative, the co-ordination of the data supplied by the parts through
deliberation upon which the choice of means is arrived at. Deliberation and
choice of means are carried out by the commander-in-chief and his staff, the
persons who have shown themselves best able to execute this part of the
army’s task. It is important to note that, in the case of such an army as we
are considering, the private soldier in the ranks remains a free agent
performing truly volitional actions; that he in no sense becomes a
mechanical agent or one acting through enforced or habitual obedience
merely. He wills the common end; and, believing that the choice of means
to that end is best effected by the appropriate part of the whole organisation,
he accepts the means chosen, makes of them his proximate end, and wills
them.
This is the essential character of the effective organisation of any human
group; it secures that while the common end of collective action is willed
by all, the choice of means is left to those best qualified and in the best
position for deliberation and choice; and it secures that co-ordination of the
voluntary actions of the parts which brings about the common end by the
means so chosen. In this way the collective actions of the well-organised
group, instead of being, like those of the simple crowd, merely impulsive or
instinctive actions, implying a degree of intelligence and of morality far
inferior to that of the average individual of the crowd, become truly
volitional actions expressive of a degree of intelligence and morality much
higher than that of the average member of the group: i.e. the whole is raised
above the level of its average member; and even, by reason of exaltation of
emotion and organised co-operation in deliberation, above that of its highest
members.
Here we must consider a little more fully the nature of the collective or
general will, a subject that has figured largely in the discussions of political
philosophers on the nature of the State. Rousseau wrote—“There is often a
great difference between the will of all and the general will; the latter looks
only to the common interest; the former looks to private interest, and is
nothing but a series of individual wills; but take away from these same wills
the plus and minus that cancel one another and there remains, as the sum of
the differences, the general will.” “Sovereignty is only the exercise of the
general will.” By this he seems to mean that a certain number of men will
the general good, while many will only their private goods; and that while
the latter neutralise one another, as regards their effects on the general
interest, the former co-operate and so form an effective force to promote the
general good. This doctrine was an approximation towards the truth, though
like all Rousseau’s social speculations, his handling of it was vitiated by his
false psychology, which set out from the fiction of man as an independent
purely self-contained and self-determining absolute individual. Later
writers do not seem to have improved upon Rousseau’s doctrine of the
general will to any great extent.
The problem of the general will, like all problems of collective
psychology, becomes extremely complex when we consider the life of
nations; and it is, therefore, important to make ourselves clear as to the
nature of collective volition by consideration of the relatively simple case of
a patriot army. It is of course impossible to arrive at a clear notion of
collective volition, until individual volition has been clearly defined and the
nature of the distinction between it, on the one hand, and mere impulsive
action, desire, and simple conflict of desires, on the other hand, has been
made clear. The lack of such clear notions and adequate definitions has
rendered much of the discussion of this topic by political philosophers
sterile and obscure. In the light of the conclusions reached in my chapter on
individual volition31, the question of the nature of collective volition
presents little difficulty. It was found that volition may be defined and
adequately marked off from the simpler modes of conation by saying that it
is the reinforcement of any impulse or conation by one excited within the
system of the self-regarding sentiment. And in an earlier chapter32 it was
shewn how the self-regarding sentiment may become extended to other
objects than the individual self, to all objects with which the self identifies
itself, which are regarded as belonging to the self or as part of the wider
self. This extension depends largely on the fact that others identify us with
such an object, so that we feel ourselves to be an object of all the regards
and attitudes and actions of others directed towards that object, and are
emotionally affected by them in the same ways that we are affected by
similar regards, attitudes, and actions directed towards us individually. It
was shewn also that such a sentiment may become wider and emotionally
richer than the purely self-regarding sentiment, through fusing with a
sentiment of love for the object that has grown up independently. These
facts were illustrated by consideration of the parental sentiment for the
child, which, it was said, has commonly this twofold character and source,
being formed by the compounding of the self-regarding sentiment with the
sentiment of love of which the dominant disposition is that of the tender or
protective instinct.
In a similar way a similarly complex sentiment may become organised
about the idea of one’s family, or of any still larger group having continuity
of existence of which one becomes a member. In the case of the patriot’s
sentiment for his country or nation, the self-regarding sentiment and the
sentiment of love may be from the first combined in the patriotic sentiment;
since he knows himself to be a part of the whole from the time that an idea
of the whole first takes shape in his mind.
In this respect the case of the soldier in a patriot army is relatively
simple. As a boy he may have acquired a sentiment of loving admiration for
the army; and, when he becomes a member of it, the dispositions that enter
into the constitution of his self-regarding sentiment, become incorporated
with this previously existing sentiment, so that the reputation of the army
becomes as important to him as his own; praise and approval of it become
for him objects of desire and sources of elation; disapproval and blame of it,
or the prospect of them, affect him as painfully as if directed to himself
individually, fill him with shame and mortification.
A similar complex sentiment, the sentiment of patriotism, becomes
organised about the idea of his country as a whole; and, when war breaks
out and the army is pitted against that of another nation, while the eyes of
the whole world are turned upon it, it becomes the representative of the
nation and the special object of the patriotic sentiment, which thus adds its
strength to that of the more special sentiment of the soldier for the army33.
When, then, the patriot army takes the field, it is capable of collective
volition in virtue of the existence of this sentiment in the minds of all its
members. The soldiers of a purely mercenary army are moved by the desire
of individual glory, of increased pay, of loot, by the habit of obedience and
collective movement acquired by prolonged drilling, by the pugnacious
impulse, by the desire of self-preservation; and they may be led on to
greater exertions by the influence of an admired captain. But such an army
is incapable of collective volition, because no sentiment for the army as a
whole is common to all its members. The soldiers of the patriot army on the
other hand may act from all the individual motives enumerated above; but
all alike are capable also of being stirred by a common motive, a desire
excited within the collective self-regarding sentiment, the common
sentiment for the army; and this, adding itself to whatever individual
motives are operative, converts their desires into collective resolutions and
renders their actions the expressions of a collective volition.
Each soldier of the mercenary army may desire that his side shall win
the battle and may resolve that he will do his best to bring victory to his
side, and he may perform many truly volitional actions; and, in so far as the
actions of the army express these individual volitions towards a common
result, they are the expressions of the ‘will of all,’ but not of the collective
will; because these volitions, though they are directed to the one common
end, spring from diverse motives and are individual volitions.
The essence of collective volition is, then, not merely the direction of
the wills of all to the same end, but the motivation of the wills of all
members of a group by impulses awakened within the common sentiment
for the whole of which they are the parts. It is the extension of the self-
regarding sentiment of each member of the group to the group as a whole
that binds the group together and renders it a collective individual capable
of collective volition.
The facts may be illustrated more concretely by taking a still simpler
example of collective volition. Consider the case of a regiment in battle
commanded to occupy a certain hill-top in face of fierce opposition. If the
regiment is one to which the self-regarding sentiment of each member has
become extended, the soldiers may be animated individually by the
pugnacious impulse and by the desire of individual glory, but they are
moved also by the common desire to show what the regiment can do, to
sustain its glorious reputation; they resolve that we, the regiment, will
accomplish this feat. As they charge up the hill, the hail of bullets decimates
their ranks and they waver, the impulse of fear checking their onward rush;
if then their officer appeals to the common sentiment, each man feels the
answering impulse; and this is strengthened by the cheer which shows him
that the same impulse rises in all his comrades; and so this impulse,
awakened within the collective self-regarding sentiment and strengthened
by sympathetic induction from all to each, comes to the support of the
pugnacious impulse or whatever other motives sustain each man, enables
these to triumph over the impulse to flight, and sweeps them all on to gain
their object by truly collective volitional effort. If, on the other hand, the
men of the regiment have no such common sentiment, then, when the
advancing line wavers, the onward impulsion checked by the impulse of
retreat, there is no possibility of arousing a collective volition; the regiment,
which from the first was a crowd organised only by external authority and
the habits created by it, acts as a crowd and yields to the rising impulse of
the emotion of fear, which, becoming intensified by induction from man to
man, rises to a panic; and the regiment is routed.
We may distinguish, then, five modes of conation which will carry all
the members of a group towards a common object, five levels of collective
action.
Let the group be a body of men on a road leading across a wilderness to
a certain walled city. A sudden threat of danger from a band of robbers or
from wild beasts may send them all flying in panic towards the city gate.
That is a purely impulsive collective action. It is not merely a sum of
individual actions, because the fear and, therefore, the impulse to flight of
each man is intensified by the influence of his fellows.
Secondly, let them be a band of pilgrims, fortuitously congregated, each
of whom has resolved to reach the city for his own private purposes. The
whole body moves on steadily, each perhaps aided in maintaining his
resolution in face of difficulties by the presence of the rest and the spectacle
of their resolute efforts. Here there is a certain collectivity of action, the
individual wills are strengthened by the community of purpose. But the
arrival of the band is not due to collective volition; nor can it properly be
said to be due to the will of all; for each member cares nothing for the
arrival of the band as a whole; he desires and wills only his own arrival.
Thirdly, let each member of the band be aware that, at any point of the
road, robbers may oppose the passage of any individual or of any company
not sufficiently strong to force its way through. Each member will then
desire that the whole band shall cohere and shall reach the city, and the
actions of the group will display a higher degree of co-operation and
collective efficiency than in the former cases; but the successful passage of
the band will be desired by each member simply in order that his own safe
arrival may be secured. There is direction of all wills towards the
production of the one result, the success of the whole band; but this is not
truly collective volition because the motives are private and individual and
diverse.
Fourthly, let the band be an army of crusaders, a motley throng of
heterogeneous elements of various nationalities, united by one common
purpose, the capture of the city, but having no sentiment for the army. In
this case all members not only will the same collective action and desire the
same end of that action, but they have similar motives arising from their
sentiment for the city or that which it contains. Still their combined actions
are not the issue of a collective volition in the full and proper sense of the
words, but of a coincidental conjunction of individual volitions. They might
perhaps be said to be the expression of the general will; and by giving that
meaning to the term ‘general will,’ while reserving the expression collective
will or volition for the type of case illustrated by our next instance, we may
usefully differentiate the two expressions.
Lastly, let the band approaching the city be an army of crusaders of one
nationality, and let us suppose that this army has enjoyed a considerable
continuity of existence and that in the mind of each member the self-
regarding sentiment has become extended to the army as a whole, so that, as
we say, each one identifies himself with it and prizes its reputation and
desires its success as an end in itself. Such a sentiment would be greatly
developed and strengthened by rivalry in deeds of arms with a second
crusading army. Each member of this army would have the same motives
for capturing the city as those of the army of our last instance; but, in
addition to these motives, there would be awakened within the extended
self-regarding sentiment of each man an impulse to assert the power, to
sustain the glory of the army; and this, adding its force to those other
motives, would enable them to triumph over all conflicting tendencies and
render the resolution of the army to capture the city a true collective
volition; so that the army might properly be said to possess and to exercise
a general or collective will.
This distinction between the will of all and the collective will, which we
have considered at some length, may seem to be of slight importance in the
instances chosen. But it becomes of the greatest importance when we have
to consider the life of a nation or other enduring community. The power of
truly collective volition is no small advantage to any body of fighting men
and receives practical recognition from experienced captains.
The importance of these different types of volition was abundantly
illustrated by the incidents of the Boer war and of the Russo-Japanese war.
That the success of its undertaking shall be strongly willed by all is perhaps
the most important factor contributing to the success of an army; and if also
the army exercises a true collective volition, in the sense defined above, it
becomes irresistible. Though it is questionable whether the Boer armies can
be said to have exercised a collective volition, it is at least certain that
individually the Boers strongly willed their common end, the defeat of the
British. On the other hand, the British armies were defective in these
respects. The motives of those who fought in the British armies against the
Boers were very diverse. The pay of the regulars, the five shillings a day of
the volunteers, the desire to live for a time an adventurous exciting life, the
desire to get home again on the sick-list as soon as possible, the desire for
personal distinction; all these and other motives were in many minds mixed
in various proportions with the desire to assert the supremacy of the British
rule and support the honour of the flag. This difference between the Boer
and British armies was undoubtedly a main cause of many of the surprising
successes of the former. In the Russo-Japanese war the opposed armies
probably differed even more widely in this respect. The Japanese soldiers
not only willed intensely the common end, but their armies would appear to
have exercised truly collective volition. Many of the several regiments also,
being recruited on the territorial system, were animated by collective
sentiments rooted in local patriotism. The Russian armies on the other hand
were largely composed of peasants drawn from widely separated regions of
the Russian empire, knowing little or nothing of the grounds of quarrel or of
the ends to be achieved by their efforts, caring nothing individually for
those ends, and having but little patriotic sentiment and still less sentiment
for the army.
It would, then, be a grave mistake to infer from the course of events in
these two wars that the British soldier was individually inferior to the Boer,
or the Russian to the Japanese; in both cases the principal psychological
condition of successful collective action—namely, a common end intensely
desired and strongly willed, individually or collectively—was present in
high degree on the one side, because the preservation of the national
existence was the end in view; while it was lacking or comparatively
deficient on the other side. As Sir Ian Hamilton, a close observer of both
these wars, has said—“the army that will not surrender under any
circumstances will always vanquish the army whose units are prepared to
do so under sufficient pressure.”
The same considerations afford an explanation of a peculiarity of
Russian armies which has often been noted in previous wars, and which
was very conspicuous in the late wars; namely, their weakness in attack and
their great strength when on the defensive. For, in attacking, a Russian army
is in the main merely obeying the will of the commander-in-chief in virtue
of custom, habit, and a form of strong collective suggestion; but in retreat
and on the defensive, each man’s action becomes truly volitional, all are
animated by a common purpose, and all will the same end, the safety of the
whole with which that of each member is bound up.
The psychology of a patriot army is peculiarly simplified, as compared
with that of most other large human groups, by two conditions; on the one
hand, the restriction of the intellectual processes, by which the large means
for the pursuit of the common end are chosen, to one or a few minds only;
on the other hand, the definiteness and singleness of its purpose and the
presence of this clear and strong purpose in the minds of all.
Other groups that enjoy in some degree the latter condition of simplicity
of collective mental life are associations voluntarily formed and organised
for the attainment of some single well-defined end. In them the former
condition is generally completely lacking and the deliberative processes, by
which their means are chosen, are apt to be very complex and ineffective,
owing to lack of customary organisation. Such associations illustrate more
clearly than any other groups the part played by the idea of the whole in the
minds of the individuals in constituting and maintaining the whole. A desire
or purpose being present in many minds, the idea of the association arises in
some one or more of them, and, being communicated to others, becomes the
immediate instrument through which the association is called into being;
and only so long as this idea of the whole as an instrument for attaining the
common end persists in the minds of the individuals does the association
continue to exist. In this respect such an association is at the opposite end of
the scale from the fortuitous crowd, which owes its existence to the
accidents of time and place merely. Human groups of other kinds owe their
existence in various proportions to these two conditions; such groups, for
example, as are constituted by the members of a church, of a university or a
school, of a profession or a township. Others, such as nations, owe their
inception to the accidents of time and place, to physical boundaries and
climatic conditions; and, in the course of their evolution, become more and
more dependent for their existence on the idea of the whole and the
sentiment organised about it in the minds of their members; and they may,
like the Jewish people, arrive in the course of time at complete dependence
on the latter condition.
The life of an army illustrates better than that of any other group the
influence of leadership. That great strategists and skilful tacticians perform
intellectual services of immeasurable importance for the common end of the
army goes without saying. But the moral influence of leadership is more
subtle in its workings, and is perhaps less generally recognised in all its
complexity and scope. It is well known that such commanders as Napoleon
inspired unlimited confidence and enthusiasm in the veteran armies that had
made many campaigns under their leadership. Yet in the Great War, in
which the British armies were, in its later stages, composed so largely of
new recruits, the same influence was perceptible. Both the British and the
French armies were very fortunate in having in supreme command men in
whom the common soldier felt confidence. The solidity, the justice, the
calm resolution of Marshal Joffre were felt throughout the French army in
the early days of the war to be the one certain and fixed point in a
crumbling universe. “Il est solid, le Père Joffre” was repeated by thousands
who, remembering the disaster of 1870, were inclined to suspect treachery
and weakness on every hand. And the genius of Marshal Foch and of other
brilliant generals was a main source of the astonishing dogged resolution
with which the French armies, in spite of their terrible losses, sustained the
prolonged agony. The British army also was fortunate in having in Field-
Marshal Haig a man at its head who was felt to be above all things resolute
and calm and just; and, when the British armies in France were placed
under the supreme control of Foch, it was generally felt throughout the
ranks that this would not only give unity of control and purpose, but also
supply that touch of genius which perhaps had been lacking in British
strategy.
But it was not only the supreme command that exercised this influence
over the minds of all ranks. At every level confidence in the leadership was
of supreme importance. The character and talents of each general and
colonel, of each captain, lieutenant, sergeant and corporal, made themselves
felt by all under their control; felt not only individually but corporately and
collectively. The whole area under the command of any particular general
might be seen to reflect and to express in some degree his attributes. The
reputations of the higher officers filtered down through the ranks in an
astonishingly rapid and accurate manner; perhaps owing largely to the fact
that these armies, in a degree unknown before, were composed of men
accustomed to read and to think and to discuss and criticise the conduct of
affairs. If the German higher command had been exercised from the first by
a man who inspired the just confidence that was felt in the old Field-
Marshal v. Moltke by the Prussian armies of 1870, it is probable that the
issue of the Great War would have been fatally different.
The moral effects of good leadership are, perhaps, of more importance
to an army than its intellectual qualities, especially in a prolonged struggle;
and these work throughout the mass of men by subtle processes of
suggestion and emotional contagion rather than by any process of purely
intellectual appreciation. And the whole organisation of any wisely directed
army is designed to render as effective as possible these processes by which
the influence of leaders is diffused through the whole.
Chapter IV.
The Group Spirit
Table of Contents
In considering the mental life of a patriot army, as the type of a highly
organised group, we saw that group self-consciousness is a factor of very
great importance—that it is a principal condition of the elevation of its
collective mental life and behaviour above the level of the merely impulsive
violence and unreasoning fickleness of the mob.
This self-consciousness of the group is the essential condition of all
higher group life; we must therefore study it more nearly as it is manifested
in groups of various types. It is unfortunate that our language has no word
that accurately translates the French expression ‘esprit de corps’; for this
conveys exactly the conception that we are examining. I propose to use the
term group spirit as the equivalent of the French expression, the frequent
use of which in English speech and writing sufficiently justifies the attempt
to specialise this compound word for psychological purposes.
We have seen that, in virtue of the sentiment developed about the idea
of the army, all its members exhibit group loyalty; it is only as the sentiment
develops about the idea that this idea of the whole, present to the mind of
each member, becomes a power which can hold the whole group together,
in spite of all physical and moral difficulties. We see this if we reflect how
armies of mercenaries, in which this collective sentiment is lacking or
rudimentary only, are apt to dissolve and fade away by desertion as soon as
serious difficulties are encountered.
The importance of the collective idea and sentiment appears still more
clearly, when we reflect on the type of army which has generally proved the
most efficient of all—namely, an army of volunteers banded together to
achieve some particular end. Such an army (for example the army of
Garibaldi) owes its existence to the operation of this idea in the minds of
all. The idea of the army is formed in the mind perhaps of one only
(Garibaldi); he communicates it to others, who accept it as a means to the
end desired by all of them individually. The idea of the whole thus operates
to create the group, to bring it into existence; and then, as the idea is
realised, it becomes more definite, of richer and more exact meaning; the
collective sentiment grows up about it, and habit and formal organisation
begin to aid in holding the group together; yet still the idea of the whole
remains constitutive of the whole.
Any group that owes its creation and its continued existence to the
collective idea may be regarded from the psychological standpoint as of the
highest type; while a fortuitously gathered crowd that owes its existence to
accidents of time and place and has the barest minimum of group self-
consciousness is of the lowest type. Every other form of association or of
human group may be regarded as occupying a position in a scale between
these extreme types; according to the relative predominance of the mental
or the physical conditions of its origin and continuance, that is to say,
according to the degree in which its existence is teleologically or
mechanically determined.
The group spirit, the idea of the group with the sentiment of devotion to
the group developed in the minds of all its members, not only serves as a
bond that holds the group together or even creates it, but, as we saw in the
case of the patriot army, it renders possible truly collective volition; this in
turn renders the actions of the group much more resolute and effective than
they could be, so long as its actions proceed merely from the presence of an
impulse common to all members, or from the strictly individual volitions of
all, even though these be directed to one common end.
Again, the group spirit plays an important part in raising the intellectual
level of the group; for it leads each member deliberately to subordinate his
own judgment and opinion to that of the whole; and, in any properly
organised group, this collective opinion will be superior to that of the
average individual, because in its formation the best minds, acting upon the
fullest knowledge to the gathering of which all may contribute, will be of
predominant influence. Each member, then, willing the common end,
accepts the means chosen by the organised collective deliberation, and, in
executing the actions prescribed for him, makes them his own immediate
ends and truly wills them for the sake of the whole, not executing them in
the spirit of merely mechanical unintelligent obedience or even of
reluctance.
In a similar way the group spirit aids in raising the moral level of an
army. The organised whole embodies certain traditional sentiments,
especially sentiments of admiration for certain moral qualities, courage,
endurance, trustworthiness, and cheerful obedience; and these sentiments,
permeating the whole, are impressed upon every member, especially new
members, by way of mass suggestion and sympathetic contagion; every
new recruit finds that his comrades accept without question these traditional
moral sentiments and confidently express moral judgments upon conduct
and character in accordance with them, and that they also display the
corresponding emotional reactions towards acts; that is to say, they express
in verbal judgments and in emotional reactions their scorn for treachery or
cowardice, their admiration for courageous self-sacrifice and devotion to
duty. The recruit quickly shares by contagion these moral emotions and
soon finds his judgment determined to share these opinions by the weight of
mass suggestion; for these moral propositions come to him with all the
irresistible force of opinion held by the group and expressed by its
unanimous voice; and this force is not merely the force derived from
numbers, but is also the force of the prestige accumulated by the whole
group, the prestige of old and well-tried tradition, the prestige of age; and
the more fully the consciousness of the whole group is present to the mind
of each member, the more effectively will the whole impress its moral
precepts upon each.
And the organisation of the army renders it possible for the leaders to
influence and to mould the form of these moral opinions and sentiments.
Thus Lord Kitchener, by issuing his exhortation to the British Army on its
departure to France, did undoubtedly exert a considerable influence towards
raising the moral level of the whole force, because he strengthened the
influence of those who were already of his way of thinking against the
influence of those whose sentiments and habits and opinions made in the
opposite direction. His great prestige, which was of a double kind, both
personal and due to his high office, enabled him to do this. In the same way,
every officer in a less degree can do something to raise the moral level of
the men under his command. Thus, then, the organisation of the whole
group, with its hierarchy of offices which confer prestige, gives those who
hold these higher offices the opportunity to raise the moral level of all
members.
Of course, if those who occupy these positions of prestige feel no
responsibility of this sort and make no effort to exert such influence, but
rather aim at striking terror in the foe at all costs, if they countenance acts
of savagery such as the destruction of cities, looting, and rapine, if they
publicly instruct their soldiers to behave as Huns or savages; then the
organisation of the army works in the opposite way—namely, to degrade all
members below their normal individual level, rather than to raise them
above it; and then we hear of acts of brutality on the part of the rank and file
which are almost incredible.
But the main point to be insisted on here is that the raising of the moral
level is not effected only by example, suggestion, and emotional contagion,
spreading from those in the positions of prestige; that, where the group
spirit exists, those enjoying prestige can, if they wish, greatly promote the
end of raising the moral tone of the whole by appealing to that group spirit;
as when Lord Kitchener asked the men to obey his injunctions for the sake
of the honour of the British Army.
And the group spirit not only yields this direct response to moral
exhortation; it operates in another no less important manner. Each member
of a group pervaded by the collective sentiment, such as a well-organised
army of high traditions, becomes in a special sense his brother’s keeper.
Each feels an interest in the conduct of every other member, because the
conduct of each affects the reputation of the whole; each man, therefore,
punishes bad conduct of any fellow soldier by scorn and by withdrawal of
sympathy and companionship; and each one rewards with praise and
admiration the conduct that conforms to the standards demanded and
admired. And so each member acts always under the jealous eyes of all his
fellows, under the threat of general disapprobation, contempt, and moral
isolation for bad conduct; under the promise of general approval and
admiration for any act of special excellence.
The development of the group spirit, with the appropriate sentiment of
attachment or devotion to the whole and therefore also to its parts, is the
essence of the higher form of military discipline. There is a lower form of
discipline which aims only at rendering each man perfectly subservient to
his officers and trained to respond promptly and invariably, in precise,
semi-mechanical, habitual fashion, to every word of command. But even
the drill and the system of penalties and minute supervision, which are the
means chosen to bring about this result, cannot fail to achieve certain
effects on a higher moral and intellectual level than the mere formation of
bodily habits of response. By rendering each soldier apt and exact in his
response to commands, they enable each one to foresee the actions of his
fellows in all ordinary circumstances, and therefore to rely upon that co-
operation towards the common end, be it merely a turning movement on the
drill ground or the winning of a battle, which is the essential aim and
justification of all group life.
The group spirit, involving knowledge of the group as such, some idea
of the group, and some sentiment of devotion or attachment to the group, is
then the essential condition of all developed collective life, and of all
effective collective action; but it is by no means confined to highly
developed human associations of a voluntary kind.
Whether the group spirit is possessed in any degree by animal societies
is a very difficult question. We certainly do not need to postulate it in order
to account for the existence of more or less enduring associations of
animals; just as we do not need to postulate it to account for the coming
together of any fortuitous human mob. Even in such animal societies as
those of the ants and bees, its presence, though often asserted, seems to be
highly questionable. When we observe the division of labour that
characterises the hive, how some bees ventilate, some build the comb, some
feed the larvae and so on; and especially when we hear that the departure of
a swarm from the hive is preceded by the explorations of a small number
which seek a suitable place for the new home of the swarm and then guide
it to the chosen spot, it seems difficult to deny that some idea of the
community and its needs is present to the minds of its members. But we
know so little as yet of the limits of purely instinctive behaviour (and by
that I mean immediate reactions upon sense-perceptions determined by the
innate constitution) that it would be rash to make any such inference. The
same may be said of associations of birds or mammals, in which division of
labour is frequently displayed; when, for example, it is found that one or
more sentinels constantly keep watch while a flock or herd feeds or rests, as
is reported of many gregarious species.
But, however it may be with animal societies, we may confidently assert
that the group spirit has played an important part in the lives of all enduring
human groups, from the most primitive ages onwards.
It has even been maintained with some plausibility that group self-
consciousness preceded individual self-consciousness in the course of the
evolution of the human mind. That again is, it seems to me, a proposition
which cannot be substantiated. But it is, I think, true to say that the two
kinds of self-consciousness must have been achieved by parallel processes,
which constantly reacted upon one another in reciprocal promotion.
In the lives of the humblest savages the group spirit plays an immensely
important part. It is the rule that a savage is born into a small closed
community. Such a community generally has its own locality within which
it remains, even if nomadic; and, if settled, it wholly lives in a village,
widely separated in space from all others. In this small community the child
grows up, becoming more or less intimately acquainted with every member
of it, and having practically no intercourse with any other persons.
Throughout his childhood he learns its laws and traditions, becomes acutely
aware of its public opinion, and finds his welfare absolutely bound up with
that of the village community. He cannot leave it if he would; the only
alternative open to him is to become an outcast, as which he would very
soon succumb in the struggle for life. There is nothing comparable with this
in our complex civilised societies. The nearest parallel to it is the case of the
young child growing up in a peculiarly secluded family isolated in the
depths of the country.
This restriction of the intercourse of the young savage to the members
of his own small society and his absolute dependence upon it for all that
makes his survival possible would in themselves suffice to develop his
group consciousness in a high degree. But two other conditions, well-nigh
universal in savage life, tend strongly towards the same result.
When the young savage begins to come into contact with persons other
than those of his own group, he learns to know them, not as individuals,
John Smith or Tom Brown, but as men of such or such a group; and he
himself is known to them as a man of his group, as representing his group,
his village community, tribe, or what not; and he displays usually some
mark or marks of his group, either in dress or ornament or speech.
The other great condition of the development of the group spirit in
primitive societies is the general recognition of communal responsibility.
This no doubt is largely the result of the two conditions previously
mentioned, especially of the recognition of an individual by members of
other groups as merely a representative of his group, rather than as an
individual, and of the fact that his deeds, or those of any one of his fellows,
determine the attitudes of other groups towards his group as a whole. But
the influence of the principle of communal responsibility, thus established,
becomes immensely strengthened by its recognition in a number of
superstitious and religious observances. The savage lives, generally
speaking, bound hand and foot by tabus and precise prescriptions of
behaviour for all ordinary situations; and the breach of any one of these by
any member of the community is held to bring down misfortune or
punishment on the whole group; so far is this principle carried, that the
breach of custom by some individual is confidently inferred from the
incidence of any communal misfortune34.
The recognition of communal responsibility is the great conservator of
savage society and customary law, the very root and stem of all savage
morality; it is the effective moral sanction without which the superstitious
and religious sanctions would be of little effect. By its means, the idea of
the community is constantly obtruded on the consciousness of the
individual. Through it he is constantly led, or forced, to control his
individualistic impulses and to undertake action with regard to the welfare
of the group rather than to his own private interest. Through it the tendency
of each to identify himself and each of his fellows with the whole group is
constantly fostered; because it identifies their interests.
We may then say that, just as the direct induction of emotion and
impulse by sense-perception of their bodily expressions is the cement of
animal societies, so group self-consciousness is the cement and
harmonising principle of primitive human societies.
And the group spirit is not only highly effective in promoting the life
and welfare of the group; it is also the source of peculiar satisfactions. The
individual revels in his group-consciousness; hence the principle is apt to
run riot in savage societies, and we find that in very many parts of the world
a great variety of complex forms of association is maintained, beside the
primary and fundamental form of association of the village community or
nomadic band (the kinship or subsistence group), apparently for no other
reason than the attainment and intensification of the satisfactions of the
group spirit. Hence, among peoples so low in the scale of savagery as the
Australians, we find a most complex system of grouping cutting across the
subsistence grouping; hence totem clans and phratries, exogamous groups,
secret societies, initiation ceremonies.
I lay stress on the satisfaction which group self-consciousness brings as
a condition or cause of these complexities of savage society, because, I
think, it has been unduly neglected as a socialising factor and a determinant
of the forms of association. If we ask—What are the sources of this
satisfaction?—we may find two answers. First, the consciousness of the
group and of oneself as a member of it brings a sense of power and security,
an assurance of sympathy and co-operation, a moral and physical support
without which man can hardly face the world. In a thousand situations it is a
source of settled opinions and of definite guidance of conduct which
obviates the most uncomfortable and difficult necessity of exerting
independent judgment and making up one’s own mind. And in many such
situations, not only does the savage find a definite code prescribed for his
guidance, but he shares the collective emotion and feels the collective
impulse that carries him on to action without hesitation or timidity.
Secondly, we may, I think, go back to a very fundamental principle of
instinctive life, the principle, namely, that, in gregarious animals, the
satisfaction of the gregarious impulse is greater or more complete the more
nearly alike are the individuals congregated together. This seems to be true
of the animals, but it is true in a higher degree of man; and, in proportion as
his mind becomes more specialised and refined, the more exacting is he in
this respect. To the uncultivated any society is better than none; but in the
cultivated classes we become extraordinarily exacting; we find the
gregarious satisfaction in our own peculiar set only—a process carried
furthest, perhaps, in university circles. In savage life this shows itself in
practices which accentuate the likeness of members of a group and mark it
off more distinctly from other groups—for example, totems, peculiarities of
dress, ornaments and ceremonies; things which are closely paralleled by the
clubs, blazers, colours, cries, and so forth of our undergraduate
communities.
The life of the savage, then, is in general dominated by that of the
group; and this domination is not effected by physical force or compulsion
(save in exceptional instances) but by the group spirit which is inevitably
developed in the mind of the savage child by the material circumstances of
his life and by the traditions, especially the superstitious and religious
traditions, of his community. Such group self-consciousness is the principal
moralising influence, and to this influence is due in the main the fact that
savages conform so strictly to their accepted moral codes.
Group self-consciousness in savage communities brings then, I suggest,
two great advantages which account for the spontaneous development and
persistence among so many savage peoples of what, from a narrowly
utilitarian point of view, might seem to be an excess of group organisation,
such as the totemic systems of the Australians and of the American Indians;
—namely, firstly, the moralising influences of the group spirit; secondly, the
satisfactions or enjoyments immediately accruing to every participant in
active group life.
And these two advantages, being in some degree appreciated, lead to a
deliberate cultivation of group life for the securing of them in higher
measure. The cultivation of group life shows itself in the many varieties of
grouping on a purely artificial basis and in the practice of rites and
ceremonies, especially dances, often accompanied by song and other music.
There is nothing that so intensifies group consciousness, at the cost of
consciousness of individuality, as ceremonial dancing and singing;
especially when the dance consists of a series of extravagant bizarre
movements, executed by every member of the group in unison, the series of
movements being at the same time peculiar to the particular group that
practises them and symbolical of the peculiar functions or properties
claimed by the group. Many savage dances have these characters in
perfection; as, for example, those of the Murray islanders of Torres Straits,
where, as I have witnessed, the several totemic groups—the dog-men, the
pigeon-men, the shark-men, and other such groups—continue, in spite of
the partial destruction by missionaries of their totemistic beliefs, to revel in
night-long gatherings, at which each group in turn mimics, in fantastic
dances and with solemn delight, the movements of its totem animal.
The importance of group consciousness in savage life has been recently
much insisted on by some anthropologists, and indeed, in my view,
overstated. Cornford35 writes “When the totem-clan meets to hold its
peculiar dance, to work itself up till it feels the pulsing of its common life
through all its members, such nascent sense of individuality as a savage
may have—it is always very faint—is merged and lost; his consciousness is
filled with a sense of sympathetic activity. The group is now feeling and
acting as one soul, with a total force much greater than any of its members
could exercise in isolation. The individual is lost, ‘beside himself,’ in one of
those states of contagious enthusiasm in which it is well known that men
become capable of feats which far outrange their normal powers.” And
again “Over and above their individual experience, all the members of the
group alike partake of what has been called the collective consciousness of
the group as a whole. Unlike their private experience, this pervading
consciousness is the same in all, consisting in those epidemic or infectious
states of feeling above described, which, at times when the common
functions are being exercised, invade the whole field of mentality, and
submerge the individual areas. To this group-consciousness belong also,
from the first moment of their appearance all representations which are
collective, a class in which all religious representations are included. These
likewise are diffused over the whole mentality of the group, and identical in
all its members.... The collective consciousness is thus super-individual. It
resides, of course, in the individuals composing the group. There is nowhere
else for it to exist, but it resides in all of them together and not completely
in any one of them. It is both in myself and yet not myself. It occupies a
certain part of my mind and yet it stretches beyond and outside me to the
limits of my group. And since I am only a small part of my group, there is
much more of it outside me than inside. Its force therefore is much greater
than my individual force, and the more primitive I am the greater this
preponderance will be. Here, then, there exists in the world a power which
is much greater than any individual’s—super-individual, that is to say
superhuman.”
“Because this force is continuous with my own consciousness, it is, as it
were, a reservoir to which I have access, and from which I can absorb
superhuman power to reinforce and enhance my own. This is its positive
aspect—in so far as this power is not myself and greater than myself, it is a
moral and restraining force, which can and does impose upon the individual
the necessity of observing the uniform behaviour of the group.” This writer
makes group consciousness the source of both morality and religion. “The
collective consciousness is also immanent in the individual himself,
forming within him that unreasoning impulse called conscience, which like
a traitor within the gates, acknowledges from within the obligation to obey
that other and much larger part of the collective consciousness which lies
outside. Small wonder that obedience is absolute in primitive man, whose
individuality is still restricted to a comparatively small field, while all the
higher levels of mentality are occupied by this overpowering force36.” The
first religious idea is that of “this collective consciousness, the only moral
power which can come to be felt as imposed from without.” And Cornford
goes yet further and makes of the group self-consciousness the source of
magic as well as of religion and morality. This primary reservoir of super-
individual power splits, he says, into two pools, human and non-human; the
former is magic power, the latter is divine power.
On this I would comment as follows. Although Cornford is right in
insisting upon the large influence of group consciousness, he is wrong, I
think, in underestimating individuality. He does not go so far as some
writers who suggest that group self-consciousness actually precedes
individual self-consciousness, but he says of individual self-consciousness
that it is but very faint in savages. I am more inclined to agree with Lotze,
who in a famous passage asserted that even the crushed worm is in an
obscure way aware of itself and its pain as set over against the world. Many
facts of savage behaviour forbid us to accept the extreme view that denies
them individual self-consciousness—individual names, secret names,
private property, private rites, religious and magical, individual revenge,
jealousy, running amok, leadership, self-assertion, pride, vanity, competition
in games of skill and in technical and artistic achievement. The flourishing
of these and many other such things in primitive communities reveals
clearly enough to the unbiassed observer in the field the effective presence
of individual self-consciousness in the savage mind. In this connexion I
may refer to two pieces of evidence bearing very directly on the question
reported by Dr C. Hose and myself. Among the Sea-Dayaks or Ibans of
Borneo we discovered the prevalence of the belief in the ‘nyarong’ or
private ‘spirit helper,’ some spiritual or animated individual power which a
fortunate individual here and there finds reason to believe is attached to him
personally for his guidance and help in all difficult situations. His belief in
this personal helper and the rites by aid of which he communicates with it
are kept secret from his fellows; so that it was only after long and intimate
acquaintance with these people that Dr Hose began to suspect the existence
of this peculiarly individualistic belief37. In the same volumes we have
described the Punans of Borneo, a people whose mode of life is in every
respect extremely primitive. In this respect they are perhaps unequalled by
any other existing people. Yet no one who is acquainted with these amiable
folk could doubt that, although their group consciousness is highly
developed, they enjoy also a well developed individual self-consciousness.
How otherwise can we interpret the fact that a Punan who suffers malicious
injury from a member of another tribe will nurse his vengeful feeling for an
indefinite period and, after the lapse of years, will find an opportunity to
bring down his enemy secretly with blow-pipe and poisoned dart?
With Mr Cornford’s view of the part played by the group spirit in
moralising conduct I agree. I agree also that it is the collective life or mind
that develops religion and in part magic; but in my view Cornford attributes
to the savage far too much reflective theorising; he represents him as
formulating a theory of the collective consciousness which is really almost
identical with the interesting speculation of M. Lévy Bruhl presently to be
noticed, and he regards his conduct, his religious and magical practices, as
guided by these theories. But that is to reverse the true order of things—to
make theory precede practice; whereas in reality, especially in religion and
magic, practice has everywhere preceded theory, often, as in this case, by
thousands of generations38.
It is true that the savage often behaves as though he held this theory of
the collective consciousness as a field of force in which he participates; that
his conduct seems to require such a theory for its rational justification. But
it by no means follows that he has formulated any theory at all. What the
savage is conscious of is, not a collective consciousness as a mysterious
superhuman power, but the group itself, the group of concrete embodied
fellow men. He behaves and feels as he does, because participation in the
life of the group directly modifies his individual tendencies and directly
evokes these feelings and actions; he does not discover, or seek, any theory
by which to explain them. Still less is it true that he performs these actions
because he has formulated a theory of a collective consciousness.
Mr Cornford regards the savage idea of a collective consciousness as
the germ of the idea of divine power or of God. Now this is connected with
the question of animism, preanimism, and dynanimism. It may be true that
the notion of mana is the common prime source of religious and magical
ideas, but it does not follow that the idea of God is arrived at by way of a
notion of collective mana. No doubt that would be the probable course of
events, if the savage had so little sense of his individuality as Cornford
supposes; but it seems to me rather that the savage’s strong sense of
individuality has led at an early stage to the personalisation, the
individuation, of mana, the vaguely conceived spiritual power and
influence, and that it was only by a long course of religious and
philosophical speculation that men reached the conception of the Absolute
or of God as a universal power of which each personal consciousness is a
partial manifestation.
It is interesting to note that, if we could accept Cornford’s views, we
could now claim to witness the completion of one full cycle of the wheel of
speculation, the last step having been made in an article in a recent number
of the Hibbert Journal39; for it is there suggested that the only God or
super-individual power we ought to recognise and revere is, not a collective
consciousness conceived as a supra-individual unity of consciousness, but
the collective mind of humanity in the sense in which I am using the term, a
system of mental forces that slowly progresses towards greater harmony
and integration.
M. Lévy Bruhl has written an interesting, though highly speculative,
account of savage mental life which he represents as differing profoundly
from our own, chiefly in that it is dominated by ‘collective
representations40.’ His view is not unlike that put forward by Cornford.
Collective representations or ideas are rightly said to be the product of
the group mind rather than of any individual mind; that is to say, they have
been gradually evolved by collective mental life; and they are said to differ
from our ideas in being “states more complex in which the emotional and
motor elements are integral parts of the ideas.” Thinking by aid of these
collective representations is said to have its own laws quite distinct from the
laws of logic.
These statements are no doubt correct; but both Lévy Bruhl and
Cornford commit the great error of assuming that the mental life of civilised
man is conducted by each individual in a purely rational and logical
manner; they overlook the fact that we also are largely dominated by
collective representations; for these collective representations are nothing
but ideas of objects to which traditional sentiments, sentiments of awe, of
fear, of respect, of love, of reverence, are attached. Almost the whole of the
religion and morality of the average civilised man is based on his
acquisition of such collective representations, traditional sentiments grown
up about ideas of objects, ideas which he receives ready made and
sentiments which are impressed upon him by the community that has
evolved them.
It is no doubt true that in the main the field of objects to which
collective representations apply is larger in savage life; and these ideas are
more uniform and more powerful and unquestioned, because the group is
more homogeneous in its sentiments. But it is, fortunately, only a rare
individual here and there among us who in considerable degree emancipates
himself from the influence of such representations and becomes capable of
confronting all objects about him in a perfectly cool, critical, logical attitude
—who can “peep and botanise upon his mother’s grave.” Only by strict
intellectual discipline do we progress towards strictly logical operations in
relation to real life, towards pure judgments of fact as opposed to judgments
of value. For our judgments of value are rooted in our sentiments; and
whatever is for us an object of a sentiment of love or hate, of attachment or
aversion, can only with the greatest difficulty, if at all, be made an object of
a pure judgment of fact.
And Cornford and Lévy Bruhl make the same mistake in regard to
‘collective representations’ as in regard to the group self-consciousness—
namely, they credit the savage with theories for the explanation of the
beliefs implicitly involved in the ‘collective representations,’ for example,
the theory of mystic participation, which is said to replace for the savage
the civilised man’s theory of mechanical causation. But, when we regard
any material object as holy, or sacred, or as of peculiar value, because it was
given us by a departed friend, or belonged to and perhaps was once worn by
a beloved person, our behaviour towards it is not determined by any theory
of participation; if, for example, we touch it tenderly and with reverent care,
that is the direct expression of our feeling. We even behave as if we held the
theory of participation, to the extent of believing that the dead or distant
person will suffer pain if we ill-use or neglect the object which is associated
with him in our minds, but without actually holding that belief; and still
more without elaborating a theory of the nature of the process by which our
action will produce such an effect. It is only a late and highly sophisticated
reflection upon behaviour of this kind which leads to theories for the
justification of such behaviour. It is not true, then, that we are logical
individuals, while savages are wholly prelogical in virtue of the dominance
among them of the collective mental life. The truth rather is that, wherever
emotion qualifies our intellectual operations, it renders them other than
purely and strictly logical; and the savage or the civilised man departs more
widely from the strictly logical conduct of his intellect, in proportion as his
conceptions of things are absorbed without critical reflection and analysis
and are coloured with the traditional sentiments of his community. The
average savage, being more deeply immersed in his group, suffers these
effects more strongly than the average civilised man. Yet the interval in this
respect between the modern man of scientific culture and the average
citizen of our modern states is far greater than that between the latter and
the savage.
If one had to name the principal difference between the conditions of
life of the typical savage and those of the average civilised man, one would,
I think, have to point to the lack in civilised life of those conditions which
so inevitably develop the group consciousness of the savage. The family
circle supplies to the young child something of these conditions, but in a
very imperfect degree only. At an early age this influence is much
weakened by general intercourse. As the individual approaches maturity, he
finds himself at liberty to cut himself off completely from all his natural
setting, to transplant himself to any part of the world, and to share in the life
of any civilised community. He can earn his livelihood anywhere, and he
knows nothing of communal responsibility.
Progressive weakening of the conditions that force the development of
group self-consciousness has characterised the whole course of the
development of civilisation, and has reached its climax in the conditions of
life in our large cities.
In primitive communities the conditions of group self-consciousness
are, as we have seen, fourfold; namely kinship, territorial, traditional and
occupational association. All these are present in the highest degree in the
nomadic group under the typical patriarchal system.
When kinship groups take to agriculture and become permanently
settled on one spot, the kinship factor tends to be weakened, through the
inclusion of alien elements; and the territorial factor becomes the most
important condition. Throughout European history the territorial factor,
expressing itself in the form of the village-community, remained of
universal importance in this respect; the Roman Empire and the Roman
Church weakened it greatly; but everywhere outside those spheres it
continued to be of dominant importance until the great social revolution of
the modern industrial period.
The village community maintained much of the tradition and custom
that tend to develop group self-consciousness with its moralising influence.
But at the present time almost the only condition of wide and general
influence that continues in times of peace to foster group self-consciousness
is occupational association. And so we find men tending more and more to
be grouped for all serious collective activities according to their
occupations. From the earliest development of European industry this
tendency has been strong; it produced the trading and craft guilds which
played so great a part in medieval Europe; and, though the monarchical and
capitalistic regimes of modern times have done all they can to repress and
break up these occupational groups, and have greatly restricted their
influence, they have failed to suppress them entirely. The climax of this
tendency for the occupational to replace and overshadow all other forms of
self-conscious grouping is present-day Syndicalism.
The natural conditions of group self-consciousness, which in primitive
societies rendered its development inevitable and spontaneous in every
man, have then been in the main destroyed. But man cannot stand alone;
men cannot live happily as mere individuals; they desire and crave and seek
membership in a group, in whose collective opinions and emotions and self-
consciousness and activities they may share, with which they may identify
themselves, thereby lessening the burden of individual responsibility,
judgment, decision and effort.
Hence in this age the natural groupings and the involuntary
developments of group consciousness are largely replaced by an enormous
development of artificial voluntary groupings, over and above the natural
groupings that are still only in very imperfect measure determined by the
weakened force of the natural conditions, namely kinship, neighbourhood
and occupation.
In part these artificial groupings are designed to reinforce the natural
conditions, as, for example, village festivals. The whole population of a
country such as our own is permeated by a vast and complexly interwoven,
or rather tangled, skein of the bonds of voluntary associations. Many of
these are, of course, formed to undertake some definite work, to achieve
some end which can only be achieved by co-operative effort. But in the
majority of such cases the satisfactions yielded by group life play a very
great part in leading to the formation of and in maintaining the groups, for
example, groups of philanthropic workers, the makers of charity bazaars,
the salvation army, the churches, the chapels, the sects. Most of such
associations that have any success and continuity of existence contain a
nucleus of persons who identify themselves in the fullest possible manner
with the group, make its interest their leading concern, the desire of its
welfare their dominant motive, and find in its service their principal
satisfaction and happiness.
And in very many voluntary associations the group-motives, the desire
for the satisfactions to be found in group life, are of prime importance,
predominating vastly over the desire to achieve any particular end by co-
operative action. Such are our countless clubs and societies formed frankly
for recreation, or for mutual improvement, and for all kinds of ostensible
purposes which serve merely as excuses or reasons for the existence of the
club. In the majority of instances these declared purposes really serve
merely or chiefly to exert a certain natural selection of persons, to bring
together persons of similar tastes as voluntary associates, to enable, in short,
birds of a feather to flock together. Even some of our enduring historical
institutions owe their continuance chiefly to the advantages and
satisfactions that proceed from group consciousness, for example, colleges,
school-houses, and political parties, especially perhaps in America. Party
feeling, as Sir H. Maine rightly said, is frequently a remedy for the inertia
of democracy.
The savage, when he maintains associations other than those determined
by natural conditions, intensifies his group consciousness by wearing
badges and totem marks, by tatooing and scarring, and by indulging in
various rites and ceremonies, about which a certain secrecy and mystery is
maintained. And civilised men exhibit just the same tendency and take very
similar measures to intensify group consciousness. We have our club
colours and ribbons and blazers, our college gowns and colours, our Oxford
accent, our badges of membership, and so on. Freemasonry, with its lodges
and badges and mysterious rites, seems to be the purest example on a large
scale. And, when the group consciousness and the group sentiment have
been acquired, we continue to cultivate it purely for its own sake, by
holding annual dinners and reunions of old boys, and so forth.
It is of the greatest importance that this tendency to seek and maintain a
share in group consciousness, which, as we have seen, manifests itself
everywhere even under the most adverse conditions, not merely yields
comfort and satisfaction to individuals, but brings about results which are in
almost every way extremely advantageous for the higher development of
human life in general.
We have seen that, in the well-organised group, collective deliberation,
judgment, and action are raised to a higher plane of effectiveness than is
possible to the average member of the group. But apart from that, the group
spirit continues with us, as with the savage (though in a less effective
degree) to be the great socialising agency. In the majority of cases it is the
principal, if not the sole, factor which raises a man’s conduct above the
plane of pure egoism, leads him to think and care and work for others as
well as for himself. Try to imagine any man wholly deprived of his group
consciousness and set over against all his fellowmen as an individual unit,
and you will see that you could expect but little from him in the way of self-
sacrifice or public service—at most a care for his wife and children and
sporadic acts of kindliness when direct appeals are made to his pity; but
none of that energetic and devoted public service and faithful self-
sacrificing co-operation without which the continued welfare of any human
society is impossible.
The group spirit destroys the opposition and the conflict between the
crudely individualistic and the primitive altruistic tendencies of our nature.
This is the peculiar merit and efficiency of the complex motives that
arise from the group spirit; they bring the egoistic self-seeking impulses
into the service of society and harmonise them with the altruistic
tendencies. The group spirit secures that the egoistic and the altruistic
tendencies of each man’s nature, instead of being in perpetual conflict, as
they must be in its absence, shall harmoniously co-operate and re-enforce
one another throughout a large part of the total field of human activity.
For it is of the essence of the group spirit that the individual identifies
himself, as we say, with the group more or less; that is to say, in technical
language, his self-regarding sentiment becomes extended to the group more
or less completely, so that he is moved to desire and to work for its welfare,
its success, its honour and glory, by the same motives which prompt him to
desire and to work for his own welfare and success and honour; as in the
case of the student working for a scholarship or university prize, or the
member of an exploring expedition or fighting group. Further, the motives
supplied by the group spirit may be stronger than, and may overpower, the
purely individualistic egoistic motives, just because they harmonise with,
and are supported by, any altruistic tendency or tendencies comprised in the
make up of the individual; which altruistic tendencies will, where the group
spirit is lacking, oppose and weaken the effects of purely egoistic motives.
To illustrate this principle, let us imagine an Englishman who, in a Congo
forest, finds a white man sick or in difficulties. To succour the sick man
may be to incur grave risks, and he is tempted to pass on; but the thought
comes to him that in so doing he will lower the prestige of the white man in
the eyes of the natives; and this idea, evoking the motives of the group spirit
which unites all white men in such a land, brings victory to his sense of pity
in its struggle with selfish fear.
In this way, that is by extension to the group, the egoistic impulses are
transmuted, sublimated, and deprived of their individualistic selfish
character and effects and are turned to public service. Hence it is that it is
generally so difficult or impossible to analyse the motives of any public
service or social activity and to display them as either purely egoistic or
altruistic; for they are, as Herbert Spencer called them, ego-altruistic. And
hence it comes about that both the cynic and the idealist can make out
plausible cases, when they seek to show that either egoism or altruism
predominates in human life. Both are right in a partial sense.
Another noteworthy feature of the group spirit renders it extremely
effective in promoting social life; namely the fact that, although the group
sentiment is apt to determine an attitude of rivalry, competition, and
antagonism towards similarly constituted groups, yet a man may share in
the self-consciousness of more groups than one, so long as their natures and
aims do not necessarily bring them into rivalry. And in our complex modern
societies this principle of multiple group consciousness in each man is of
extreme importance; for without it, and in the absence or comparative lack
of the natural conditions of grouping other than the occupational, the whole
population would become divided into occupational groups, each fighting
collectively against every other for the largest possible share of the good
things of life. A tendency towards this state of things is very perceptible, in
spite of the correcting cross-connexions of kinship, of church and political
party, and of territorial association.
But another principle of multiple group consciousness is, perhaps, of
still greater importance, namely that it allows the formation of a hierarchy
of group sentiments for a system of groups in which each larger group
includes the lesser; each group being made the object of the extended self-
regarding sentiment in a way which includes the sentiment for the lesser
group in the sentiment for the larger group in which it is comprised. Thus
the family, the village, the county, the country as a whole, form for the
normal man the objects of a harmonious hierarchy of sentiments of this sort,
each of which strengthens rather than weakens the others, and yields
motives for action which on the whole co-operate and harmonise rather than
conflict.
Such a hierarchy is seen in savage life. It often happens that a man is
called on to join in the defence of some village of the tribe other than his
own. In such cases he is moved not only by his tribal sentiment, but also by
his sentiments for his village and family. The sentiment for the part supports
the sentiment for the whole.
It is of considerable importance also that in general the development of
a sentiment of attachment to one group not only does not prevent, but rather
facilitates, the development of similar sentiments for other groups. And this
is especially true when the groups concerned are related to one another as
parts and wholes, that is, when they form a hierarchy of successively more
widely inclusive groups. The sentiment for the smaller group (e.g. the
family) naturally develops first in the child’s mind; if only for the reason
that this is the group of which he can first form a definite idea, and with the
whole of which he is in immediate relations. The strong development of this
first group sentiment prepares the child’s mind for the development of other
and wider group sentiments. For it increases his power of grasping
intellectually the group of persons as a complex whole; and it strengthens
by exercise those impulses or primary tendencies which must enter into the
constitution of any group sentiment; and, thirdly, it prevents the excessive
development of the purely individualistic attitude, of the habit of looking at
every situation and weighing all values from the strictly individualistic and
egoistic standpoint; which attitude, if once it becomes habitual, must form a
powerful hindrance to the development of the wider group sentiments,
when the child arrives at an age to grasp the idea of the larger group.
The organisation of an army again illustrates these principles in
relatively clear and simple fashion. In our own army the regiment is the
traditional self-conscious unit about which traditional sentiment and ritual
have been carefully fostered, in part through realisation of their practical
importance, in part because this unit is of such a size and nature as to be
well suited to call out strongly the natural group tendencies of its
component individuals. On the whole the military authorities, and
especially Lord Haldane in the formation of the territorial army, seem to
have wisely recognised the importance of the group spirit of the regiment;
although during the Great War it was, under the pressure of other
considerations, apparently lost sight of at certain times and places, with, I
believe, deplorable consequences.
In modern warfare, and especially in the Great War, the Division has
tended to become of predominant importance as the unit of organisation;
and accordingly, without destroying or superseding regimental group
consciousness, the sentiment for the Division has been in many instances a
very strong factor in promoting the spiritual cohesion and efficiency of the
army. Certain Divisions, such as the 10th and the 29th, have covered
themselves with glory, so that the soldiers have learnt to feel a great pride in
and a devotion to the Division.
This larger group, although of comparatively ephemeral existence and
therefore devoid of long traditions coming down from the past, is in perfect
and obvious harmony, in purpose and spirit and material organisation, with
the battalions and other units of which it is composed; and, accordingly, the
sentiment for the larger group does not enter into rivalry with that for the
battalion, the battery, or other smaller unit; rather it comprises this within its
own organisation and derives energy and stability from it.
These psychological principles of group consciousness are, I think, well
borne out inductively, by any comparative survey; that is to say, we find
that, where family sentiment and the sentiment for the local group are
strong, there also the wider group sentiments are strong, and good
citizenship, patriotism, and ready devotion to public services of all kinds are
the rule. The strongest most stable States have always been those in which
family sentiment has been strong, especially those in which it has been
strengthened and supported by the custom of ancestor worship, as in Rome,
Japan and China. Scotchmen again (Highlanders especially) are noted for
clannishness, and Scotch cousins have become a bye-word; a fact which
implies the great strength of the family sentiment. The clan sentiment,
which is clearly only an extension of the family sentiment, is also
notoriously strong. The sentiment for Scotland as a whole is no less strong
in the hearts of all her sons. But, and this is the important point, these strong
group sentiments are perfectly compatible with and probably conducive to a
sentiment for the still wider group, Great Britain or the British Empire; and
the public services rendered to these larger groups by men of Scottish birth
are equally notorious.
In these considerations we may see, I think, a principal ground of the
importance of the institution of the family for the welfare of the state. The
importance has often been insisted upon; but too much stress is usually laid
upon the material aspects, and not enough upon the mental effects, of
family life.
It has been a grave mistake on the part of many collectivists, from Plato
onwards, that they have sought to destroy the family and to bring up all
children as the children of the state only, in some kind of barrack system. It
is not too much to say that, if they could succeed in this (and in this country
great strides in this direction are being rapidly made), they would destroy
the mental foundations of all possibility of collective life of the higher type.
We touch here upon a question of policy of the highest importance.
There are, it seems to me, three distinct policies which may be deliberately
pursued, for the securing of the predominance of public or social motives
over egoistic motives. First, we may aim at building up group life on the
foundation of a system of discipline which will result in more or less
complete suppression of the egoistic tendencies of individuals, the building
up in them of habits of unquestioning obedience to authority. I imagine that
the Jesuit system of education might fairly be taken as the most successful
and thorough-going application of this principle. The organisation of an
army of unwilling conscripts to fight for a foreign power must rest on the
same basis. Some group spirit no doubt will generally grow up. But, though
wonderful results have been obtained in this way, the system has two great
weaknesses. First, it seeks to repress and destroy more than half of the
powerful forces that move men to action—namely, the egoistic motives in
general—instead of making use of them, directing them to social ends.
Secondly, it necessarily crushes individuality and therefore all capacity of
progress and further development in various directions; it results in a rigidly
conservative system without possibility of spontaneous development.
The second system is that which aims at developing in all members of
the state or inclusive group a sentiment of devotion to the whole, while
suppressing the growth of sentiments for any minor groups within the
whole. This was the system of Plato’s Republic and is essentially the
collectivist ideal. It is the policy of those who would suppress all
sentimental groupings, all local loyalties and patriotisms, in favour of the
ideal of the brotherhood of man, the cosmopolitan ideal. I have already
pointed out one great weakness of this plan,—namely, that this sentiment
for the all-inclusive group cannot be effectively developed save by way of
development of the minor group sentiments. And, though it may succeed
with some persons, there will always be many who cannot grasp the idea of
the larger whole sufficiently firmly and intelligently to make it the object of
any strong and enlightened sentiment of attachment; such persons will be
left on the purely egoistic level, whereas their energies might have been
effectively socialised by the development of some less inclusive group
consciousness.
Again, the smaller group is apt to call out a man’s energies more
effectively, because he can see and foresee more clearly the effects of his
own actions on its behalf. Whereas the larger the group, the more are the
efforts of individuals and their effects obscured and lost to view in vast
movements of the collective life. That is to say, the smaller groups
harmonise more effectively than the larger groups the purely egoistic and
the altruistic motives (except of course in the case of those few persons who
can play leading parts in the life of the larger group). For, though a man
may be moved by his devotion to the group to work for its welfare, he will
work still more energetically if, at the same time, he is able to achieve
personal distinction and acknowledgment, if the purely egoistic motives can
also find satisfaction in his activities. Hence this second policy also, no
matter how successful, fails to make the most of men, fails to bring to the
fullest exercise all their powers in a manner that will promote the welfare of
the whole. Thirdly, this system loses the advantages of the healthy rivalry
between groups within the whole; which rivalry is a means to a great
liberation of human energies. These are the weaknesses of the over-
centralised state, such as modern France or the Roman Empire.
Only the third policy can liberate and harmonise the energies of men to
the fullest extent; namely, that which aims at developing in each individual
a hierarchy of group sentiments in accordance with the natural course of
development.
One other virtue of the group spirit must be mentioned. Although it
tends to bring similar groups into keen rivalry and even into violent
conflict, the antagonism between men who are moved to conflict by the
group spirit is less bitter than that between individuals who are brought into
conflict by personal motives; for the members of each group or party,
though they may wish to frustrate or even to destroy the other party as such,
may remain benevolent towards its members individually. And this is
rendered easier by the fact that the members of each group, recognising that
their antagonists are also moved by the group spirit, by loyalty and devotion
to the group, will sympathise with and respect their motives far more
readily and fully than they would, if they ascribed to their opponents purely
egoistic motives. This recognition, even though it be not clearly formulated,
softens the conflict and moderates the hostile feelings that opposition
inevitably arouses in men keenly pursuing any end, especially one which
they hold to be a public good; in this way it renders possible that
continuance of friendly relations between members of bitterly opposed
parties which has happily been the rule and at the same time the seeming
anomaly of English public life.
In our older educational system, and especially in the ‘public schools’
and older universities, the advantages and the importance of developing the
group spirit have long been practically recognised—‘esprit de corps’ has
been cultivated by the party system, by rivalry of groups within the group;
by forms, school-houses, colleges, clubs, teams, games, and by keeping the
honour and glory of the school, college, or other unit, prominently before
the minds of the scholars in many effective ways. It is, I think, one of the
gravest defects of our primary system of education that it makes so little
provision for development of this kind; that, while it weakens the family
sentiment, it provides no effective substitute for it. Something has been
done in recent years to remedy this defect, notably the fostering of the boy-
scout movement; but every opportunity of supplying this need should be
seized by those who are responsible for the direction of educational policy.
The importance of the group spirit may be illustrated by pointing to
those individuals and classes which are denied its benefits. The tramp, the
cosmopolitan globe-trotter, the outcast in general, whether the detachment
from group life be due to the disposition or choice of the individual or to
unfortunate circumstances, is apt to show, only too clearly, how little man is
able, standing alone, to maintain a decent level of conduct and character. On
a large scale this is illustrated by the casteless classes in caste communities,
and especially by Eurasians of India and by other persons and classes of
mixed descent, who fail to identify themselves wholly with either of the
groups from which they derive their blood. The moral defects of persons of
these classes have often been deplored, and they have usually been
attributed to the mixture of widely different hereditary strains. There is
probably some truth in the view; but in general the moral shortcomings of
persons of these classes are chiefly due to the fact that they do not fully
share in the life of any group having old established moral traditions and
sentiments.
Summary of Principal Conditions of the Development Of the Group
Spirit
We have seen that the group spirit plays a vastly important part in raising
men above the purely animal level of conduct, in extending each man’s
interests beyond the narrow circle of his own home and family, in inspiring
him to efforts for the common good, in stimulating him to postpone his
private to public ends, in enabling the common man to rise at times, as
shown by a multitude of instances during the Great War, to lofty heights of
devotion and self-sacrifice.
The development of the group spirit consists in two essential processes,
namely, the acquisition of knowledge of the group and the formation of
some sentiment of attachment to the group as such. It is essential that the
group shall be apprehended or conceived as such by its members. Therefore
the group spirit is favoured by whatever tends to define the group, to mark
it off distinctly from other groups; by geographical boundaries; by
peculiarities of skin-colour or of physical type, of language, or accent, of
dress, custom, or habit, common to the members of the group; that is to say,
by homogeneity and distinctiveness of type within the group.
And, though definition of the group as such within the minds of its
members is the prime condition of the growth of the group spirit, that spirit
will be the more effective the fuller and truer is the knowledge of the group
in the minds of its members. Just as individual self-knowledge favours self-
direction and wisdom of choice, so group self-knowledge must, if it is to be
fully effective, comprise not only the conception of the group as a whole
but also the fullest possible knowledge of the component parts and
individuals and an understanding of their relations to one another. In this
respect smallness and homogeneity of the group are obviously favourable.
But knowledge of the group, however exact and widely diffused, is of itself
of no effect, if there be not also widely diffused in the members some
sentiment of attachment to the group. The prevailing group sentiment is
almost inevitably one of attachment. There are exceptional instances in
which men are compelled to act as members of a group which they hate or
despise, notably in some cases of compulsory military service and in
convict gangs; but it must be rare that, even under such conditions, some
sense of common interest, some fellow feeling for other members in like
distressing circumstances, does not lead to the growth of some group spirit,
provided only that the group has some continuity and some homogeneity in
essentials.
In all natural and spontaneously formed groups, the extension of the
self-regarding sentiment to the group is a normal and inevitable process;
and, like the self-regarding sentiment, the sentiment so formed may range
from an insane and incorrigible pride (as often in the case of the family
sentiment) to a decent self-respect that is perfectly compatible with a
modest attitude and with reasonable claims upon and regard for the interests
of other groups.
The main difference between the self-regarding sentiment and the
developed group sentiment is that the latter commonly involves an element
of devotion to the group for its own sake and the sake of one’s fellow
members. That is to say, the group sentiment is a synthesis of the self-
regarding and the altruistic tendencies in which they are harmonised to
mutual support and re-enforcement: the powerful egoistic impulses being
sublimated to higher ends than the promotion of the self’s welfare41.
Further, the group has, or may have, a greater continuity of existence
than the individual, both in the past and in the future; and for this reason,
and because also it includes the purely altruistic tendency, the group
sentiment is capable of idealisation in a high degree and of yielding
satisfactions far more enduring and profound than the most refined self-
sentiment.
Both knowledge of the group and the growth of the group sentiment are
greatly promoted by two processes, in the absence of which the group spirit
can attain only a very modest development. These are free intercourse
within the group and free intercourse between the group and other groups.
We shall have occasion to discuss and illustrate them in later chapters.
Chapter V.
Peculiarities of Groups of Various Types
Table of Contents
We have discussed the psychology of the simple crowd or unorganised
group; and taking an army as an extreme and relatively simple type of the
highly organised group, we have used it to illustrate the principal ways in
which organisation of the group modifies its collective life, raising it in
many respects high above that of the crowd.
I propose now to discuss very briefly the peculiarities of groups of
several types. Some classification of groups seems desirable as an aid to the
discovery of the general principles of collective life and their application to
the understanding of social life in general. It seems impossible to discover
any single principle of classification. Almost every group that enjoys a
greater continuity of existence than the simple crowd partakes in some
degree of qualities common to all. But we may distinguish the most
important qualities and roughly classify groups according to the degrees in
which they exhibit them.
Apart from crowds, which, as we have seen, may be either fortuitously
gathered or brought together by some common purpose, there are many
simple groups which, though accidental in origin (i.e. not brought together
by common purpose or interest) and remaining unorganised, yet present in
simple and rudimentary form some of the features of group life.
The persons seated in one compartment of a railway train during a long
journey may be entirely strangers to one another at the outset; yet, even in
the absence of conversation, they in the course of some hours will begin to
manifest some of the peculiarities of the psychological group. To some
extent they will have come to a mutual understanding and adjustment; and,
when a stranger adds himself to their company, his entrance is felt to some
extent as an intrusion which at the least demands readjustments; he is
regarded with curious and to some extent hostile glances. If an outsider
threatens to encroach on the rights of one of the company, the others will
readily combine in defence of their member; and any little incident
affecting their one common interest (namely, punctual arrival of the train at
its destination) quickly reveals, and in doing so strengthens, the bond of
common feeling.
On a sea voyage the group spirit of the passenger ship attains a greater
development, by reason of the longer continuance of the group, its more
complete detachment and definition, the sense of greater hazard affecting
all alike, the sense of dependence on mutual courtesy and good-will and
sympathy for the comfort and enjoyment of all. Very soon the experienced
traveller, contrasting and comparing this present company with those of
previous voyages, sums up its qualities and defects and lays his plans
accordingly. And by the time that an intermediate port is reached, where
perhaps the most ‘grumpy’ and least entertaining member of the company
disembarks, even his departure is felt by the rest as a loss that leaves a gap
in the structure of the group.
Such fortuitous and ephemeral groups apart, all others may be classed in
the two great divisions of natural and artificial groups.
The natural groups again fall into two main classes which partly
coincide,—namely, those rooted in kinship and those determined by
geographical conditions. The family is the pure example of the former; the
population of a small island, the type of the latter kind. The main difference
is that the bonds of the kinship group are purely or predominantly mental
and therefore can, and commonly do, remain effective in spite of all spatial
separation and of all lack of common purpose or of material benefits
accruing from membership in the group.
The artificial groups may be divided into three great classes, the
purposive, the customary or traditional, and the mixed; those of the last
kind combining the purposive and the traditional characters in various
proportions.
The purposive group is brought together and maintained by the
existence of a common purpose in the minds of all its members. It is, in
respect of efficiency, the highest type; for it is essentially self-conscious,
aware of its ends and of its own nature, and it deliberately adopts an
organisation suited to the attainment of those ends. The simplest and purest
type is the social club, a body of people who meet together to satisfy the
promptings of the gregarious instinct and to enjoy the pleasures of group
life. In the great majority of instances, the social club adopts some form of
recreation—debating, music, chess, whist, football, tennis, cycling—the
practice of which gives point and definition to the activities of members and
secures secondary advantages. It is noteworthy that on this purely
recreational plane, clubs and societies of all sorts seek in almost all cases to
enhance the group consciousness and hence the satisfactions of group life
by entering into relations, generally relations of friendly rivalry, but
sometimes merely of affiliation and formal intercourse, with other like
groups. For not only is the group consciousness enriched and strengthened
by such intercourse; but, when the rival or communicating groups,
becoming aware of one another, become informally or, more generally,
formally allied to constitute a larger whole, the consciousness of
participation in this larger whole gratifies more fully the gregarious impulse
and enhances the sense of power and confidence in each member of each
constituent group. This seems to be the main ground of that universal
tendency to the formation of ever more inclusive associations of clubs and
societies, which, overleaping even national boundaries and geographical
and racial divisions, has produced numerous world-wide associations.
Another very numerous class of strictly purposive groups is to be found
in the commercial companies. In these the group spirit commonly remains
at the lowest level; for the dominant motive is individual financial gain, and
the only common bond among the shareholders is their interest in the
management of the company so far as it affects the private and individual
end of each one. Group self-knowledge, organisation, tradition, and group
sentiment are all at a minimum; accordingly the group remains incapable of
effective deliberation or action. It operates through its board of directors
and officers and, owing to its incapacity for group action, has to rely upon
the provisions of the Company Laws for the control of their actions.
A third large class of purposive groups are the associations formed for
the furthering of some public end. Many such groups are purely altruistic or
philanthropic; but in the majority the members hope to share in some
degree in the public benefits for the attainment of which the group is
formed. In many such associations, group life hardly rises above the low
level of the commercial company; the main difference being that, in virtue
of the ‘disinterested’ or public-spirited nature of the dominant purpose, the
members regard one another and their executive officers with greater
confidence and sympathy; even though remaining personally unacquainted.
Notable instances of such associations, achieving great public ends, are
‘The National Trust for the Preservation of Places of Natural Beauty or
Historic Interest,’ and ‘The Public Footpaths Association.’ Other
associations of this kind have something of the nature of a commercial
company: e.g. ‘The First Garden City Company,’ and ‘The Trust Houses
Company.’ The peculiarity of these is that the motive of financial gain is
subordinated to, while co-operating with, the desire for achievement of a
public good, a benefit to the whole community in which the members of the
group share in an almost inappreciable degree only. Such associations are
very characteristic of the life of this country; and it may be hoped that their
multiplication and development will prove to be one of the ameliorating
factors of the future, softening the asperities of commercial life, correcting
to some degree that narrowing of the sympathies, and preventing that
tendency to class antagonisms, which purely commercial associations
inevitably produce. The great co-operative societies seem to have
something of this character; for, although the dominant motive of
membership is probably in most cases private advantage, yet membership
brings with it some sense of participation in a great movement for better
social organisation, some sense of loyalty to the group, some rudimentary
group knowledge and group spirit, some interest in and satisfaction in the
prosperity of the group for its own sake, over and above the strictly private
interest of each member. The introduction of various forms of profit sharing
will give something of this character to commercial companies.
The recent investments in government loans by millions of individuals,
acting in part from patriotic motives, must have a similar tendency; and a
similar effect on a large scale must be produced by any nationalisation of
industries, a fact which is one of the weightiest grounds for desiring such
nationalisation; though it remains uncertain whether, when the scale of the
association becomes so large as to include the whole nation, the bulk of the
citizens will be able effectively to discern the identity of their public and
private interests, and whether, therefore, such nationalisation will greatly
promote that fusion or co-operation of public and private motives which is
the essential function and merit of the group spirit.
The most characteristic British group of the purposive type is the
association formed for some public or quasi-public end and operating
through a democratically elected committee or committees and sub-
committees. Such groups are the cradle of the representative principle and
the training ground of the democratic spirit, especially of its deliberative
and executive faculties. In them each member, taking part in the election of
the committee, delegates to them his share of authority, but continues to
exert control over them by his vote upon reports of the committee and in the
periodic re-election of its members. On this ground the citizens are trained
to understand the working of the representative principle; to yield to the
opinion of the majority on the choice of means, without ceasing loyally to
co-operate towards the common end; to observe the necessary rules of
procedure; to abide by group decisions; to influence group opinion in
debate, and in turn to be influenced by it and respect it; to differ without
enmity; to keep the common end in view, in spite of the inevitable working
of private and personal motives; to understand the necessity for delegation,
and to respect the organisation through which alone the group raises itself
above the level of the crowd.
Traditional groups of pure or nearly pure character are relatively
infrequent. Perhaps the castes of the Hindu world are, of all large groups,
those which most nearly approach the pure type. Traditional grouping is
characteristic of stagnant old established populations, of which it is the
basis of organisation and principal cement. No doubt in almost every case
the formation of the traditional group was in some degree purposive; but the
original purpose has generally been lost sight of; myths and legends have
grown up to explain the origin of and give a fictitious purpose or ‘raison
d’être’ to the group. In the absence of any definite practical purpose
animating the group and holding it together, its stability is secured and its
tradition is re-enforced and given a visible presentation by the development
of ritual. Of all the great groups among us the Free Masons perhaps afford
the best illustration of this type.
Far more important in the British world are the groups of the mixed
type, partly traditional and partly purposive, groups having a long history
and origins shrouded in the mists of antiquity, but having some strong and
more or less definite common purpose. Of such groups the Christian
Church is the greatest example. In the Roman Church, whose history has
been so little interrupted, tradition attains its fullest power, and the regard
for the past is strengthened and supplemented by the prospect of an
indefinitely prolonged future directed towards the same ends. Its
organisation has grown gradually under the one continued overshadowing
purpose, every addition becoming embodied and established in the great
tradition, the strength of which is perpetually maintained by ritual. And this
traditional organisation is not only borne in the minds of each generation of
members of the Church, but, in an ever increasing degree, has embodied
itself in a material system of stone and glass and metal and printed words;
these constitute a visible and enduring presentment which, though entirely
disconnected and heterogeneous in a merely material sense, yet provides
fixed points in the whole organisation, contributing immensely to its
stability, and aiding greatly in bringing home to the minds of its members
the unity of the whole group in the past, the present, and the future. Many
groups or sects having the same essential purpose as the Roman Church
have aimed to establish a tradition without the aid of such material
embodiments: but their ephemeral histories illustrate the wisdom of the
mother Church which, in building up her vast organisation, has recognised
the limitations and the frailties of the human mind and has not scorned to
adapt herself to them in order to overcome them.
On a smaller scale our ancient universities and their colleges illustrate
the same great type of the partly traditional partly purposive group, and the
same great principles of collective life,—namely, the stability derived from
the continuity of tradition, from its careful culture, and its partial
embodiment in ritual and material structure.
An essential weakness of all such groups in a progressive community is
that tradition tends to overshadow purpose; hence every such group tends
towards the rigidity and relative futility of the purely traditional group. Its
organisation tends to set so rigidly that it is incapable of adapting itself to
the changing needs of the present and the future; the maintenance of
tradition, which is but a means towards the acknowledged end, becomes an
end in itself to which the primary purpose of the whole is in danger of being
subordinated.
The churches and the universities alike illustrate vividly the principles
of a group within a group. Each of the older universities is a microcosm, a
small model of the national life, and largely to this fact is due its
educational value as a place of residence. Each college evokes a strong
group spirit in all its members; and this sentiment for the college, though it
may and does in some minor matters conflict with the sentiment for the
university, is in the main synthesised within this, and indeed is the chief
factor in the strength of that sentiment.
The group spirit of each college owes much of its strength to the
carefully fostered, but perfectly friendly, rivalry between the several
colleges in sports and studies and other activities. The close companionship
and emulation between a number of small communities of similar
constitution and purpose, each having a long and distinct tradition as well as
a clearly defined material habitat which embodies and symbolises its
traditions in a thousand different ways, has raised the self-knowledge and
sentiment of the groups to a high level. It is well known that the few years
spent in one of the colleges develops in every member (with few
exceptions) a sentiment of attachment that persists through life and extends
itself in some degree to every other member, past, present and future; so
that, in whatever part of the world and under whatever circumstances two
such men may meet, the discovery of their common membership of the
college at once throws them into a friendly attitude towards each other and
prepares each to make disinterested efforts on behalf of the other.
The same is true in a less degree of the universities themselves. Oxford
and Cambridge have, partly in consequence of their proximity and close
intercourse, developed on closely parallel lines. They are therefore so
similar in constitution and aims as to be keen though friendly rivals. This
has been of great benefit to both, the self-knowledge and group sentiment of
each having been greatly promoted by this close intercourse, rivalry, and
reciprocal criticism. And this rivalry has not prevented the growth of some
sentiment for the larger group constituted by the members of both
universities, each of whom is always ready to defend the common interests
of the larger group against the rest of the world.
Again, within each college there are numerous smaller groups, each
with its traditions and group spirit; and, so long as these groups do not
become too exclusive, do not absorb all the devotion of their members, but
leave each one free to join in the life of other minor groups, their influence
is good, the group spirit of each such minor group contributing to the
strength of the larger group sentiment and enriching the spiritual life of the
whole.
In the middle ages occupational groups were of great importance and
influence. They were of the mixed type, for most of them, though
essentially purposive, developed strong traditions; and in their remote
origins many of them were perhaps rather natural than artificial formations.
The violent changes of industrial life, the development of the capitalist
system and modern industrialism, dislocated and largely destroyed these
occupational groups to the great detriment of social well-being. At the
present time we see a strong tendency to the growth of occupational groups
of the purely purposive type, which, lacking the guidance and conservative
power of old traditions, and depending for their strength largely upon the
identification of the material interests of each member with those of the
group, show a narrowness of outlook, a lack of stability and internal
cohesion, and a tendency to ignore the place and function of the group in
the whole community. They show, in short, a lack of the enlightened group
spirit which only time, with increasing experience and understanding of the
nature and functions of group life, can remedy. It may be hoped that with
improved internal organisation, with the growth of more insight into the
mutual dependence of the various groups on one another and on the whole
community, these groups, which at present seem to some observers to
threaten to destroy our society and to replace the rivalry of nations by an
even more dangerous rivalry of vast occupational groups, may become
organised within the structure of the whole and play a part of the greatest
value in the national life.
Part II.
The National Mind and Character
Table of Contents
Chapter VI.
Introductory
Table of Contents
What is a Nation?
Having studied the most general principles of the collective mental life, as
exemplified in the two extreme forms of the unorganised crowd and the
highly organised army, having briefly noted the principal classes of groups
that enjoy a collective mental life, and having examined the nature and
function of the group spirit in the organisation of the group mind, we may
now take up the study of the most interesting, most complex and most
important kind of group mind, namely the mind of a nation-state42.
Many attempts have been made to define more exactly the popular
notion of a nation. The word has sometimes been applied to large groups of
primitive folk that show evidence of close racial affinity and similarity of
customs, such as the Iroquois tribes of North America, or the Hun invaders
of medieval Europe. In popular usage the word is more commonly
restricted to the great nation-states of modern times. It must be recognised
that, since human societies of present and past times present every
conceivable variety of composition and structure, it is impracticable to lay
down any strict definition and to classify populations as falling definitely
within or outside the class.
But, though we may not hope to lay down a definition which shall
clearly mark off the nation from all other human groups, we may usefully
define the nation-state or nation in the most highly developed form that it
has yet attained, and recognise that various peoples partake of the nature of,
or approach the type of, the nation in so far as they exhibit something of its
essential character.
It is perhaps hardly necessary to point out that it is only in the nation-
state, or nation in the fullest sense of the word, that the state becomes
identical with the nation, and that this identification has only been achieved
in modern history by the growth among a few peoples of representative
institutions and the democratic spirit.
In the work mentioned above Prof. Ramsay Muir writes—“What do we
mean by a Nation? It is obviously not the same thing as a race, and not the
same thing as a state. It may be provisionally defined as a body of people
who feel themselves to be naturally linked together by certain affinities
which are so strong and real for them that they can live happily together, are
dissatisfied when disunited, and cannot tolerate subjection to peoples who
do not share these ties43.” The provisional definition has the merit of
recognising that nationhood is essentially a mental condition and must be
defined in psychological terms. The author goes on to inquire—“What are
the ties of affinity which are necessary to constitute a nation?” He then
considers the following conditions: (1) “occupation of a defined
geographical area,” (2) “unity of race,” (3) “unity of language,” (4) “unity
of religion,” (5) “common subjection, during a long stretch of time, to a
firm and systematic government,” (6) “community of economic interest,
with the similarity of occupations and outlook which it brings,” (7) “the
possession of a common tradition, a memory of sufferings endured and
victories won in common, expressed in song and legend, in the dear names
of great personalities that seem to embody in themselves the character and
ideals of the nation, in the names also of sacred places wherein the national
memory is enshrined.” Of the last he says that it is “the most potent of all
nation-moulding factors, the one indispensable factor”; thus showing his
sense of the essentially psychological nature of nationhood. But of all the
other six ‘factors’ enumerated, he shows that they are unessential. After
reaching this negative conclusion, that nationhood cannot be defined by any
one of these marks or factors, he writes: “Nationality, then, is an elusive
idea, difficult to define. It cannot be tested or analysed by formulæ, such as
German professors love. Least of all must it be interpreted by the brutal and
childish doctrine of racialism. Its essence is a sentiment, and in the last
resort we can only say that a nation is a nation because its members
passionately and unanimously believe it to be so. But they can only believe
it to be so if there exist among them real and strong affinities; if they are not
divided by any artificially maintained separation between the mixed races
from which they are sprung; if they share a common basis of fundamental
moral ideas, such as are most easily implanted by common religious beliefs;
if they can glory in a common inheritance of tradition; and their nationality
will be all the stronger if to these sources of unity they add a common
language and literature and a common body of law. If these ties, or the
majority of them, are lacking, the assertion of nationality cannot be made
good. For, even if it be for the moment shared by the whole people, as soon
as they begin to try to enjoy the freedom and unity which they claim in the
name of nationality, they will fall asunder, and their freedom will be their
ruin.” In the last sentence the author clearly shows that the conclusion at
which he seemed to have arrived, namely that “a nation is a nation because
its members passionately and unanimously believe it to be so,” is untenable.
At the present time there are populations claiming the rights of nationality
just upon this fallacious ground; a fact which illustrates the importance of
achieving some satisfactory definition of nationhood. Indeed at the present
moment, when Europe is being remoulded by the Paris Conference, the
need for clear notions and some working definition of nationhood has
acquired a most urgent importance. For, as our author remarks, “we say,
loosely, that every nation has a right to freedom and unity,” and the
principle of “self-determination of nations” has become almost universally
accepted as a kind of moral axiom of political justice; and this axiom is
being applied to determine the political boundaries of the world now and
for all time. Yet how can we hope to make a proper use of this principle, if
we cannot define a nation, if a modern historian, who has devoted himself
to the study of nationality, finds himself compelled in the year 1917 to give
up the attempt to define the meaning of the term nation? For that is the issue
of Prof. Ramsay Muir’s interesting discussion. “We have not attained,” he
confesses, “in this discussion any very clear definition of nationality, or any
very satisfactory test of the validity of the claims put forward for national
freedom. We are not to base the doctrine of nationality upon abstract rights.
We must recognise that there is no single infallible test of what constitutes a
nation, unless it be the peoples’ own conviction of their nationhood, and
even this may be mistaken or based upon inadequate grounds44.” And the
dire consequences of this failure are made clear on the following page
—“There seems no escape from the conclusion that nationhood must
mainly determine itself by conflict. That conclusion appears to be the moral
of the history of the national idea in Europe.” Which is as much as to say
that, when any population declares itself to be a nation and claims the rights
of nationhood, the Statesmen of the Paris Conference are to reply—“We do
not know whether your claim is well-founded; for the historians and
political philosophers cannot tell us the meaning of the word ‘nation.’ Go to
and fight, and, if you survive, we shall recognise the ‘fait accompli’ and hail
you a Nation.”
I have dwelt at some length on this perplexity of the historian, grappling
with the task of defining nationhood, because it illustrates so well a fact on
which I wish to insist—namely, that it is not sufficient for the historian and
the political philosopher to be willing to recognise the mental factors in the
phenomena with which he deals. It is necessary to recognise that these
factors are of overwhelming importance, and that they cannot be
satisfactorily dealt with by aid of the obscure and confused psychological
concepts of popular thought and speech. We must recognise these political
problems for what they truly are—namely, psychological through and
through, and only to be attacked with some hope of success if we call to our
aid all that psychological science can give us. This conclusion cannot fail to
be unpalatable to very many workers in this field; for it implies that
equipment for such work demands some additional years of preparatory
study. But, it may fairly be asked, if the medical man must devote six years
to the intensive study of the human body, before he is permitted to practise
upon it, and even then without any scientific knowledge of the human mind,
should not he who would practise upon the body politic, in which not
merely the bodies but the minds of men interact in the most subtle and
complex fashion, prepare himself for his exalted task by an even more
extended course of study?
Prof. Ramsay Muir has the merit of recognising the essentially
psychological nature of his problem; for his provisional definition (cited
above) is wholly psychological, and he tells us that the essence of
nationality is a sentiment; but he reveals the inadequacy of his
psychological equipment by telling us in the same paragraph that its essence
is a belief, the belief that they are a nation, passionately and unanimously
held by the members of some group. If we look again at the list of seven
proposed marks of nationhood, we shall see that they are rather of the
nature of conditions favourable to the growth of nationhood; and, as we
shall find, this list may be considerably enlarged. He comes nearest to the
truth perhaps when he says “its essence is a sentiment.” But he does not
attempt to tell us what is the nature of this sentiment, nor even what is its
object.
We may imagine a group of people of considerable magnitude, say the
Mormons, or the Doukhobors, the Swedenborgians, or the Christian
Scientists, withdrawing themselves to some defined territory, in order to
form themselves into a nation; then, although each of the seven conditions
enumerated by Prof. Ramsay Muir might be realised, and even though the
community possessed the two conditions described by him as the essence of
nationality—namely, a strong sentiment (presumably one of loyalty to the
group) and a passionate belief in its nationality—it would, in the absence of
other essential conditions, lamentably fall short of being a nation and would
suffer the fate indicated; namely “as soon as they begin to try to enjoy the
freedom and unity which they claim in the name of nationality, they will
fall asunder, and their freedom will be their ruin45.”
What, then, is the essential condition for lack of which any such people
would fall short of nationhood? What is the factor which has escaped the
analysis of Prof. Ramsay Muir? The answer must be—organisation; not
material organisation, but such mental organisation as will render the group
capable of effective group life, of collective deliberation and collective
volition. The answer to the riddle of the definition of nationhood is to be
found in the conception of the group mind. A nation, we must say, is a
people or population enjoying some degree of political independence and
possessed of a national mind and character, and therefore capable of
national deliberation and national volition. In this and the succeeding
chapters we have to examine the nature of such national mind and character,
to give fuller meaning to these vague popular terms, and to study the way in
which various conditions of national life contribute to their development.
Nationhood is, then, essentially a psychological conception. To
investigate the nature of national mind and character and to examine the
conditions that render possible the formation of the national mind and tend
to consolidate national character, these are the crowning tasks of
psychology.
Let me remind the reader at this point of the general sense of the words
mind and character. The two words really cover the same content; when we
speak of the individual mind or character, we mean the organised system of
mental or psychical forces which expresses itself in the behaviour and the
consciousness of the individual man. Any such organised system has two
aspects or sides which, though intimately related, maybe considered
abstractly as distinct—namely, the intellectual or cognitive aspect and the
volitional, conative, or affective aspect. When we use the word ‘mind’ in
speaking of any such system, we give prominence to its intellectual side;
when we say ‘character’ we draw attention to its conative or affective side.
The group mind of a nation is a mind in the sense that, like the mind of the
individual, it is an organised system of mental or psychical forces; and, like
the individual mind, it also has its intellectual and its affective sides or
aspects. And this remains true whether or no there be any truth in that
notion of the ‘collective consciousness’ as a synthesis of minor
consciousnesses which we have provisionally rejected46; that is to say, we
accept unreservedly the notion of the collective mind, while suspending
judgment upon the notion of ‘collective consciousness,’ until we shall find
that this hypothesis is, or is not, required for the interpretation of the facts.
It will be observed that we are getting far away from the old-fashioned
conception of psychology which limited its province to the introspective
description of the contents of the individual’s consciousness. The wider
conception of the science gives it new tasks and new branches, of which the
study of the national mind is one. Like the main trunk of psychology and
most of its branches, this branch has to become an empirical science which
shall take the place of what has long been regarded as a branch of
speculative philosophy and pursued by the deductive a priori methods of
philosophy. In this case the branch of philosophy in question has generally
been called the Philosophy of History. It has been well said by Fouillée that
the Philosophy of History of the past is related to the psychological social
science, that is now beginning to take shape, as alchemy was related to
chemistry, or astrology to astronomy. That is to say, it was a realm of
obscure and fanciful ideas, of sweeping and ill-based assumptions and
slipshod reasoning. It was an elaborate attempt “to lay the intellect to rest
on a pillow of obscure ideas.”> The task of scientific analysis and research
was avoided by bringing in, as the main explanatory principles or causal
agencies, vaguely conceived entities regarded as presiding over the
development of peoples—such entities as Providence, or the Destiny of
nations, the Genius of a people, or the Instinct of a nation, the Unconscious
Soul of a people, or the Spirit of the Age; and, when the problem was to
account for some great secular change, for example, some change of
national character, nothing was commoner than to appeal to Time itself, and
thus to make of this most empty of all abstractions a directive agency and
an all powerful cause of change. The strictly national gods of various
nations were popular conceptions of this order; the gods who directly
intervened in battles and enabled their chosen peoples to smite their
enemies hip and thigh so that not one was left alive. Of this class the “good
old German god” of the late German emperor was, it may be hoped, the last
example.
In a less crude form similar hypotheses of direct supernatural
intervention have been seriously maintained in modern times. Thus the poet
Schiller argued as follows—“The individuals of whom a nation is
composed are dominated by egoism, each seeking only his own good, yet
their actions somehow secure the good of the whole; hence we must believe
that the history of a people unrolls itself beneath the glance of a wisdom
that looks on from afar, that knows how to control the ill-regulated caprices
of liberty by the laws of a directing necessity and to make the particular
ends pursued by individuals subservient to the unconscious realisation of a
general plan.”
In estimating the claims to consideration of a doctrine of this sort, we
must put aside its deleterious moral effects, the fact that its acceptance
would necessarily tend to weaken our sense of responsibility, to paralyse
altruistic effort, and to justify purely egoistic conduct. We have to consider
only its truth or probability in the light of history. When we do that, it
appears merely as a fictitious solution of the larger problems of social
science, a solution which may relieve us of the necessity of intellectual
effort, but which brings no enlightenment and is supported by no serious
argument. The one argument advanced is a libel on human nature; for it
denies the reality and efficacy of the disinterested social efforts of the
leaders of humanity, to which its progress has been in the main due; and it
ignores the great mass of human activity due to the group spirit with its
fusion of egoistic and altruistic motives. Further, it ignores the fact that the
history of the world is not merely the history of the rise of nations, but
rather of the perpetual rise and fall of nations. When we are told that a
power of this sort has constantly intervened in the course of history, and
that the rise of peoples has been due to its guidance, we may fairly ask—
Why has it repeatedly withdrawn its support, just when civilisation has
achieved such a degree of development as might have rendered possible the
flowering of all the finer capacities of human nature and the alleviation of
the hard lot of the great mass of men? If the contemplation of the course of
history compelled us to believe that such a power intervenes, we should
certainly have to regard it as a malign power that delights in mocking
human efforts by first encouraging and then bringing them to naught.
Very similar is the rôle in history assigned by von Hartmann to his
‘Unconscious.’ “It carries away the peoples that it dominates,” says von
Hartmann, “with a demoniac power towards unknown ends; it teaches them
the way that they must take; though they often believe themselves to be
marching towards a goal very different from that to which they are being
conducted.”
Others maintain that the great men of a nation, who are the principal
agents in moulding its destiny, are in some mystical sense the products and
expressions of the ‘unconscious soul’ of the people, that they are the means
by which its ideas are realised, through which they become effective; and
they usually make the assertion, altogether unwarranted by history, that the
moment of great need in the life of a people always produces a great man or
hero to lead the people through the crisis. That is, or may appear to be, true
of those peoples that have survived to pass into history. But what of those
peoples that have gone down, leaving no trace of all their strivings, beyond
some mounds of rubble, some few material monuments, or some strange
marks on brick or stone or rock?
All such assumptions are the very negation of science. We have no right
to appeal to such obscure and mystical powers, until by prolonged effort we
shall have exhausted the possibilities of understanding and explanation in
terms of known forces and conditions47.
On the other hand, a number of writers have sought to interpret the
course of history and the rise and fall of nations in a more scientific
manner; but most of these have studied some one aspect of national life,
and have professed to find in that one aspect the key which shall unlock all
doors and solve all problems. Thus some, adopting the notion of a variety of
human races, each endowed with a certain peculiar and unalterable
combination of qualities, seek to explain all history by the aid of biological
laws, especially the Darwinian principles, as a struggle for survival between
individuals and between races. Others, like Karl Marx and Guizot, see in
economic conditions and the struggles between the social classes within
each nation, the all important factors. Others again, like Montesquieu and to
some extent Buckle and more recently Matteuzzi, have seen in the
influences of physical environment the key to the understanding of
differences of national character and history; while others profess to have
found it in differences of religious system, or of the forms of government
and systems of laws. Others again, like le Bon48, in a few dominant ideas
which, they say, being possessed by any nation (or possessing a nation)
determine its character and civilisation. All these are exaggerations of
partial truths; and in opposition to all of them it must be laid down that the
understanding of the mind of a nation is an indispensable foundation for the
interpretation of its history.
Just as there are two kinds of psychology of individuals, so there are
two kinds of psychology of peoples. There is the individual psychology
which is primarily descriptive, which is the biography of persons, and
whose aim is to impart an accurate conception of the general tendencies of a
person and of the course of his development. And there is the psychology
whose aim is to explain in general terms the conduct of individual men in
general by the aid of conceptions and laws of general validity. The former,
of course, was developed much earlier than the latter, which is in the main
of quite modern growth. As this explanatory psychology develops, its
principles begin to find application in the sphere of biographical or
individual psychology, raising it also to the explanatory plane.
Just so there are two parallel kinds of psychology of peoples. There is
the descriptive psychology of the tendencies of particular peoples, the
biography of nations and peoples, which is what commonly is meant by
‘history’; and there is the psychology which seeks to explain in general
terms how these tendencies arise, which seeks the general laws of which
these diverse national tendencies are the outcome.
This last is the modern science which is beginning to take shape and to
undertake the task so inadequately dealt with by the so-called Philosophy of
History. It is essentially a branch, and by far the most important part, of
Group Psychology49. Now individual psychology tends more and more to
be a genetic psychology; because we do not feel that we really understand
the individual mind, until we know how it has come to be what it is, until
we know something of its development and racial evolution. Just so the
explanatory psychology of peoples must be a genetic psychology. Here it
differs from individual psychology in that the distinction between
individual development and racial evolution disappears. For the national
mind is a continuous growth; it is not embodied in a temporal succession of
individuals, but in a single continuously evolving organism.
Nevertheless, we may with advantage consider separately (1) the nature
of the general conditions necessary to the existence and operation of a
national mind; (2) the processes of evolution by which such minds are
formed and their peculiarities acquired. I propose to take up the former
problem in the following chapter.
Chapter VII.
The Mind of a Nation
Table of Contents
We have prepared ourselves for the study of the national mind by our
preliminary examination of the two extreme types of collective mental life,
that of the quite unorganised group, the simple crowd, on the one hand, that
of a very highly organised group, the army, on the other hand. We have seen
that in the former type the collective actions imply a collective mental life
much inferior, both intellectually and morally, to that of the average
component individuals; and that in the other type they imply a collective
mental life and capacities much superior to those of the average individual.
The mind of any nation occupies some intermediate position in the scale
of which these are the extreme types; and it differs from both in being
immensely more complex, and also in that the influence of the past
dominates and determines to a much greater extent the mental life of the
present.
The study we have already made of collective mental life will enable us
to understand what we mean, or ought to mean, when we speak of national
character. There are two senses in which this phrase is used, and they are
often confused. On the one hand, the phrase may be used to denote the
character of individuals who are taken to be typical representatives or
average specimens of their nations. On the other hand, it may be taken to
mean the character of the nation as a collective whole or mind. These two
things are by no means the same; they are rather very different. We saw that
this was true in the case of the crowd and also of the army; and it is true in a
still higher degree of the nation than of any other social aggregate, just
because the influence of its past over its present is greater than in any of the
others. It is in the second and preferable sense that Fouillée uses this
expression. He writes—“The national character is not the simple sum of the
individual characters. In the bosom of a strongly organised nation, there are
necessarily produced reciprocal actions between the individuals which issue
in a general manner of feeling, thinking and willing very different from that
of the individuals existing in isolation, or even from the sum or resultant of
all the mental actions of isolated individuals. The national character is not
simply the average type which one would obtain if one could imitate for
minds the procedure adopted by Galton in the case of faces and so obtain a
collective or generic image. The face which the process of compound
photography produces exerts no action and is not a cause; while the national
spirit does exert an effect which is different from all effects of individual
minds; it is capable of exerting a sort of pressure and a constraint upon the
individuals themselves; it is not only an effect, but is also in turn a cause; it
is not only fashioned by individuals, it fashions them in turn. The average
type of the Frenchman existing to-day, for example, does not adequately
represent the French national character, because each people has a history,
and ancient traditions, and is composed, as it is said, of the dead even more
than of the living. The French national character resumes the physical and
social actions that have been taking place through centuries, independently
of the present generation, and imposes itself upon this generation through
all the national ideas, the national sentiments and national institutions. It is
the weight of the entire history to which the individual is subjected in his
relations with his fellow citizens. Just, then, as the nation, as a certain social
group, has an existence different from (though not separable from) the
existence of the individuals, so the national character implies that particular
combination of mental forces of which the national life is the external
manifestation50.” That is a precise and admirable statement of what we are
to understand by national mind and character.
We must now consider in turn the principal conditions of the existence
of highly developed national mind and character, and first those which, as
we have seen, are essential to all collective mental life.
A certain degree of mental homogeneity of the group, some similarity of
mental constitution of the individuals composing it, is the prime condition.
The homogeneity essential to a nation may be one of two kinds, native or
acquired; both of these are usually combined, but one of them predominates
in some nations, the other in others.
In considering racial or native homogeneity, we touch upon one aspect
of a much disputed question, the influence of race on national character and
history, in regard to which the greatest diversity of opinion has prevailed
and still prevails. A correct estimate of this influence is of fundamental
importance. I have stated elsewhere the view I take51, but we must consider
the question more fully here. On the one hand are those who would explain
all differences of national character and action, all success and failure of
nations, as arising from racial composition. This view is the basis of much
of the ill-founded national pessimism which, before the Great War, was
widely prevalent among the peoples who speak the Romance or Latin
languages and who are falsely called by these pessimists the Latin races. It
was also the foundation of that overweening national pride which has
corrupted the German people and led them to disgrace and disaster; for,
following Gobineau52 and a host of his disciples, among whom H. S.
Chamberlain is perhaps the most notorious, they had come to believe,
against the most obvious and abundant evidence, that they were the purest
representatives of a race from whose blood all great men and all good
things have come, a race fitted by native superiority to rule all the peoples
of the earth53.
On the other hand, popular humanitarianism would regard all men and
all races as alike and equal in respect of native endowment; and we have
seen so distinguished a sociologist as Durkheim denying any importance or
influence to racial composition of a people. Many others put aside all
explanations based on racial differences as cheap and meretricious means of
avoiding difficulties. J. S. Mill, for example, wrote “Of all vulgar modes of
escaping from the consideration of the effect of social and moral influences
on the human mind, the most vulgar is that of attributing the diversities of
conduct and character to inherent natural differences”; and Buckle, in his
great work on the History of Civilisation, quoted this remark with cordial
approval54.
Both these extreme views are false; the truth lies somewhere in the
midst between them. At the time when Mill and Buckle wrote, biology and
anthropology had not shown, as now they have, the enormous power of
heredity in determining individual character and the great persistence of
innate qualities through numberless generations. Buckle especially
overrated the power of physical environment, and Mill the power of
education and of social environment, to change the innate qualities of a
people; and it was this overestimation that led them, and leads others still,
to underestimate the importance of racial composition. There are involved
in this dispute two theses which are often confused together. When people
speak of the influence of ‘race’ on national character and institutions, they
may, and sometimes do, mean by ‘race’ the sum of innate inborn qualities
or tendencies of the people at any given point of history. On the other hand,
by influence of race they may mean the influence of the prehistoric races
which have entered into the social composition of the nation—that is, those
races from which its population is descended. Some authors mean to deny
importance to race in both these senses; Buckle and Mill and Durkheim
meant, I think, to deny it in both, because they believed that human nature
is very plastic and easily moulded as regards its innate qualities by its
environment; they believed that, if only a system of institutions, especially
educational institutions, adapted to promote the intellectual and moral
development of each generation of a people, can be established among it,
then the influence of such institutions will so vastly predominate over that
of innate qualities that these become a negligible quantity. From this it
would follow that we should expect to see any two or more populations
endowed with similar institutions form nations of similar character which
will continue to develop along similar lines, except in so far as minor
unessential differences of physical environment produce differences of
modes of occupation, dress, food and so forth.
This view of the insignificance of innate qualities was in harmony with,
and was determined by, the dominant psychological doctrine of the time;
the view which came down from Locke, according to which the mind of the
new-born individual is a tabula rasa, entirely similar in all men, without
specific tendencies and peculiarities of any importance, on which individual
experience impresses itself, moulding all its development according to the
principle of the association of ideas.
This doctrine, explicitly or implicitly adopted, has played a great part in
determining British policy in its relations with British dependencies and
their populations, notably India. It is a striking example of the way in which
theory affects practice, and of the danger of our profound indifference to
theory; we are influenced by it though we pretend to ignore it. It is well to
make ourselves clear as to what theories we hold, even if we do not allow
our practice to be governed by them exclusively.
There are commonly confused together, under the head of the influence
of race on national character, three problems which must be disentangled.
(1) Are there differences of innate mental constitution between the
various branches of mankind?
(2) If there are such differences, are these important for national life?
Do they in any considerable degree determine national character? Or are
they capable of being swamped and submerged and altogether over-ridden
by the moulding influences brought to bear by environment on each
generation?
(3) If such innate differences exist, what degree of permanence do they
possess? Do they persist through thousands of years, in spite of vast
changes of physical or cultural conditions? Or may they undergo
considerable modification or complete transformation in the course of a few
generations?
These are questions of fundamental importance. And they admit of no
positive clean-cut answers at the present time. They offer vast fields for
research, and only when prolonged research shall have been directed to
them shall we be able to answer them positively.
In the past, since their importance could not be altogether overlooked, it
has been usual to dispose of them by dogmatically asserting one extreme
view and pouring scornful epithets upon the other extreme view. A principal
task for science in its present stage is to define the questions clearly. It is
not possible, perhaps, to keep them quite separate; for, if there are
considerable differences of innate mental constitution, then their importance
for national character must depend greatly upon their degree of
permanence; and, again, there is the great difficulty of distinguishing
between innate and acquired mental qualities in any individual and still
more in groups.
Nevertheless, we may safely say that both extreme views in regard to
race, the positive and the negative, are gross exaggerations, plausible only
while we ignore one part of the evidence; the truth lies in between
somewhere.
There can, I think, be no reasonable doubt that there are great
differences between races, and that these may be, and in many cases have
been, persistent through thousands of generations.
The recognition that the mind of the human infant is not a tabula rasa,
but that its innate constitution comprises a number of instincts, specifically
directed tendencies to thought, feeling, and action, prepares us to accept this
view and gives us some basis for the definition of these differences.
Whether all differences can be defined in such terms is a further problem.
That they cannot be wholly defined in this way seems to be obvious, when
we consider how quite specialised idiosyncrasies are transmitted in families
through several generations, often with a leap across one generation,
peculiarities of taste and feeling, of aesthetic endowment and temperament,
abilities such as the musical, mathematical and artistic.
When we compare widely different peoples such as the Negro, the
White, and the Yellow, the fact of profound differences cannot be
overlooked. These differences cannot be ascribed to the action of
environment upon each generation. Perhaps the only differences of this kind
which at present are accurately measurable are those of the size and form of
the brain. The negro brain is decidedly smaller than that of the white and
yellow races. And there are small but distinct differences of sensory
endowment which are highly significant. For, if there are racial differences
in these most fundamental and racially oldest endowments, we may expect
still greater differences in the later evolved powers of the mind; although
these are much more difficult to detect and define.
Still, the negro race wherever found does present certain specific mental
peculiarities roughly definable, especially the happy-go-lucky disposition,
the unrestrained emotional violence and responsiveness, whether its
representatives are found in tropic Africa, in the jungles of Papua, or in the
highly civilised conditions of American cities.
The Semitic stock again is one which, though widely scattered, seems to
present certain constant peculiarities. And among closely allied branches of
the white race of similar culture, we can hardly refuse to recognise innate
differences. Differences of temperament are, perhaps, the clearest and the
most generally recognised, even between peoples of allied stock and similar
civilisation. Who can question that Irishmen in general are very different
from Englishmen in temperament, that they are less phlegmatic, more easily
moved to joy, or sorrow, or enthusiasm, more easily touched by poetry, have
a more varied and lively emotional experience? That this is an innate racial
difference seems clear; for it can be accounted for in no other way, and it
obtains in some degree between all communities of similar racial stocks, in
spite of similarities or differences of history and of present conditions. For
example, similar differences, roughly definable as the difference between
the so-called Celtic temperament and the Anglo-Saxon, seem evidently to
obtain between the Breton and the Norman, who represent in the main the
same two stocks.
And, even in intellectual quality, there appear to be not only differences
of degree, but also differences of kind, inexplicable save as racial
differences. The logical deductive tendencies of the French intellect and the
empirical inductive tendency of the English, seem to be rooted in race;
though here of course tradition accumulates and accentuates such
differences from generation to generation.
But the best evidence of persistent innate differences is afforded by
differences and similarities expressed in national life which cannot be
accounted for in any other way. The innate differences and peculiarities of
individuals are largely obscured by these national characteristics. And the
more highly organised the collective life of any people, the more clearly
will it express their racial qualities.
The social environment in a developed nation is in harmony with the
individual innate tendencies, because in the main it is the natural outcome
and expression of those tendencies. For, throughout the history of such a
nation, the elements of its social environment—its customs, beliefs,
institutions, language, its culture in general—have been slowly evolved
under the steady pressure of the individual innate tendencies, which in each
succeeding generation are the same. A part of this culture is of native origin;
a part, in every European nation probably by far the larger part, is of foreign
origin, and has been acquired by the acceptance of ideas and beliefs from
without its borders, by the copying of institutions, customs, arts, from
foreign models. In both cases the idea or custom or other cultural element
only becomes embodied in the national culture through widespread or
general imitation55.
In the case of elements of native origin, it is by imitation of the
individuals of original powers of thought or feeling that the element
becomes embodied in the national culture; in the case of foreign elements,
by imitation of foreign models, acceptance of foreign ideas, through
literature and personal contacts. In both cases, such general imitation will
only take place when the culture-element in question is more or less
congenial to the innate qualities of the bulk of individuals. All other novel
elements will be ignored, or will fail to propagate themselves successfully;
if they obtain a first footing, they will fail to pass beyond the stage of
fashion into that of custom. And, when once accepted, the cultural element
will usually undergo modification in the direction of more complete
harmony with the innate tendencies; its less congenial features will be
allowed to die out, its more congenial will be accentuated from generation
to generation.
The social environment of any civilised people is, then, very largely the
result of a long continued process of selection, comparable with the natural
selection by which, according to the Darwinian theory, animal species are
evolved; a constant favouring of certain elements, a constant rejection of
others. We may in fact regard each distinctive type of civilisation as a
species, evolved largely by selection; and the selective agency, which
corresponds to and plays a part analogous to the part of the physical
environment of an animal species, is the innate mental constitution of the
people. The sum of innate qualities is the environment of the culture-
species, and it effects a selection among all culture variations, determining
the survival and further evolution of some, the extermination of others.
And, just as animal species (especially men) modify their physical
environment in course of time, and also devise means of sheltering
themselves from its selective influence, so each national life, each species
of civilisation, modifies very gradually the innate qualities of the people
and builds up institutions which, the more firmly they are established and
the more fully they are elaborated, override and prevent the more
completely the direct influence of innate qualities on national life.
These principles are illustrated, perhaps, most clearly by the spread and
modification of religious systems among peoples of different races. Take
the case of the Moslem religion, which has gained acceptance among one-
sixth of the population of the world in historic and in fact recent times, and
is still spreading. The leading feature of this system is its acceptance of all
that is and happens as being the will of God, the act of an entirely arbitrary,
inscrutable, and absolutely powerful individual, before which men must
simply bow without question or criticism; it is characterised by its
simplicity and its fatalism. There seems good reason to believe that the
tendency to unquestioning obedience to authority is a strong innate
tendency of most Asiatics (except perhaps the Chinese and their relatives),
far stronger than in most individuals of European peoples; for we see it
expressed in many ways in their institutions and history, both of those who
are and those who are not Moslems56; and Asiatic fatalism has, in fact,
become proverbial. With the causes or origin of this innate quality we are
not now concerned; but, accepting it as a fact, we may note that it is among
Asiatics that Mohammedanism has secured the great mass of its converts;
and that in India, in spite of many minor features that are opposed to the
spirit of Hindooism, it continues to spread largely; while Christianity makes
but little progress. Buddhism on the other hand has almost faded away, after
an initial success in the country of its origin, but has continued to gain
adherents and has become the dominant religion among the yellow peoples
further east, in Burma, China, Thibet, Japan. The Moslem religion, having
been thus accepted in virtue of the fact that its dominant tendency is in
harmony with the strong innate tendency to unquestioning submission to a
supreme will, then accentuates this tendency in all its converts, moulding
their political relations to the same type, so that all recognise one earthly
regent of God; and it has led to the almost complete suppression of any
spark of the spirit of inquiry and scepticism that might otherwise display
itself among these peoples.
Another good illustration of the fact is afforded by the distribution of
the two great divisions of the Christian religion in Western Europe. Among
all the disputes and uncertainties of the ethnographers about the races of
Europe, one fact stands out clearly—namely, that we can distinguish a race
of northerly distribution and origin, characterised physically by fair colour
of hair and skin and eyes, by tall stature and dolichocephaly (i.e. long shape
of head) and mentally by great independence of character, individual
initiative, and tenacity of will. Many names have been used to denote this
type, but the usefulness of most of them has been spoilt through their
application to denote linguistic groups (e.g. Indo-Germanic, Aryan), and by
the false assumption that linguistic groups are racial groups. Hence recently
the term Homo Europaeus, first applied by Linnaeus to this type, has come
into favour; and perhaps it is the best term to use, since this type seems to
be exclusively European. It is also called the Nordic type.
The rest of the population of Europe, with the exception of some
peoples in the extreme north and east of partly mongoloid or yellow racial
origin, seems to be chiefly derived from two stocks. Of these, the one type,
which occupies chiefly the central regions, is most commonly denoted by
the name Homo Alpinus; the other, chiefly in the south, by the name Homo
Mediterraneus. Both are of dark or brunette complexion and the principal
physical difference between them is that the former, H. Alpinus, has a short
broad head (i.e. is brachycephalic) and also is of short stature; while the
latter, H. Mediterraneus, is long-headed like the northern type and is
perhaps taller than H. Alpinus. Mentally both these differ from the northern
or European type in having less independence and initiative, a greater
tendency to rely upon and seek guidance from authority57. Now we find
that the distribution of the Protestant variety of Christianity coincides very
nearly with the regions in which the fair type predominates; while in all
other regions the Roman Catholic or Greek orthodox churches hold
undisputed sway. North and South Germany illustrate the point. And
Motley’s account of the Netherlands shows how closely the line between
Protestant Holland and Roman Catholic Belgium coincides with the line of
racial division. We may note also that ‘Celts’ of Ireland and Scotland early
proved the superior strength of their religious tendencies by sending
missionaries to England.
It would be absurd to hold that this coincidence is fortuitous. It is
clearly due to the assimilation of the form of the religious and ecclesiastical
system to the innate tendencies of the people. The northern peoples have
given the system a turn compatible with the independence of spirit which is
their leading racial quality; and among ourselves the tendency is apt to be
pushed to an anarchical extreme in the rise of numerous small peculiar
sects; this we must connect with the fact that the English represent in
greatest purity the most independent branch of the Northern race.
The peoples among whom the other racial elements predominate have
developed and maintained a religion of authority. And it is clear how, this
differentiation having been achieved, either form of religion favours and
accentuates in the peoples among whom it has become established the
innate tendencies that have shaped it. The religion of authority tends, both
by its general teachings and by the deliberate efforts of its official
representatives, to suppress the spirit of independent thought and inquiry
and action; the Protestant religion, relatively at least, favours the
development of the independent tendencies of individuals. This is not to say
that any individual is a Mohammedan or a Protestant, because he belongs to
this or that race; that would be a parody of my statement. The form of each
man’s religious belief is, in the vast majority of cases, determined for him
by the fact of his growing up within a community in which that form of
belief prevails. My thesis is that in the main the racial qualities of each
community have played a great part in determining which form of belief it
shall accept. If the reader will reflect how, at the time of the Reformation,
various communities hung for a time in the balance, he will see that the
innate differences we have noted may well have played the determining
rôle.
The same facts are illustrated by the political life of the European
peoples. Only those among whom the northern race is predominant have
developed individualistic forms of political and social organisation. Among
the rest there appears clearly the tendency to rely upon the supreme
authority of the state and to look to it for all initiative and guidance, a
tendency to centralised and paternal administration; and this is the same,
whether the external form of the political organisation be a monarchy or a
republic. Thus France, in becoming a republic, did not overthrow the
centralised system perfected by Henry IV, Louis XIV, Richelieu and
Napoleon; for that system was congenial to the innate qualities of the mass
of the people. It is clear that the centralised and therefore rigid system of
government tends to accentuate, among the people subjected to it, their
tendency to rely on authority and to repress individual initiative; while the
other form, such as obtains in this country and still more in the United
States of America, tends to the development of the initiative and
independence of individuals, giving them free scope and throwing them
upon their own resources. Among any people, an institution or other
cultural element that has had a history of this kind will, then, cause a great
development in the mass of individuals of just those innate or racial
tendencies of which it is itself the slowly accumulated result or product.
If a nation is composed from stocks not too diverse, or if the original
stocks have fused by intercrossing and have produced a fairly homogeneous
people; and if this nation has enjoyed a long period of natural evolution
undisturbed by violent influences from outside, conquests or invasions or
immigrations on a great scale; then the social environment will have been
brought in the main into harmony with the innate qualities of the people,
and it will mould the individuals of each generation very strongly,
accentuating and confirming those innate tendencies. This for two reasons.
First, the social environment will be strongly organised and homogeneous;
that is to say, the various elements, the beliefs, customs, institutions, and
arts that go to compose it, will be in harmony with one another and of
strongly marked character; and they will be almost universally accepted by
that people as above criticism. Secondly, the institutions and customs have
not to fight against the innate tendencies of the people in the formation of
the adult minds, but co-operate harmoniously with them.
Now, when authors dispute over the question of the influence of race in
determining the nation, they usually fail to distinguish clearly between the
direct effects and the indirect effects of racial qualities.
Those who, like Mill, attribute to the social environment unlimited
power of moulding individuals and who regard the influence of race as
insignificant, are misled by the contemplation of such nations as we have
been considering, the class of which our own is the most notable example,
nations in which a strongly organised social environment makes in the
direction of the innate tendencies. They overlook the fact that in any such
nation the social environment, the body of institutions and traditions, is in
the main the outcome and expression of these innate tendencies; they fail to
see that the racial tendencies exert their strongest influence on national
thought and action by means of the institutions, customs, and traditions on
the growth of which they have exerted a constant directive pressure
throughout many generations. In order to realise fully the influence of race,
we must consider peoples whose culture and much else that enters into their
social environment has been impressed upon them from without. We then
see how little the social environment can accomplish in the moulding of a
people, when it is not congenial to and in harmony with the racial
tendencies.
The modern world contains certain instructive instances, of which Hayti
is perhaps the most striking. There a circumscribed population of negro race
has had a political and social and religious organisation and the elements of
higher culture impressed upon it by Europeans, in the belief that it would be
possible to construct a social environment which would mould the people.
France, at a time of revolutionary enthusiasm for liberty, equality, and
fraternity, withdrew from the island and granted the people self-
government. The consequence has been a rapid relapse into barbarism and
savagery of the worst kinds58.
It was the ignoring of the importance of race and the overestimation of
the moulding influence of culture and institutions, eloquently voiced by
Lord Macaulay, that led England eighty years ago to set out on the task of
endowing the millions of India with British culture and institutions. The
task has been pursued in a half-hearted manner only; but already we see
some of the incongruity of the results of these efforts; and the best
observers assure us that, were the task accomplished and the reins of a
representative government left in native hands, it would be but a few years
before the whole country would be reduced to a chaotic anarchic condition
no better than that in which we found it. Others go further and assert with
some plausibility that Western culture is positively injurious to the intellect
and moral nature of Indians59.
In the Philippines the Americans seem to have applied similar mistaken
ideas in a reckless fashion in the first years of their administration; with the
result that, according to some accounts, they were in a fair way to plunge
those islands into poverty and debt and chronic rebellion, while failing to
secure affection, trust, or respect for themselves.
We must conclude, then, that innate mental constitution, and therefore
race, is of fundamental importance in determining national character, not so
much directly as indirectly; for it gives a constant bias to the evolution of
the social environment, and, through it, moulds the individuals of each
generation. It will help to make clear the influence of innate qualities, if, by
an effort of imagination, we suppose every English child to have been
exchanged at birth for an infant of some other nation (say the French)
during some fifty years. At the end of that period the English nation would
be composed of individuals of purely French origin or blood; it would have
the innate qualities of the present French nation; and the French nation
would be, in the same sense, English. What would be the effect?
Presumably things would go on much as before for a time. There would be
no sudden transformation of our language, our laws, our religious or
political institutions; and those who make little of the influence of race
might point to this result as a convincing demonstration of the truth of their
view. But gradually, we must suppose, certain changes would appear; in the
course of perhaps a century there would be an appreciable assimilation of
English institutions to those of France at the present day, for example, the
Roman Catholic religion would gain in strength at the cost of the Protestant.
This view has been challenged and described as an extreme view60. But
it is not. Both extreme opposite views continue to be maintained just
because the importance of the indirect cumulative effect of innate qualities
on culture is ignored. The innate qualities are of great importance, but only
in the course of centuries can they exert their full effect on culture.
If then innate qualities have this importance, in what degree are they
permanent? Here again two extreme views remain opposed to one another.
Even as regards physical qualities this is still the case; and the problem is
much more difficult and at the same time infinitely more important as
regards mental qualities. One reason for the belittling of innate qualities by
Mill and Buckle, and for their overweening confidence in the power of
institutions and environment, was the opinion generally prevailing in their
time that, in so far as racial peculiarities exist, they can be modified and
transformed in a few generations by physical and social environment.
But, when, under the influence of Welshman’s theories, the majority of
biologists came to the conclusion that acquired qualities are not transmitted,
the position of the ‘race theorisers’ was immensely strengthened. For
selection, natural or social or artificial, remained as the only recognised
cause of change of racial qualities; and, since it is clear that the
development of civilisation tends to bring to an end the operation of natural
selection, owing to the more efficient shielding of the weaker by the
stronger members of societies, and since no other form of selection seems
to have operated forcibly to change race qualities, it was inferred that race
qualities endure throughout long ages with very little change.
Another revolution of opinion has had a similar effect. One of the old
assumptions which seemed to justify the belief in rapid modifiability of race
qualities was that the difference of culture between ourselves and our
savage ancestors corresponds to, and is the expression of, an almost equally
great difference of innate capacities, intellectual and moral. But this was in
the main a misunderstanding. One well established fact suffices to show its
improbability—namely, the larger size of the brains of Palæolithic men as
compared with our own. Our superiority of civilisation is due to slow
accumulation, each generation adding comparatively little to the mass of
intellectual and moral tradition which it inherits and passes on to later
coming generations. In so far as differences of cultural level are associated
with differences of level of innate intellectual and moral qualities, cultural
superiority must be regarded as the effect, rather than the cause, of innate
mental superiority. There are strong grounds for holding that, in so far as
Europeans are innately superior to negroes, that superiority was achieved
not by means of, and in the process of, the development of, civilisation; but
rather before civilisation began; and that the principal mental differences of
the various human stocks were, like their principal physical differences,
produced in the course of the immensely long ages of human life that
preceded the dawn of civilisation, or at any rate of history, ages compared
with which the historic period is but a very brief span.
This view—namely, that there has been no great change, and certainly
no great increase, of the mental powers of men during the historic period—
was forcibly maintained by Dr A. R. Wallace61. Wallace pointed to the
pyramids of Egypt and other great achievements of earlier civilisations,
such as writing, as evidence of the highly developed intellectual powers of
men thousands of years before the Christian era. He concluded that the men
of the early stone age were probably our equals, intellectually and morally,
in respect to innate qualities.
If, then, so little change of man’s mental constitution has been produced
in the course of many thousand years, even though the growth of
civilisation has so profoundly modified his mode of life and the nature of
his pursuits, that is good evidence of the great persistency of racial mental
qualities. But we have more direct evidence of their persistence. As Wallace
points out, the negro and the yellow races are scattered over many parts of
the earth, and, though these regions present great diversities of physical
environment, men of either of the two races everywhere present the same
mental peculiarities or strong similarities, for example, the Papuan and
African and American negroes. And the characteristic differences between
the two races are not diminished even where, as in the islands of the far
East, they have been subjected to the same physical environment and modes
of life for long periods of time. In the eastern Archipelago, Papuans and
Malayans occupying the same or adjoining islands are cited by Wallace as
illustrating the persistence of racial mental differences; and I can bear out
his remarks from my own observations in that region.
But we must beware of excess in the direction of the unalterability of
race. The dogma of the non-transmissibility of acquired qualities is by no
means established; it seems not improbable that mental acquisitions are so
transmitted in some degree, though with only very slight effect in each
generation. Even now, when the difficulties of the principle of transmission
of acquired qualities are generally understood, almost all those who deal
with the problem of the genesis of mental and physical peculiarities of races
find themselves driven to postulate the principle in order to explain the
facts. And this in itself constitutes evidence of a certain value in support of
the validity of the principle.
Again, we must beware of assuming that there are no selective
processes operating among us. Although natural selection may be almost
inoperative, there may well be at work other forms of selection, social
selections; and these are specially powerful amongst populations of blended
stocks.
Summing up on the durability of racial peculiarities, we may say that
racial qualities are extremely persistent; but that, nevertheless, they are
subject to slow modifications when the conditions of life are greatly
changed, as by emigration, or by changes of climate, or by social
revolutions, and especially among populations of mixed origin.
To return now to the question of mental homogeneity of a population as
a condition of national character and collective mental life. Purity of race is
the most obvious condition of such homogeneity; but few, if any, nations
that have attained any high level of civilisation have been racially
homogeneous; probably for the simple reason that the civilisation of such a
nation would crystallise at an early stage into rigid forms which would
render further progress impossible. This has been the fate of most
civilisations of the past; as Walter Bagehot put it, their cake of custom has
so hardened as to become brittle, incapable of partial modification and
growth, so that, like a crystal, it must either resist completely every
modifying influence or be shattered irretrievably62.
Certainly none of the European nations are racially homogeneous.
Nevertheless, some of them approach homogeneity of innate qualities, or,
rather, the degree of heterogeneity is much less in some than in others.
Consider the case of England. Before the Anglo-Saxon invasion the
population consisted in all probability of a mixture of the northern fair race
with a darker race, probably that of H. Mediterraneus, in some proportion
that we cannot determine, with small islands of H. Alpinus or of stocks
formed by an earlier blending of this with the Nordic race. The Anglo-
Saxon invasion brought great numbers of the pure representatives of the
Northern race of closely allied stocks; and these did not confine themselves
to any one region, but, entering at many points of the south and east coasts,
diffused themselves throughout almost all England, imposing themselves as
masters upon those Britons whom they did not drive out. Ever since that
time a crossing of the stocks has been going on freely, little hindered by
differences of area, language, law, or custom. And, with the exception of
small numbers of the Northern stock, Danes and Normans, the population
has not received any considerable additions since the Saxon invasion.
Now it has been shown by a simple calculation that, given three
generations to the century, each one of us might claim ten million ancestors
in the year 1000 A.D.; while in the fifth century, when this process of
intermarriage began, the number would be enormous, some thousands of
millions; that is, if consanguine marriages had never taken place. These
figures make it clear that, in any mixed population in which intermarriage
takes place freely, the two or more stocks must, after a comparatively brief
period of time, become thoroughly blended, on one condition—namely, that
the cross between the pure stocks is a stable stock, fertile inter se and with
both the parent stocks. There seems to be no doubt that this was the case
with the British and the Anglo-Saxon stocks, and that the English form now
a stable new subrace, or secondary race, in which the qualities of the
northern race predominate. The subrace may be regarded as innately
homogeneous in fairly high degree; not so homogeneous as a people of
unmixed racial origin, or one formed by a blending of more remote date,
but more so than most of the European nations. This is the sense in which
we must understand the word race, in discussing the influence of race upon
national character.
In most of the European countries the original mixture of races has been
greater and the degree of blending less intimate. Thus France has the three
stocks, H. Europaeus, Alpinus, Mediterraneus, all largely represented; but
they have remained in some degree geographically separated in three belts
running east and west63. Hence there are greater innate mental differences
between Frenchmen than between Englishmen. Nevertheless the strength of
the Roman civilisation of Gaul sufficed to abolish differences of language
and institutions and to assimilate the later coming Northmen, Franks and
Normans; while the centralised system of administration, established in
accordance with the innate tendencies of the major part of the population,
has completed the work of a long series of national wars, and has produced
a firmly united nation, bound by common traditions and moulded by
common institutions. The greater centralisation of France seems to have
compensated for the less degree of innate uniformity, so that the French
people is hardly, if at all, less truly a nation than our own.
In our own nation one racial cleft still remains. The Irish have never
undergone that intimate mixture and blending with the Anglo-Saxon stock
which has produced the English subrace; and so they remain an element
which seriously disturbs the harmony of the national mind. And the same is
perhaps true in a less degree of the Welsh people. On the other hand, the
Scottish people, although they enjoyed their independent system of
government for much longer periods than the Irish and Welsh and have a
system of laws and customs differing in many respects from the English,
and indeed may be said to have achieved a considerable degree of
independent nationhood, have nevertheless become thoroughly incorporated
in the British nation; for in the main mass of the Scotch the same Northern
race is the greatly predominant element.
But it is not till we consider such a country as Austria-Hungary that we
see the full importance of homogeneity of a people for the development of a
national mind. There several races and subraces, one at least with a strong
yellow strain, are grouped together under one flag; but they remain
separated by language and by distribution and by tradition, and, therefore,
are but little mixed and still less blended. Under such conditions a national
mind cannot be formed. The elements of different racial stock threaten to
fall apart at any moment64.
Going further afield, contrast India with China, two regions
geographically comparable in area and in density of population and in other
ways. The population of China is the most racially homogeneous of all
large populations in the world. Hence an extreme uniformity of culture and
social environment, which still further accentuates the uniformity of mental
type. Hence, in spite of the imperfection of means of communication, we
find great political stability and a considerable degree of national feeling,
likely to be followed before long by harmonious national thought and action
on the part of this vast nation. The one great distracting and disturbing
factor in the life of China has been the intrusion of the Manchus, a people
of somewhat different race and traditions.
On the other hand, India is peopled by many different stocks, and,
although these are geographically much mixed, they are but very little
blended, owing to the prevalence from early times of the caste system. The
light coloured intellectual Brahman lives side by side with small black folk,
as different physically and mentally as the Englishman and the Hottentot;
and there are also large numbers of other widely differing racial stocks,
including some of yellow race. Hence an extreme diversity of social
environment, save in the case of the Moslem converts, who, however, being
scattered among the rest, do but increase the endless variety of custom,
creed, and social environment. Hence the people of India have never been
bound together in the slightest degree, save purely externally by the power
of foreign conquerors, the Moguls and the British; and hence, even though
nations have begun at various times to take form in various areas, as e.g. the
Sikh nation, they have never achieved any high degree of permanence and
stability and are restricted in area and numbers.
Now let us consider for a moment an apparent exception from the
conclusion to which the foregoing argument seems to point—namely, that
homogeneity of innate qualities is the prime condition of a developed and
harmonious national life.
The most striking exception is afforded by the people of the United
States of America, or the American nation. There we see a great area
populated by immigrants from every part and race of Europe in times so
recent that, although they are pretty well mixed, they are but little blended
by crossing; a considerable part of the population still consisting of actual
immigrants and their children. Here, then, there can be no question of any
homogeneity as regards innate mental qualities. Nevertheless, the people is
truly a nation and, perhaps, further advanced in the evolution of national
consciousness, thought, and action than many other of the civilised peoples.
This we must attribute to homogeneity of mental qualities which is in the
main not innate but acquired, a uniformity of acquired qualities, especially
of all those that are most important for national life.
Following Münsterberg’s recent account of The Psychology of the
American People we may recognise as individual characteristics, almost
universally diffused, a spirit of self-direction and self confidence, of
independence and initiative of a degree unknown elsewhere, a marvellous
optimism or hopefulness both in private and public affairs, a great
seriousness tinged with religion, a humourousness, an interest in the welfare
of society, a high degree of self-respect, and a pride and confidence in the
present and still more in the future of the nation; an intense activity and a
great desire for self-improvement; a truly democratic spirit which regards
all men (or rather all white men) as essentially or potentially equal, and a
complete intolerance of caste.
Such high degree of acquired homogeneity of individual qualities seems
to be due in about equal parts to uniformity of social and of physical
environment, both of which make strongly in the same direction. The
physical environment consists in a great and rich territory, still only
partially developed, a fairly uniform climate, and a uniformity of the
physical products of human labour resulting from the immense
development of the means of communication. The importance of the
physical uniformity we may realize on reflecting that the one great
divergence of physical conditions, the sub-tropical climate of the southern
States, gave rise to the one great and dangerous division of the people
which for a time threatened the harmonious development of the national
life; that is to say, the civil war was due to the divergence of the social
system and economic interests of the southern States resulting from their
sub-tropical climate.
The uniformity of social environment we must ascribe, firstly and
chiefly, to the fortunate circumstance that the first immigrants were men of
one well marked and highly superior type, men who possessed in the fullest
measure the independence of character and the initiative of the fair northern
race, and who firmly established the superior social environment of
individualistic type that had been gradually evolved in England. Secondly,
to the fact that the peopling of the whole country has taken place by
diffusion from this strongly organised initial society; its institutions and
ideas, especially its language, its political freedom, its social seriousness,
being carried everywhere. Thirdly, to the fact that the country was just such
as to give the greatest scope to, and so to develop, these innate tendencies
of the earliest settlers and their successors. Fourthly, to the fact that the
great diffusion of the population of mixed origin has only taken place since
the means of communication have become very highly developed.
Consider, as one example of the effects of the ease of communication
between all parts, the influence of the American Sunday newspapers. These
papers are read on an enormous scale all over the continent; and the bulk of
the contents of those published in different places is identical, being
prepared and printed in New York, or other great city, and then sent out to
be blended with a little local matter in each centre of publication; thus every
Sunday morning vast numbers are reading the same stuff. Lastly, it must be
added, it is largely due to the fact that in the main the population has been
recruited by those elements of different European peoples who shared in
some degree the leading tendencies of the American character,
independence, initiative, energy and hopefulness; for it is only such people
who will tear themselves from their places in an old civilisation and face the
unknown possibilities of a distant continent. In spite of an increasing
proportion of emigrants of a rather unlike type from south-eastern Europe,
there seems good ground for hope that these factors will continue to secure
a sufficient uniformity of acquired qualities, until the diverse elements shall
have been fused by intermarriage to a new and stable subrace, innately
homogeneous.
The Americans are, then, no exception to the rule that the evolution of a
national mind presupposes a certain considerable degree of homogeneity of
mental qualities among the individuals of which the nation is composed.
They merely show that, under peculiarly favourable physical and social
conditions, a sufficient degree of such homogeneity may perhaps be secured
in spite of considerable racial heterogeneity. But the favourable issue of the
vast experiment is not yet completely assured.
There remains in the American people one great section of the
population, namely the negroes and the men of partly negro descent, whose
innate qualities, mental and physical, are so different from those of the rest
of the population, that it seems to be incapable of absorption into the nation.
This section remains within the nation as a foreign body which it can
neither absorb nor extrude and which is a perpetual disturber and menace to
the national life. The only hope of solving this difficult problem seems to lie
in the possibility of territorial segregation of the coloured population in an
area in which it might, with assistance from the American people, form an
independent nation. At present it illustrates in the most forcible manner the
thesis of this chapter.
The geographical peculiarities of the country inhabited by a nation may
greatly favour, or may make against, homogeneity, in so far as this depends
on acquired interests and sentiments.
The division of the territory occupied by a nation by any physical
barrier makes against homogeneity and therefore against national unity;
whereas absence of internal barriers and the presence of well marked
natural boundaries afford conditions the most favourable to homogeneity.
Almost all the great and stable nations have occupied well-defined
natural territories. In Great Britain and Japan the national spirit is perhaps
more developed than elsewhere. How much does Great Britain or Japan
owe this to the insular character of its territory, which from early days has
sharply marked off the people from all others, making of them a well-
defined and closed group, within which free intermarriage has given
homogeneity of innate qualities, and within which a national culture has
grown up undisturbed; so that by mental and physical type, and by
language, religion, tradition and sentiment, the people are sharply marked
off from all others, and assimilated to one another!
A unitary well-defined territory of well marked and fairly uniform
character tends to national unity, not only through making the community a
relatively closed one, but also by aiding the imagination to grasp the idea of
the nation and offering a common object to the affections and sentiments of
the people.
Contrast in this respect the physical characters of England and
Germany. The boundaries of the latter are almost everywhere artificial and
arbitrary and have fluctuated greatly. It would be impossible for a poet to
write of Germany as Shakespeare wrote of England:—
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war;
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
and all the rest of that splendid passage. France, Spain, Italy, Greece,
Denmark, Scandinavia, are all more fortunate than Germany or Austria in
this respect; and the lack of such natural boundaries has been in the past,
and threatens to be in the future, a source of weakness to the German
nation. We may, I think, not improbably attribute, in part at least, to this
circumstance a peculiarity often noticed in German emigrants—namely,
that they rapidly become denationalised and assimilated by the peoples
among whom they settle, and that an Americanised German, for example,
has often less sympathetic feeling for Germany than a foreigner. For, owing
largely to the lack of natural boundaries and the consequent fluctuations
that have occurred, and the mingling and blending with other peoples,
Germany is a less clear-cut conception than Great Britain or France; to be a
German is something much less definite than to be an Englishman or a
Japanese, or even a Frenchman or a Spaniard65. And the presence or lack of
definite natural territorial boundaries operates in a similar way through
many centuries, determining on the one hand historical continuity to a
people as a whole, or on the other hand breaches of historical continuity.
The United States of America afford a fine example of the binding
influence of a well-defined territory; for here the effect is clearly isolated
from racial factors and from slowly accumulated tradition. The Monroe
doctrine is the outward official expression of this effect. The private
individual effect is a sense of part ownership of a splendid territory with a
great future before it. And we are told, I believe truly, that this sense is very
strong and very generally diffused even among immigrants; that it inspires
an unselfish enthusiasm for the work of developing the immense resources
of the country; that this is the idealistic motive of much of the intense
activity which we are apt to ascribe to the love of the ‘almighty dollar’; and
that it is one of the main causes of the rapid assimilation of immigrants to
the national type of mind.
The Chinese nation, again, owes its existence and its homogeneity of
mental and physical type to geographical unity. Roughly, China consists of
the basins of two immense rivers, not separated from one another by any
great physical barrier, but forming a compact territory well marked off save
in the north. It comprises no such partially separate areas as in Europe are
constituted by Spain, or Italy, or Greece, or Scandinavia, or even France;
almost all parts are well adapted for agriculture. Hence, largely, the national
unity and the national sentiment which have long existed, and possibly a
latent capacity for national thought and action.
Perhaps the most striking instance of all is ancient Egypt. There, in the
long strip of land rendered fertile by the waters of the Nile, a people of
mixed origin was long shut up and isolated; there all men felt their
immediate dependence on the same great powers, the great river which
once a year overflows its banks, and the scorching sun which passes every
day across a cloudless sky. There all men looked out on the same unvarying
and unvaried landscape, hoped and feared for the same causes, suffered the
same pains, prayed for the same goods. There was formed one of the most
stable and enduring of nations, whose uniform culture certainly bears the
impress of the uniform monotonous physical environment66.
The other way in which physical environment affects homogeneity is by
determining similarity or difference of occupations and, through them,
similarities or differences of practical interests and of acquired qualities. So
long as such differences are determined in many small areas, the result is
merely a greater differentiation of the parts, without danger to the unity of
the whole nation. But, when the physical differences divide a whole people
into two or more locally separate groups differing in occupation and
interests and habits, they endanger the unity of the whole. There are to-day
many countries in which the distribution of mineral wealth is exerting an
influence of this sort, giving rise to the differentiation of an industrial area
from agricultural areas and a consequent divergence of interests and of
mental habits; notably South Africa, Spain, and Italy.
Great Britain is fortunate in this respect also. Its geological formation
presents on a small scale all the principal strata from the oldest to the most
recent, a fact which secures great diversity within a compact area, an area
too compact to allow of divergences of population being produced by
differences of geological formation; so that it enjoys the advantages of
diversity without its drawbacks. Although a certain degree of differentiation
between north and south may be noted, it is not sharp or great enough to be
dangerous. But let us imagine that coal and iron had been confined to
Scotland. Would there be now the same harmony between the two countries
as actually obtains? The United States of America afford a good illustration
of this principle, as I have already pointed out; the sub-tropical climate of
the southern states gave rise to a differentiation of occupation, and
consequently of ideas and interests and sentiments, which was almost fatal
to the unity of the nation. A similar differentiation between the agricultural
west and the industrial and commercial east seems to be the greatest danger
to the future unity of the nation; and the same may be said of the Canadian
people.
Ireland illustrates well the effects of both kinds of physical influence.
The Irish Channel has perpetuated that difference of race and consequent
difference of religion, which, but for it, would probably have been wiped
out by free intermarriage; while the lack of coal and iron in the greater part
of the country has prevented the spread of industrialism, and has thus
accentuated the difference between the Irish people and the English. And it
is obvious that among the Protestants of Ulster the accessibility of coal and
iron, maintaining a divergence of occupations and of interests which
prevents racial and cultural blending, perpetuates the racial and traditional
differences between them and the rest of the population.
Chapter VIII.
Freedom of Communication as a Condition of
National Life
Table of Contents
Let us consider now very briefly in relation to the life of a nation a second
essential condition of all collective mental life—namely, that the
individuals shall be in free communication with one another. This is
obviously necessary to the formation of national mind and character. It is
only through an immense development of the means of communication,
especially the printing press, the railway and the telegraph, that the modern
Nation-State has become possible, and has become the dominant type of
political organism. So familiar are we with this type, that we are apt to
identify the Nation and the State and to regard the large Nation-State as the
normal type of State and of Nation, forgetting that its evolution was not
possible before the modern period.
In the ancient world the City-State was the dominant type of political
organism; and to Plato and Aristotle any other type seemed undesirable, if
not impossible. For they recognised that collective deliberation and volition
are essential to the true State. Aristotle, trying to imagine a vast city,
remarks—“But a city, having such vast circuit, would contain a nation
rather than a state, like Babylon.” The translator there uses the word
‘nation,’ not in the modern sense, but rather as we use ‘people’ to denote a
population of common stock not organised to form a nation. The limits of
the political organism capable of a collective mental life were rightly held
to be set by the number of citizens who could live so close together as to
meet in one place to discuss all public affairs by word of mouth.
The great empires of antiquity were not nations; they had no collective
mental life. Although the Roman Empire, in the course of its long and
marvellous history, did succeed in generating in almost all its subject
peoples a certain sentiment of pride in and attachment to the Empire, it
cannot be said to have welded them into one nation; for, in spite of the
splendid system of roads and of posting, communication between the parts
was too difficult and slow to permit the reciprocal influences essential to
collective life. As in all the ancient empires, the parts were held together
only by a centralised despotic executive organisation; there was no
possibility of collective deliberation and volition67.
All through history there has obviously been some correlation between
the size of political organisms and the degree of development of means of
communication. At the present time those means have become so highly
developed that the widest spaces of land and sea no longer present any
insuperable limits to the size of nations; and the natural tendency for the
growth of the larger states at the expense of the smaller, by the absorption
of the latter, seems to be increasingly strong. It seems not unlikely that
almost the whole population of the world will shortly be included in five
immense States—the Russian or Slav, the Central European, the British, the
American, and the Yellow or East Asiatic State. The freedom of
communication between the countries of Europe is now certainly sufficient
to allow of their forming a single nation, if other conditions, such as
diversities of racial type and of historical sentiments, would permit it.
Although, then, the platform and the orator and the assembly remain
important influences in modern times, it is primarily the telegraph, wireless
telegraphy, the printing press, and the steam engine, that have rendered
possible the large modern nations; for these have facilitated the
dissemination of news and the expression of feeling and opinion on a large
scale, and the free circulation of persons68.
Without this freedom of communication the various parts of the nation
cannot become adequately conscious of one another; and the idea of the
whole must remain very rudimentary in the minds of individuals; each part
of the whole remains ignorant of many other parts, and there can be no
vivid consciousness of a common welfare and a common purpose. But,
more important still, there can be none of that massive influence of the
whole upon each of the units which is of the essence of collective mental
life. Of these means of reciprocal influence the press is the most important;
though, of course, its great influence is only rendered possible by the
railway and the telegraph.
Hence we find that it is as regards the press that Great Britain and
America differ most markedly from such states as Germany, and still more
Russia. To an Englishman or American the meagre news-sheets which in
Germany take the place of our daily and weekly press bring a shock of
astonishment when he first discovers them; and that astonishment is not
diminished when he finds that the best people hardly trouble to look at them
occasionally69.
It is interesting to note how the general election of January, 1910
illustrated the importance of improved means of communication. It was
found that the number of citizens voting at the polls was a far larger
proportion of those on the register than at any previous election; and, in this
respect, the election was a more complete expression of the will of the
people than any preceding one. This seems to have been due to the use of
the motor-car, at that time the latest great addition to our means of
communication.
The modern improvements of means of communication tend strongly to
diminish the importance of the geographical factors we considered in the
foregoing chapter; for they practically abolish what in earlier ages were
physical barriers to intercourse; they render capital and labour more mobile;
and they make many forms of industry less dependent upon local physical
conditions and, therefore, less strictly confined by geographical factors. As
instances of important developments of this order in the recent past or near
future, the reader may be reminded of the railway over the Andes between
Chile and Argentina, the tunnels through the Alps, the Channel tunnel, the
Siberian railway, the Suez and Panama canals, the Cape to Cairo railway,
and, above all, aerial transport. All these make for free intercourse between
peoples.
Easy means of communication promote development in the direction of
the organic unity of a nation in another way—namely, they promote
specialisation of the functions of different regions; they thus render local
groups incapable of living as relatively independent closed communities;
for they make each local group more dependent upon others, each upon all
and the whole upon each; hence they develop the common interest of each
part in the good of the whole.
This influence already extends beyond national groups and it had been
hoped that its further growth was about to render war between nations
impossible70. To-day England is contemplating a task never before
attempted, the fusing into one nation of the peoples of the mother-country
and her distant colonies. Whether or no she will succeed depends upon
whether the enormously increased facilities of communication can
overcome the principal effects of physical barriers that we have noted—
namely, lack of intermarriage and divergence of occupations, with the
consequent divergence of mental type and interests. The task is infinitely
more difficult than the establishment of such an Empire as the Roman; not
because the distances are greater, but because the union must take the form
of nationhood, because it must take the form of a collective mind and not
that of a merely executive organisation. But, in the considerations which
have shown us that membership in and devotion to a smaller group is by no
means adverse to membership in and devotion to a larger group, we have
ground for believing that the task is not impossible of achievement.
The slow rate of progress towards nationhood of such peoples as the
Russian and the Chinese has been largely due to lack of means of free
communication between the parts of these countries. On the introduction of
improved communications, we may expect to see rapid progress of this
kind; for many of the other essential conditions are already present in both
countries.
The fact that in the Nation-State the communications between
individuals and between the parts of the whole are in the main indirect,
mediated by the press, the telegraph, and the printed word in general, rather
than by voice and gesture and the other direct bodily expressions of thought
and emotion, modifies the primary manifestations of group life in important
ways which we must notice in a later chapter.
Chapter IX.
The Part of Leaders in National Life
Table of Contents
We turn now to a third very important condition of the growth of the
national mind, one which also has its analogue in both the crowd and the
army. A crowd always tends to follow some leader in thought, feeling, and
action; and its actions are effective in proportion as it does so. To follow
and obey a leader is the simplest, most rudimentary fashion in which the
crowd’s action may become more effective, consistent, intelligent,
controlled. Not any one can be such a leader; exceptional qualities are
necessary. In every army the importance of leadership is fully recognised. A
hierarchy of leaders is the essence of its organisation. In the deliberately
organised army, the appointment of leaders is the principal and almost the
sole direct means taken by the State to organise the army. Everything is
done to give to the leaders of each grade the greatest possible prestige,
especially by multiplying and accentuating the distinctions between the
grades. Though much can be accomplished in this way, unless the men
chosen as leaders have in some degree the superior qualities required by
their position in the hierarchy, the whole organisation will be of little value.
The same is true in much higher degree of nations. If a people is to
become a nation, it must be capable of producing personalities of
exceptional powers, who will play the part of leaders; and the special
endowments of the national leader require to be more pronounced and
exceptional, of a higher order, than those required for the exercise of
leadership over a fortuitous crowd.
Such personalities, more effectively perhaps than any other factors,
engender national unity and bring it to a high pitch. There are regions in
which the other main conditions of national unity have long obtained, but
which have failed to become the seat of any enduring nation. Although the
greater part of Africa, perhaps the richest continent of the globe, has been in
the possession of the negro races during all the ages in which the European,
Asiatic, and American civilisations were being developed, those races have
never founded a nation. Nevertheless many, perhaps most, negroes are
capable of acquiring European culture and of turning it to good account.
And, when brought under the influence of Arabs or men of other races, they
have formed rudimentary nations71. The incapacity to form a nation must be
connected with the fact that the race has never produced any individuals of
really high mental and moral endowments, even when brought under
foreign influences; and it would seem that it is incapable of producing such
individuals; the few distinguished negroes, so called, of America—such as
Douglas, Booker Washington, Du Bois—have been, I believe, in all cases
mulattoes or had some proportion of white blood. We may fairly ascribe the
incapacity of the negro race to form a nation to the lack of men endowed
with the qualities of great leaders, even more than to the lower level of
average capacity. On the other hand, there is at least one people which, in
the absence of every other condition, has continued to retain something of
the character of a nation for many generations—namely, the Jews. The Jews
are not even racially homogeneous, and they are scattered through all the
world under the most varied physical conditions; yet the influence of a
succession of men of exceptional power, Moses and his successors the
prophets, all devoted to the same end—namely, the establishment of the
Jewish nation and religion—has lived on through many generations and still
holds this people together, marking it off from all others.
This is an extreme instance. But another almost equally striking case is
that of the Arab nation, which has owed its existence to one man. The Arab
nation was made by the genius of Mahomet, who welded together, by the
force of his personality and the originality and intensity of his religious
conviction, the warring idolatrous clans of Arabia. Until his advent these
had been a scattered multitude, in spite of racial and geographical
uniformity, geographical isolation, and fairly free intercommunication. We
have here one of the purest, clearest instances of the effect of great
personalities in furthering nationhood; for there seems to be no reason to
believe that, if Mahomet had not lived, any such development of the
Arabian people would have taken place.
M. le Bon has produced a curious piece of evidence bearing on this
question. He has measured the cranial capacity of a great number of skulls
of different races, and has shown that any large collection of skulls from
one of the peoples who have formed a progressive nation invariably
contains a certain small number of skulls of markedly superior capacity,
implying exceptionally large brains; while any similar collection of skulls
from one of the unprogressive peoples, like the negro, differs, not so much
in the smaller average size of the brain, as in the greater uniformity of size,
that is to say, the absence of individuals of exceptionally large brains72. He,
rightly, I think, sees in the absence of such individuals a main condition of
the unprogressive character of these races; and, in the exceptionally large
brains produced among the other peoples, a main condition of their
progress.
These indications are borne out by a review of the history of any nation
that has achieved a considerable development. Every such people has its
national heroes whom it rightly glorifies or worships; for to them it owes in
chief part its existence.
To them also it owes in large measure the forms of its institutions, its
religion, its dominant ideas and ideals, its morals, its art and literature, all
that of which it is most proud, all its victories of peace as well as of war, the
memory of which and the common pride in which is the strongest of all
national bonds73.
Who can estimate the enormous influence of Confucius and Laotse in
moulding and rendering uniform the culture of China? The influence of
single individuals has undoubtedly been greater in the early than in the later
stages of civilisation; for there was then a more open field, a virgin soil, as
it were, for the reception of their influence. In the developed nation the
mass of accumulated knowledge and tradition is so much greater, that the
modifications and additions made by any one man necessarily are relatively
small.
The leading modern nations owe their position to their having produced
great men in considerable numbers; for that reason also no one man stands
out so prominently as Mahomet or Confucius or Moses. Nevertheless their
existence can in many cases be traced to some few great men. Would
Germany now be a nation, but for Frederick the Great and Bismarck?
Would America, but for Washington, Hamilton, and Lincoln? Would Italy,
but for Garibaldi and Mazzini and Cavour? How greatly is the unity of
national spirit and tradition among Englishmen due to the great writers who
have produced the national literature, and to the great statesmen and
soldiers and sailors who have given her a proud position in the world! What
would England be now if Shakespeare, Newton and Darwin, Cromwell and
Chatham, Marlborough and Nelson and Wellington had never been born?
And it is not only the men of great genius who are essential to the
modern nation, but also men of more than average powers, though not of
the very highest.
Let us try to imagine the fifty leading minds in each great department of
activity suddenly removed from among us. That will help us to realise the
extent to which the mental life of the nation is dependent on them. Clearly,
we should be reduced to intellectual, moral, and aesthetic chaos and nullity
in a very short time. If a similar state of affairs should continue for some
few generations, Britain would very soon cease to be of any importance in
the world. The force of national traditions might keep up a certain unity; but
we should be a people, or a crowd, living in the past, without energy,
without pride in the present or hope in the future, having perhaps a little
melancholy national sentiment, but incapable of national thought or action.
The continuance of the power and prosperity and unity of national life,
the continued existence of the national mind and character, depends, then,
upon the continued production of numbers of such men of more than
average capacity. It is these men who keep alive from generation to
generation, and spread among the masses and so render effective, the ideas
and the moral influence of the men of supremely great powers. These men
exert a guidance and a selection over the cultural elements which the mass
of men absorb. They praise what they believe to be good, and decry what
they believe to be bad; and, in virtue of the prestige which their exceptional
powers have brought them, their verdict is accepted and moulds popular
opinion and sentiment.
Consider how great in this way has been the influence of men like
Carlyle, Matthew Arnold, and Ruskin. The tone and standard of taste,
thought, and sentiment are set and maintained by such men. It is in their
minds chiefly that the system of ideals and sentiments, which are the
guiding principles and moving forces of the national mind, is perpetuated.
They are truly ‘the salt of the earth’; without them the nation would soon
fall into fragments, or become an inert and powerless mass of but low
degree of organisation and unity.
It is because the national ideals and sentiments are formed by these
leading spirits, and are perpetuated and developed by them, and by them
impressed in some degree upon the mass of the people, and because in all
national movements their influence predominates, that the judgments and
actions, the character and the sentiments, of a nation may be different from,
and in the higher nations are superior to those of the average men of the
nation. As Fouillée said—“The national character is not always best
expressed by the mass, by the vulgar, nor even by the actual majority. There
exists a natural élite which, better than all the rest, represents the soul of the
entire people, its radical ideas and its most essential tendencies. This is what
the politicians too often forget74.” That is to say, it is what they forget when,
as is too often the case in this country, they consider that no movement must
be undertaken till the mass of the people demands it. They ignore the fact
that leadership is essential to the maintenance of national life at a high
level, and, instead of exercising initiative, they wait for it to come from
below—wait for a mandate, as they say. The late President Rooseveldt was
a fine example of the contrary type of statesmanship. The character of the
talents displayed by these exceptionally gifted individuals determines
largely the form of the civilisation and, through shaping the social
environment, tends to bring the minds of the mass of individuals more or
less into harmony with it, giving them something of the same tendencies.
The men of genius of certain peoples, more especially peoples of
relative racial purity, have excelled in some one direction. Thus the Semites
have produced great religious teachers and little else, and have given to the
world its three great monotheistic religions. The Tartar race has produced
from time to time great soldiers and little else. It has made immense
conquests and established dynasties ruling over other peoples. But, as in the
case of the Turks, who owe their national existence to a line of great despots
of the house of Othman, they make little progress in civilisation and they do
not unify the peoples they rule; for they produce ability of no other kind.
We see in most of the leading European nations the predominance of
certain forms of genius. Modern Italy boasts chiefly men great in religion
and art, perhaps owing to the predominance of Homo Mediterraneus; Spain
in pictorial art and military conquest; England in poetry and administration
and science; Germany in music and philosophy. Nevertheless, each of these
peoples has produced men of the greatest power in all or several kinds; and
this we may connect with the fact that they are all of very mixed racial
composition. And we may add that France, the most composite or mixed
racially, has produced the greatest variety of genius.
The production of the largest numbers of eminent men by peoples of
mixed and blended racial elements, not too widely different, is what
biological knowledge would lead us to expect. For, if a subrace is produced
by crossing of varieties, it will be one of much greater variability than a
pure race; as we see in the cases of the domesticated horse and dog and
pigeon, of which the modern varieties are only kept pure by continual
rejection of the departures from the standards, and of which the great
variability renders possible the production, by selection of very marked new
features in a brief period of time.
The many elements which go to form the mental constitution of an
individual become, in a mixed race, variously combined. If the crossed
races are very widely different, the results seem to be in nearly all cases
bad. The character of the cross-bred is made up of divergent inharmonious
tendencies, which give rise to internal conflict, just as the physical features
appear in bizarre combination; what examples we have—the Spanish
Americans, the Eurasians, the Mulattoes, the half-breeds of Java and
Canada—seem to show that a people so composed will produce few great
men and will not become a great nation.
But, when the crossed races are less widely divergent, the elements of
which the mental constitution is composed (and which direct observation
and analogy with physical heredity show to be transmitted more or less
independently of one another from parent to offspring) have opportunities
to come together in new combinations, which result in mental constitutions
unlike those of either parent (that is to say, the cross-breds are variable); and
among these new combinations, while some will form minds below the
average, others will form minds above the average in various degrees; and
these, so long as the constitution is not too much weakened by radical lack
of harmony of its elements, will be the effective great men.
Incidentally, these considerations perhaps throw light on a fact much
discussed—namely, that exceptional powers, especially when of highly
specialised nature, are often exhibited by persons of unstable mental
constitution; whence arises the popular belief that genius is allied to, or is a
form of, insanity.
These considerations also raise a presumption that peoples derived by
the blending of several stocks may be expected to have progressed further
in civilisation and in national growth than those of purer stock; and that,
while the racial purity of a people may give stability, such a people will be
liable to arrest and crystallisation of civilisation at an early stage, before
culture is sufficiently advanced to render possible a highly developed
national life. These indications are well borne out by a survey of the peoples
of the world. We may see here, in all probability, one of the main causes of
the early crystallisation of Chinese civilisation. Homogeneity and racial
purity have produced extreme stability, but at the cost of the variability
which produces great and original minds, and, therefore, at the cost of
capacity for national progress beyond an early stage.
Chapter X.
Other Conditions of National Life
Table of Contents
In the two foregoing chapters, we have considered in relation to the life of
nations three principal conditions essential to all collective mental life and
action, even that of the unorganised crowd—namely, homogeneity, free
communications and leadership. We have now to consider other conditions
which may render the collective mental processes of nations very different
from, and superior to, those of a mere crowd.
In considering a patriot army as exemplifying collective life of a
relatively high level, we distinguished five principal conditions that raise it
above the level of the mental life of the crowd, in addition to one which is
present in some crowds. This last was a common well-defined purpose
present to, and dominant in, the minds of all individuals. It is this condition
mainly that renders the collective mental life of such an army so simple, so
relatively easy to understand, and so extremely effective.
This condition—a clearly defined common purpose dominant in the
minds of the great mass of the constituent units—is for the most part
lacking in the life of nations; its absence is one of the principal reasons for
the ineffectiveness and bewildering complexity of their mental life. It is,
however, occasionally realised in national life, and then we see how
immense is its influence. Such an occasion is a war for national existence.
Consider how, when the excesses of the French Revolution excited all the
monarchies of Europe to attack France, the French nation, becoming
animated with the one strong purpose of asserting its right to exist and to
choose its own form of government, successfully drove back all its enemies
and rose to a height of power and glory greater than at any other period; and
how, at the same time, its parts were welded more firmly together, so that it
displayed a high degree of unity as well as of efficiency. Having achieved
this high degree of unity and efficiency, the French nation, led on by the
ambitions of Napoleon, became aggressive. And we are told by the
historians that the attacks of Napoleon upon the various European peoples,
which threatened to destroy whatever degree of national life those peoples
had attained, were like the blows of a smith’s hammer and resulted in
welding together and hardening into nations the loosely aggregated races
ruled over by the various monarchs; and that in this way these attacks
initiated the modern period of Nation-States75.
War for national existence unifies nations. So long as the nation is not
utterly shattered and crushed, such war greatly develops the national mind;
because it makes one common purpose dominate the minds of all the
citizens.
We are told that it is a practical maxim of cynical rulers to plunge their
people into war when they are faced by dangerous internal discontents; and
the reason usually given is that war diverts the attention of the people from
their domestic grievances. But if it is a national war, a war in which the
national existence is at stake, it does far more than merely divert attention;
it binds the nation into a harmonious efficient whole by creating a common
purpose; whereas, if the war is not of this order and is waged in some
distant country and merely for some territorial aggrandisement, it has little
or no such effect. Thus the recent Russo-Japanese war did little or nothing
at the time to raise the Russian people in the scale of nationhood; it was
followed by a period of national weakness; the national existence was not
endangered, the objects of the war were too remote from the interests of the
mass of the people to appeal to them strongly. Whereas the same war and
the years of preparation for it, following upon the previous Chino-Japanese
war, have made the Japanese one of the most efficient and harmonious
nations of the world.
Another striking example of the same principle was the formation of
modern Bulgaria as a strong Nation-State out of a population of quiet
peasant proprietors united only by spatial proximity and by their racial
distinctness from the surrounding populations. This creation of a strong
nation out of a mere population of peasants was in the main the work of the
war of 1885, by which the unprovoked attack of Servia was triumphantly
repelled76.
The unity and nationhood of modern Germany is largely due to similar
causes; and the war of 1871 may fairly be said to have led to a further
integration of the national life of the French people, in spite of their defeat.
America owes something of the same kind to the Spanish war; and the entry
of that nation into the Great War, long delayed as it was, will probably be
found to have had a similar effect. The French and Italian nations have
undoubtedly been welded more firmly by the Great War; while England and
her sister and daughter nations (with the one sad exception of the Irish)
have been united, by their co-operation in the one great purpose, to a degree
which no other conceivable event could have achieved and which many
generations of peaceful industry and enlightened political efforts might
have failed to approach.
History offers no parallel to these effects of war; and it is difficult or
impossible to imagine any other common purpose which could exert this
binding influence in a similar degree. But it is worth while to notice that
other and minor forms of international rivalry have corresponding effects.
The international rivalry in aeronautics affords a contemporary illustration.
Perhaps every one in this country has felt some degree of interest and
satisfaction in the achievements of the adventurous spirits of our nation who
have traversed the Atlantic by air. And it is probably largely owing to the
prevalence of this national pride and purpose that, at a time demanding
strict national economy, no voice has been raised against the enormous
current expenditure of the government upon aeronautics.
Another and more important effect of the same kind is produced by the
assumption of great national responsibilities in the way of administration in
respect of backward peoples and undeveloped territories. The greatest
example in history is the responsibility of Great Britain for the
administration of India, gradually and only half-consciously assumed, but
now keenly felt as at once a legitimate ground of national pride and a moral
responsibility that cannot be laid aside. It is like the responsibility of the
father of a family in its semi-instinctive origin and in its effects in steadying
and strengthening character, for it imposes a responsibility which the
nation, like the individual, cannot discharge indifferently without seriously
damaging its reputation and prestige in the eyes of the world. Holland owes
some of the strength of her nationhood to such influences; and the
assumption by the American nation of responsibility for the peoples of
Cuba and of the Phillipine islands cannot fail to bring them in some degree
similar moral benefits77.
Of the five other conditions of the higher development of a collective
mind, let us notice, first and very briefly, continuity of existence, material
and formal. Of course every nation has this in some degree, but some have
it in much higher degree than others. The English nation is fortunate in this
respect also. It has preserved both its formal and its material continuity in
very high degree throughout many centuries, in fact ever since the Norman
Conquest. No European nation can compare with it in this respect; it is only
surpassed by China and perhaps Japan. The French nation has preserved its
material continuity, its population and territory, in high degree. But the
Great Revolution cut across and destroyed to a great extent its formal
continuity, so that, as is sometimes said, the French nation has cut itself off
from its past and made a new start; although, in doing so, it did not get rid
of its highly centralised system of administration. The modern Italian and
German nations are quite recent growths, their formal continuity having
been subject to many interruptions. Spain, with her almost insular position,
might have had continuity; but it was greatly disturbed by the imperial
ambitions of her rulers in the sixteenth century and by the expulsion of the
Moors. Greece is a striking example of loss of both material and formal
continuity. The population of ancient Greece, which put her in the van of
civilisation, has been largely abolished and supplanted by a different race;
and her formal continuity also has suffered a number of complete ruptures.
Now material and formal continuity is, as we said, the essential
presupposition of all the other main conditions of development of the
collective mind. On it depends the strength of custom and tradition and, to a
very great extent, the strength of national sentiment. It is, therefore, a
principal condition of national stability; from it arise all the great
conservative tendencies of the nation, all the forces that resist change;
accordingly, the more complete and long enduring such continuity has been
in the past, the greater is the prospect of its prolongation in the future. It is
owing to the unbroken continuity of the English nation through so long a
period that its organisation is so stable, its unwritten constitution so
effective, at once stable and plastic, its national sentiment so strong, its
complex uncoded system of judge-made law so nearly in harmony with
popular feeling and therefore so respected. National organisation resting
upon this basis of custom and traditional sentiment is the only kind that is
really stable, that is not liable to be suddenly overthrown by internal
upheavals or impacts from without. For it alone is rooted in the minds of all
citizens in the forms of habit and sentiment. All other organisation is
imposed by authority.
In this respect modern England and Germany offer a striking contrast
that forces itself upon the most casual observation. As regards the mass of
the people, the position of each individual in the organism of the German
nation is officially determined by the written and codified law of the State;
all personal status and relations are formally determined by official
positions in this recently created system. Almost every individual carries
about some badge or uniform indicating his position within the system. In
England, the status and relations of individuals are determined by factors a
thousand times more subtle and complex, involving many vaguely
conceived and undefined traditions and sentiments. In Germany, it is almost
true to say, if a man has no official position he has no position at all. In
England, the comparatively few persons who have official positions have
also their social positions by which their private relations are determined.
They are officials only in their offices; whereas the German official is an
official everywhere.
Other important topics we have to consider are (1) the organisation of
the national mind; (2) the national self-consciousness; (3) the interaction of
the nation as a whole with other nations. All these we may advantageously
consider in the light of an analogy, the analogy between the individual mind
and the collective mind of the nation. This is a much closer and more
illuminating analogy than that between the nation, or society, and the
material organism. The latter analogy has been developed in detail by H.
Spencer, Schäffle78 and others; it has now fallen into some disrepute. It has
no doubt a certain value, but it is popularly used in a way that leads to quite
unjustifiable conclusions. Of these fallacies by far the most commonly
accepted is that which asserts that, just as every animal organism inevitably
grows old and dies, so too must nations.
This is one of the most popular dogmas of amateur philosophers, and so
distinguished a statesman as the late Lord Salisbury gave it countenance;
while Mr A. J. Balfour in his recent Sidgwick Memorial Lecture79
courageously breaks away and proposes to substitute for senility as the
cause of decay the word decadence—a proposal which merely implies that
he trusts less to the analogical argument from the material organism and
more to empirical induction, to the observation of the fact that so many
nations have decayed.
All this serves to illustrate the dangers of analogy. We need no special
cause to account for the fall and the decay of nations, no obscure principle
of senility or decadence; the wonderful thing is that they exist at all; and
what needs explanation is not so much the decay of some, but rather the
long persistence of others.
Let us turn, then, to the analogy between the organisation of the national
collective mind and that of the individual mind, which, I say, is so much
closer and more illuminating than that between a society and a bodily
organisation.
The actions of the individual organism are the expression of its mental
constitution or organisation; in some creatures this organisation is almost
wholly innate—the organisation consists of a number of reflex and
instinctive dispositions each specialised for bringing about a special kind of
behaviour under certain circumstances. Such old established racial
dispositions with their special tendencies have their place in more
complexly developed minds; but in these their operations are complicated
and modified by the life of ideas, and by a variety of habits developed under
the guidance of ideas and in the light of individual experience.
The enduring reflex and instinctive dispositions of the individual mind
we may liken to the established institutions of a nation, such as the army
and navy, the post office, the judicial and the administrative systems of
officials. These, like the instincts, are specialised executive organisations
working in relative independence of one another, each discharging some
specialised function adapted to satisfy some constantly recurring need of
the whole organism. In both cases such semi-independent organisations, the
instincts or the institutions, are relatively fixed and stable, and they work, if
left to themselves, quasi-mechanically along old established lines, without
intelligent adaptation to new circumstances; and they are incapable of self-
adaptation. In both cases, the mental organisation is in part materialised, the
instinct in the form of specialised nervous structure, the institution in the
form of the material organisation essential to its efficient action, the
buildings, the printed codes, the whole material apparatus of complex
national administration. In both cases, the actions in which they play their
part are not purely mechanical but to some extent truly psychical—though
of a low order.
If we accept the view, which is held by many, that instincts and reflexes
are the semi-mechanised results of successive mental adaptations effected
by the mental efforts of successive generations, then the analogy is still
closer; for the permanent national institutions are also the accumulated
semi-mechanised products of the efforts at adaptation of many generations.
The organisation of some nations resembles that of the minds of those
animals whose behaviour is purely instinctive. Such is a nation whose
organisation takes the form of a rigid caste system. Each caste performs its
special functions in the prescribed manner in relative independence of all
the others. And, in both cases, the organisation of the mind includes no
means of bringing the different fixed tendencies or dispositions into
harmonious co-operation in the face of unusual circumstances. The whole
system lacks plasticity and adaptability; for it is relatively mechanical and
of a low degree of integration. Any true adaptation of the whole organism
by mental effort is impossible in both cases.
The higher type of individual mind is characterised by the development
of the intellectual organisation by means of which the activities of the
various instincts, the executive organisations, may be brought into co-
operation with, or duly subordinated to, one another; and the activities of
each such individual may be further adapted to meet novel combinations of
circumstances not provided for in the innate organisation; hence, the
activities of the whole organism, instead of being a succession of quasi-
mechanical actions, and of crude conflicts between the impulses or
tendencies of the different instincts, reveal a higher degree of harmony of
the parts, a greater integration of the whole system, and a much greater
adaptability to novel circumstances; while, at the same time, the behaviour
of the whole, in face of any one of the situations provided for by innate
organisation or instinct, is liable to be less sure and perfect than in the case
of the less complex, less highly evolved type of mind.
Exactly the same is true of the more highly evolved type of national
mind. Like the lower type, it has its executive institutions and hierarchies of
officials, organised for the carrying out of specialised tasks subserving the
economy of the whole. But, in addition, it has a deliberative organisation
which renders possible a play of ideas; and, through this, the operations of
the institutions are modified and controlled in detail and are harmonised in
a way which constitutes a higher integration of the whole.
In both cases ideas and judgments reached by the deliberative processes
can only become effective in the world of things and conduct by setting to
work, or calling into play, one or more of the executive dispositions or
institutions.
In both cases, ideas and the deliberative processes, which to some extent
control the operations of the innate or traditional dispositions, produce, in
so doing, some permanent modification of them in the direction of
adaptation to deal with novel circumstances; so that the dispositions or
institutions grow and change under the guidance of the deliberative
processes, slowly becoming better adapted for the expression of the ruling
ideas; they become better instruments, and more completely at the service
of ideas and of the will.
Just as the animal, on the instinctive plane of mental life, displays a very
efficient activity in the special situation which brings some one instinct into
play, so any one caste of a caste-nation may perform its function under
normal circumstances with great efficiency, the priestly caste its priestly
function, the warrior caste, or the caste of sweepers, its function; and, in
both cases, the development of the deliberative organisation is apt to
interfere to some extent with the perfect execution of these specialised
functions.
Again, in the individual mind, adaptation of conduct to novel
circumstances, or to secure improved action in familiar circumstances,
requires the direction of the attention, that is the concentration of the whole
energy of the mind, upon the task; whereas, when the new mode of
behaviour is often repeated, it becomes more and more automatic; for,
owing to the formation of new nervous organisation, the attention is set free
for other tasks of adaptation. Just in the same way new modes of national
behaviour are only effected when the attention of the nation’s mind is
turned upon the situation; whereas, with recurrence of the need for any such
novel mode of action, there is formed some special executive organisation,
say a Colonial Office, or an Unemployed Central Committee, or an Imperial
Conference, which deals with it in a more or less routine fashion, and
which, as it becomes perfected, needs less and less to be controlled and
guided by national attention and therefore operates in the margin of the field
of consciousness of the national mind, while public attention is set free to
turn itself to other tasks of national adaptation.
We may also regard the customs of a nation as analogous with the habits
of the individual, if (for the sake of the analogy) we accept the view that
instincts are habits that have become hereditary; for custom is an informal
mode in which routine behaviour is determined, and it tends to lead on to,
and to become embodied in, formal institutions; it is like habit, a transition
stage between new adaptation and perfected organisation. Individual
adaptation, habit and instinct are parallel to national adaptation, custom and
legal institution.
At the risk of wearying the reader, I will refer to one last point of the
analogy. Individual minds become more completely integrated in proportion
as they achieve a full self-consciousness, in proportion as the idea of the
self becomes rich in content and the nucleus of a strong sentiment
generating impulses that control and override impulses of all other sources.
In a similar way, the national mind becomes more completely integrated in
proportion as it achieves full self-consciousness, that is, in proportion as the
idea of the nation becomes widely diffused among the individual minds,
becomes rich in content and the nucleus of a strong sentiment that supplies
motives capable of overriding and controlling all other motives.
Consider now in the light of this analogy the principal types of national
organisation. The organisation of some peoples is wholly the product of the
conflicts of blind impulses and purely individual volitions working through
long ages. This is true of many peoples that have not arrived at a national
self-consciousness or, as the French say, a social consciousness, and are not
held in servitude by a despotic power. It is a natural stage of evolution
which corresponds to the stage of the higher mammals in the scale of
evolution of the individual mind. A nation of this sort has no capacity for
collective deliberation and volitional action. What collective mental life it
has is on the plane of impulse and unregulated desire. Such ideas as are
widely accepted may determine collective action; but such action is not the
result of the weighing of ideas in the light of self-consciousness; hence they
are little adapted to promote the welfare of the nation, and, because there is
no organisation adapted for their expression, they can be but imperfectly
realised.
We may perhaps take China (as she was until recently) as the highest
type of a nation of this sort. Hers was a complex and vast organisation
consisting of very ancient institutions and customs, slowly evolved by the
conflict of impulses and in part imposed by despotic power and individual
wills; not formed by a national will under the guidance of national self-
consciousness80. Hence China was incapable of vigorous national thought
or volition, and its nearest approach to collective action was expressed in
such blind impulsive actions as the Taeping Rebellion or the Boxer Rising.
This last seems to have been prompted by a dawning national self-
consciousness which had not, however, so moulded the national
organisation as to make it an efficient instrument of its will.
Of other nations the organisation is, in part only, a natural growth,
having been, in large part, impressed upon it by an external power. Such is
the case in all those many instances in which a foreign power of higher
social organisation has conquered and successfully governed for a long
period a people of lower civilisation. We may see a parallel to this type in
the mind of an individual whose behaviour is in the main the expression of
a number of habits engendered by a severe discipline which has continued
from his earliest years, and which has never permitted the free development
of his natural tendencies and character. Such was England under the feudal
system imposed upon her by her Norman conquerors. Such also France
under Louis XIV. Such was Russia when the Varegs, the conquering
Northmen, imposed on the almost unorganised mass of Slavs their rule and
a national organisation; and such it remained up to the outbreak of the Great
War, a mass of men in whom the national consciousness was only just
beginning to glimmer here and there, crudely organised by the bureaucratic
power of a few. Even in the minds of these few the national consciousness
and purpose was but little developed. Individual purposes and individual
self-consciousness predominated. Hence Russia had no capacity for
national thought and action; and when, as recently, ideas stirred the masses
to action, their actions were those of unorganised crowds, impulsive and
ineffective; the ends were but vaguely conceived, the means were not
deliberately chosen, or, if so chosen, found no executive organisation for
the effective expression of the collective purpose.
In such nations the organisation, which has been in the main created by
a small governing class, is adapted only for the execution of its purposes,
and not at all for the formation of a national mind and the expression of the
collective will. The organisation consists primarily in a system for the
collecting of taxes and the compulsory service of a large army. The revenue
is raised for two primary purposes—the support of the governing class or
caste in luxury and the support of the army; and the end for which the army
is maintained is primarily the gathering of the taxes, and the further
extension of the tax-collecting system over larger areas and populations—a
vicious circle. On the other hand, the conditions which tend to the
formation of national mind and character (which would have quite other
ends than these) are naturally suppressed as completely as possible by the
governing few.
Russian history in modern times exemplifies these principles in the
clearest and most complete manner. The effects of this sort of organisation
were very clearly illustrated by Count Tolstoi’s articles in the Fortnightly
Review81, in which he expressed as his social creed and ideal a complete
anarchy to be achieved by passive resistance; denied that nations have or
can have any existence; and asserted that the idea of a nation is as fictitious
as it is pernicious. He had in mind only this type of organisation of a
people, which hardly entitles it to be called a nation. And the same
considerations explain the wide prevalence of philosophic anarchy in
Russia.
Another type of national organisation results when the natural evolution
of the national mind and character has been artificially and unhealthily
forced by the pressure of the external environment of a people, when the
need of national self-preservation and self-assertion compels the mass of
the people to submit to an organisation which is neither the product of a
natural evolution through the conflict of individual wills, nor the expression
of the general mind and will, nor is altogether imposed upon it for the
individual purposes of the few, but is a system planned by the few for the
good of the whole, and by them imposed upon the whole. This is the kind of
organisation of which a modern army stands as the extreme type and which
is best represented among modern nations by Germany as she was before
the War.
Under such a system there appears inevitably a tendency rigorously to
subordinate the welfare of individuals to that of the nation as a whole. And
that was just the state of affairs in Germany. German political philosophy
showed the opposite extreme from Tolstoi’s; the individual existed for the
nation only. Hence we find this condition of affairs justified by such writers
as Blüntschli82, Treitschke and Bernhardi, who represent the State as having
an existence and a system of rights superior to that of all individuals; and
we see attempts to justify the subordination of individual interests by means
of the doctrine of the ‘collective consciousness83.’
In such States as that of the foregoing type the one kind of organisation
is alone highly developed, namely the executive organisation; while the
deliberative organisation is very imperfect and is repressed and discouraged
by the governing power. Such a State is likely to appear very strong in all
its relations with other States, and its material organisation may be
developed in an effective and rapid way, as we have seen in pre-war
Germany. But its actions are not the expression of the national will and are
not the outcome of the general mind. They are designed by the minds of the
few for the good not of all, but of the whole, the good, that is, not of
individuals but of the State.
Organisation of this type is not of high stability, in spite of its
appearance of strength and its efficiency for certain limited purposes, such
as industrial organisation and the promotion and diffusion of material well-
being. In a State so organised there inevitably grows up an antagonism
between individual rights and interests and the rights and interests of the
State. It is psychologically unsound. This fact was revealed in Germany by
the tremendous growth of social democracy, which was the protest against
the subordination of individual welfare to that of the State. The defect of
such organisation was illustrated by the fact that Germany, though its well-
governed population increased rapidly, for many years continued to lose
great numbers of its population to other countries. For the mass of the
people felt itself to be not so much of the State as under it. And it is, I think,
obvious that the advent of a bad and stupid monarch might easily have
brought on a revolution at any time.
The inherent weakness of the system induced the governing power to all
sorts of extreme measures directed to maintain its equilibrium and cohesion.
Among such State actions the gravest were perhaps the deliberate
falsification of history by the servile historians and the suppression and
distortion of news by the press at the command and desire of the State. The
expropriation of the Polish landowners and the treatment of Alsace-Lorraine
were other striking manifestations of the imperfect development of the
national mind and of the corresponding practice and philosophy of the
State-craft which the world has learnt to describe as Prussian.
The organisation of pre-war Germany was, then, very similar to that of
an army and was efficient in a similar way, that is to say for the attainment
of particular immediate ends. In a wider view, such national organisation is
of a lower nature than that of England or France or America; for the ends or
purposes of a nation are remote, they transcend the vision of the present and
cannot be defined in terms of material prosperity or military power; and
only the development of the national mind, as a natural and spontaneous
growth, can give a prospect of continued progress towards those indefinable
ends. Germany was organised from above for the attainment of a particular
end, namely material prosperity and power among the peoples of the world;
and, as the bulk of her population had been led to accept this narrow
national purpose, the organisation of the nation, like that of an army, was
extremely effective for the purpose. It gave her a great advantage as against
the other nations, among whom the lack of any such clear cut purpose in the
minds of all was a principal difficulty in the way of effective national
thought and action. For a like reason the existence of a nation organised in
this way is a constant threat to the nations of higher type; and, as we have
seen, it may compel them at any time to revert to or adopt, temporarily at
least and so far as they are able, an organisation of the lower and more
immediately effective kind. And this threat was the justification of the
nations of the Entente, when they demanded a radical change in this
political organisation of Germany. In a similar way, in the past, the Huns,
the Turks, and the Arabs, peoples organised primarily for war and conquest,
had to be destroyed as nations if the evolution of nations of higher type was
to go forward.
Chapter XI.
The Will of the Nation84
Table of Contents
Rousseau, in his famous treatise, Le Contrat Social, wrote “There is often a
great difference between the will of all and the general will; the latter looks
only to the common interest; the former looks to private interest, and is
nothing but a sum of individual wills; but take away from these same wills
the plus and minus that cancel one another and there remains, as the sum of
the differences, the general will.” “Sovereignty is only the exercise of the
general will.” That is to say, a certain number of men will the general good,
while most men will only their private good; the latter neutralise one
another, while the former co-operate to form an effective force.
Dr Bosanquet85, criticising Rousseau’s doctrine, says that the general
will is expressed by the working of the institutions of the community which
embody its dominant ideas; that no one man really grasps the nature and
relations of the whole society and its tendencies; that the general will is thus
unconscious (by which he seems to mean that the nation is unconscious of
itself and of its ends or purposes); and he goes on to say that the general
will is the product of practical activities making for nearer smaller ends, and
that its harmony depends on the fact that the activities of each individual are
parts of a systematic whole.
Bosanquet’s theory amounts to a justification of the old individualist
laissez faire doctrine—the doctrine that the good of the whole is best
achieved by giving freest possible scope to the play and conflict of
individual purposes and strivings—the philosophic radicalism of Bentham
and Mill, which teaches that, if each man honestly and efficiently pursues
his private ends, the welfare of the State somehow results. How this
systematic whole which is the State arises he does not explain; and it seems
to me that Bosanquet leaves unsolved that difficulty which, as we saw, led
Schiller and others to postulate an external power guiding each people—the
difficulty, if we assume that individual wills strive only after private
egoistic ends, of explaining how the good of the whole is nevertheless
achieved.
In all societies many general changes result, and in some nations no
doubt the good of the whole is achieved in a measure by fortunate accident,
in the way Bosanquet describes—namely, by the interplay of individual
wills working for near individual ends. But, I think, it is improper to say
that in such a case any general will exists. Such a nation, if it displays any
collective activity, only does so in an impulsive blind way which is not true
volition, but is comparable rather with instinctive action; for, as we have
seen, self-consciousness is essential to volition; a truly volitional action is
one which issues from the contemplation of some end represented in
relation to the idea of the self and found to be desirable. And the changes of
a society which result in the way Bosanquet claims as the expression of the
general will are unforeseen and unwilled; they are no more the expression
and effects of a general will than are the movements of a billiard ball struck
simultaneously by two or more men each of whom aims at a different
position.
Bosanquet maintains that the national will is unconscious of its ends;
but that the life of a nation does express a general will, in virtue of the fact
that the individuals, who will private and less general ends than the ends of
the nation, live in a system of relations that constitutes them an organism;
and that it is in virtue of this organic system of relations that the individual
volitions work out to an unforeseen unpurposed resultant, which he calls the
end willed by the general will. He makes of this organic unity the essential
difference between a mere crowd and a society or nation—defining an
organism or organic unity as a system of parts the capacities and functions
of each of which are determined by the general nature and principle of the
whole group.
That is an excellent definition of an organism; and we have recognised
fully the importance of organisation in national life, consisting in
specialisation of the parts such that each part is adapted to perform some
one function that subserves the life of the whole, while itself dependent
upon the proper functioning of all other parts.
We may admit too that, in proportion as this specialisation of functions
is carried further, organic unity is promoted because the life of the whole
becomes more intimately dependent on the life of each part, and each part
more intimately and completely dependent on the life of the whole.
But unity of this sort is characteristic of all animal bodies; and, though
the mind has this kind of organic unity, it acquires, in proportion as self-
consciousness develops, over and above this kind of unity, a unity of an
altogether new and unique kind; a unity which consists in the whole (or the
self) being present to consciousness, whether clearly or obscurely, during
almost every moment of thought, and pervading and playing some part in
the determination of the course of thought and action.
Now, the national mind also has both the lower and the higher kinds of
unity. In both cases—that is, in the development both of the individual and
of the national mind—a certain degree of organic unity must be achieved,
before self-consciousness can develop and begin to play its part; but in both
cases, when once it has begun to operate, self-consciousness goes on greatly
to increase the organic unity, to increase the specialisation of functions and
the systematic interdependence of the parts.
Consider a single illustration of this parallelism of the individual with
the national mind. Take the aesthetic faculty. In the individual mind there
develops a certain capacity for finding pleasure in certain objects and
impressions, such as young children and even the animals have; and then,
with the growth of self-consciousness, the individual sets himself
deliberately to cultivate this faculty, to specialise it along particular lines
and to exercise it as something apart from his other mental functions; while,
nevertheless, it becomes for him, in proportion as it is developed and
specialised, more and more an essential part of his total experience. Just so
there spontaneously develop in a people some rudimentary aesthetic
practices and traditions and some class of persons, say the bards, who are
more skilled than other men in ministering to the aesthetic demands of their
fellows. Then, as national self-consciousness develops, the place and value
of these functions in the system of national life becomes explicitly
recognised, and they are deliberately fostered by the establishment of
national institutions, schools of art, academies of letters and music, the
award of public titles and honours and so forth; whereby the specialisation
of these national functions is increased, their dependence on the life of the
whole rendered more intimate, and, at the same time, the life of the whole
rendered more dependent upon the life of these parts, because the richer
aesthetic development of the parts reacts upon the whole, diffusing itself
through and elevating the life of the whole.
Bosanquet recognises in national life only the lower kind of unity and
not the unity of self-consciousness. He seems to reject the notion of national
self-consciousness, on the ground that the life of a nation is so complex that
it cannot be fully and adequately reflected in the consciousness of any
individual; yet in this respect the difference between the national mind and
the individual mind is one of degree only and not of kind. In the individual
mind also, even the most highly developed and self-conscious, the
capacities and dispositions and tendencies that make up the whole mind are
never fully and adequately present to consciousness; the individual never
knows himself exhaustively, though he may continually progress towards a
more nearly complete self-knowledge. Just so the national mind may
progress towards a more complete self-knowledge, and, though at the
present time no nation has attained more than a very imperfect self-
knowledge, yet the process is accelerating rapidly among the more
advanced nations; and such increasing self-knowledge promises to become
the dominating factor in the life of nations, as it is in the lives of all men,
save the most primitive.
Suppose that all those conditions making for national unity which we
have considered in the foregoing chapters were realised, but that
nevertheless all men continued to be moved only by self-regarding motives,
or by those which have reference to the welfare of themselves and their
family circle or to any ends less comprehensive than the welfare of the
whole nation. We could not then properly speak of the tendencies resulting
from the interplay and the conflict of all these individual wills as
expressions of the general will, as Bosanquet and others have done, even
though the organic unity of the whole secured a harmonious resultant
national activity, if such a thing were possible. But there is no reason to
suppose that such a thing is possible.
I think we may say that it is only in so far as the idea of the people or
nation as a whole is present to the consciousness of individuals and
determines their actions that a nation in the proper sense of the word can
exist or ever has existed. Without this factor any population inhabiting a
given territory remains either a mere horde or a population of slaves under a
despotism. Neither can be called a nation; wherever a nation has appeared
in the history of the world, the consciousness of itself as a nation has been
an essential condition of its existence and still more of its progress.
We may see this, even more clearly, in the case of the smaller
aggregations of men, the smaller social units, the family, the clan, the tribe.
The family is a family only so long as it is conscious of itself as a family,
and only in virtue of that self-consciousness and of the part which this idea
and the sentiments gathered about it play in determining the actions of each
member. How carefully such family consciousness is sometimes fostered
and how great a part it plays in social life is common knowledge. In the
early stages of Greek and Roman history, the family consciousness was the
dominant social force which long succeeded in overriding and preventing
the development of any larger social consciousness. Just as the gens played
this part in early Rome, so the clan has played a similar part elsewhere, for
example in the highlands of Scotland. Such peoples form the strongest
nations.
Just so with the tribe. It exists as a tribe only because, and in so far as, it
is conscious of itself, and in so far as the idea of the tribe and devotion to its
service determines the actions of individuals. The mere fact of the
possession of a tribal name suffices to prove the existence of this self-
consciousness. And, as a matter of fact, tribal self-consciousness is in many
cases extremely strongly developed; the idea of the tribe, of its rights and
powers, of its past and its future plays a great part among warlike savages;
and an injury done to the tribe, or an insult offered to it, will often be kept
in mind for many years, even for generations, and will be avenged when an
opportunity occurs, even in spite of the certainty of death to many
individuals and the risk of extermination of the whole tribe.
The federation of Iroquois tribes to form a rudimentary nation seems to
have been due to a self-conscious collective purpose. And, when other
tribes become fused to form nations, the same holds true. Consider the
Hebrew nation, one of the earliest historical examples of a number of allied
tribes becoming fused to a nation. Surely the idea of the nation as the
chosen people of Jehovah played a vital part in its consolidation, implanted
and fostered as it was by a succession of great teachers, the prophets. Their
work was to implant this idea and this sentiment strongly in the minds of
the people, to create and foster this traditional sentiment by the aid of
supernatural sanctions. The national self-consciousness thus formed has
continued to be not only one factor, but almost the only factor or condition,
of the continued existence of the Jewish people as a people, or at any rate
the one fundamental condition on which all the others are founded—their
exclusive religion, their objection to intermarriage with outsiders, their hope
of a future restoration of the fortunes of the nation, and so forth.
And the same is true of every real nation; its existence and its power are
grounded in its consciousness of itself, the idea of the nation as a dominant
factor in the minds of the individuals. The dominant sentiment which
centres about that idea is very different in the various nations. It may be
chiefly pride in the nation’s past history, as in Spain; or hope for its future,
as in Japan; or the need of self-assertion in the present, as in pre-war
Germany.
The political history of Europe in the nineteenth century is chiefly the
history of the national actions that have sprung from increase of national
self-consciousness resulting from the spread of education, from the
improvement of means of communication within each people and from
increase of intercourse between nations. The opening pages were the wars
in which the French people, suddenly aroused to an intense national
consciousness, successfully resisted and drove back all the other European
powers. Of other leading events the formation of modern Italy and of
modern Germany, of Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece, were results of the
awakening of national self-consciousness86.
The resistance of the Japanese to the Russians and their victory over
them were in the fullest sense the immediate outcome of the idea of the
Japanese nation in the minds of all its people, leading to a strong collective
volition for the greater power, glory, and advancement of the nation. The
recent unrest in China is recognised on all hands to be the expression of a
dawning national self-consciousness. In Europe, Poland, Finland, Hungary,
and Ireland exemplify its workings very clearly in recent years. The
Magyars were not oppressed by the Austrians. They, economically and
individually, had nothing material to gain by a separation from Austria; and
in separating themselves they would have risked much, their lives, and their
material welfare; yet the idea of the Magyar nation impelled them to it. The
Poles of Germany were not rebellious because they were ill-treated and
their affairs maladministered. If they could and would have cast out from
their minds the idea of the Polish nation, they might have comfortably
shared in the marvellously advancing material prosperity of Germany. But
they were severely treated by the Germans, because they were moved by
this idea and this sentiment; and the bad treatment it brought upon them did
but render the idea more vividly, more universally, present to the
consciousness of all, even of the little children at school, and, by inflaming
the passions which have their root in the national sentiment, strengthened
that sentiment.
But for the idea of the Boer nation and the dawning national sentiment,
the late Boer war would never have occurred; and that sentiment was, as in
the case of the Japanese in their late war, the principal source of the great
energy displayed by the Boers and of such success as they achieved.
Even in India, the proposal to divide Bengal has suddenly discovered
among the Bengalese, the most submissive part of the population, the part
which has seemed most devoid of national spirit, the existence and the
importance as a political factor of the idea of the Bengalese as a people and
of sentiments centred upon that idea.
The rapid increase of national self-consciousness among the peoples of
the world and the increasing part everywhere played by the sentiment for
national existence are in short the dominant facts in the present period of
world history; their influence overshadows all others.
Since, then, any nation exists only in virtue of the existence of the idea
of the nation in the minds of the individuals of whom it is composed, and in
virtue of the influence of this idea upon their actions, and since this idea
plays so great a part in shaping the history of the world, it is absurd to
maintain that the general will is but the blind resultant of the conflict of
individual wills striving after private ends and unconscious of the ends or
purposes of the nation. In opposition to such a view, we must maintain that
a population seeking only individual ends cannot form or continue to be a
nation, though all the other conditions we have noticed be present; that a
nation is real and vigorous in proportion as its consciousness of its self is
full and clear. In fact national progress and power and success depend in
chief part upon the fulness and the extension, the depth and width of this
self-consciousness—the accuracy and fulness with which each individual
mind reflects the whole; and upon the strength of the sentiments which are
centred upon it and which lead men to act for the good of the whole, to
postpone private to public ends. And the same holds good of all the many
forms of corporate life within the nation. Each individual’s sense of duty, in
so far as it is a true sense of duty, and not a fictitious sense due merely to
superstitious fear or to habit formed by suggestion and compulsion, is
chiefly founded upon the consciousness of the society of which he forms a
part, upon the group spirit that binds him to his fellows and makes him one
with them. And the nations in which this national self-consciousness is
strongest and most widely diffused will be the successful nations.
Reflect a little on these facts vouched for by General Sir Ian Hamilton.
No soldier of the Japanese army, none even of the coolies, would accept
anything in the shape of a tip even for honest services rendered, lest the
purity of his motives should be sullied; and each man always went into
action not merely prepared to die if necessary, but actually prepared and
expecting to conquer and to die for the good and glory of his nation. He
writes “Japanese officers have constantly to explain to their men that they
must not consider the main object of the battle is to get killed87.” And he
goes on to show that they are not fanatics, are not inspired by any idea of
the supernatural or by any hope of rewards after death, as is usually the case
of the Moslem soldier who displays an equal recklessness of life. Surely, if
in any nation the national consciousness could inspire and maintain all
classes of its people in all relations of life to this high level of strenuous
self-sacrifice for the welfare of the nation, that nation would soon
predominate over all others, and be impregnably strong, no matter what
defects of individual and national character it might display.
The idea of the nation is, then, a bond between its members over and
above all those bonds of custom, of habit, of economic interdependence, of
law and of self-interest, of sympathy, of imitation, of collective emotion and
thought, which inevitably arise among a homogeneous people occupying
any defined area; and it is the most powerful and essential of them all. As
Fouillée put it, the essential characteristic of human society is that “it is an
organism which realises itself in conceiving and in willing its own
existence. Any collection of men becomes a society in the only true sense of
the word, when all the men conceive more or less clearly the type of
organic whole which they can form by uniting themselves and when they
effectively unite themselves under the determining influence of this
conception. Society is then an organism which exists because it has been
thought and willed, it is an organism born of an idea88.” In this sense
Society has never yet been perfectly realized, but it is the ideal towards
which social evolution tends.
National group self-consciousness plays, then, an all-important part in
the life of nations, is in fact the actual, the most essential constitutive factor
of every nation; and nationhood or the principal of nationality is the
dominant note of world history in the present epoch; that is to say, the
desire and aspiration to achieve nationhood, or to strengthen and advance
the life of the nation, is the most powerful motive underlying the collective
actions of almost all civilised and even of semi-civilised mankind; and the
consequent rivalry between nations overshadows every other feature of
modern world history, and is convulsing and threatening to destroy the
whole of modern civilisation. It is surely well worthy of serious study. Yet,
owing to the backward and neglected state of psychology, not only is this
study neglected, but, as we have seen, some of our leading political
philosophers have not yet even realized the essential nature of the problem;
and many of the historians, economists and political writers are even further
from a grasp of its nature. They have been forced by the prominence and
urgency of the facts to recognise what they call the principle of nationality;
and even now the majority of them are demanding that, in the European
settlement and in the affairs of the world in general, the principle of
nationality shall be given the leading place and the decisive voice. But they
do not recognise that the understanding of this principle, this all-powerful
political factor, is primarily and purely a psychological problem. We find
them, in discussing the nature of nations and the conditions of nationality,
perhaps mentioning the psychological view of nations as a curious
aberration of a few academic cranks, from which they turn to discover the
true secret of nationality in such considerations as geographical boundaries,
race, language, history, and above all economic factors; they do not see that
each and all of these conditions, real and important though they are and
have been in shaping the history and determining the existence of nations,
only play their parts indirectly by affecting men’s minds, their beliefs,
opinions, and sentiments, especially by favouring or repressing the
development in each people of the idea of the nation.
The all-dominant influence of the idea of the nation, I insist, is not a
theory or a speculative suggestion, it is a literal and obvious fact. Let every
other one of the favouring conditions of nationality, the geographical,
historical, economic be realised by a population; yet, if that population has
no collective self-consciousness, is not strongly actuated to collective
volition by the group spirit, it will remain not a nation, but a mere aggregate
of individuals, having more or less organic unity due to the differentiation
and interdependence of its parts, but lacking that higher bond of unity
which alone can ensure its stability and continuity, and which, especially,
can alone enable it to withstand and survive the peaceful pressure or the
warlike impact of true nations.
I am not at present defending nationality; I shall come back to the
question of its value. I am now only concerned with the psychological
problem of the nature and conditions of the development of national self-
consciousness. I have been using the latter phrase and the phrase ‘the idea
of the nation’ as a shorthand expression; but I must remind the reader that
we have to beware of the intellectualist error of regarding ideas as moving
powers; ideas as merely intellectual representations or conceptions have no
motive power, they are in themselves indifferent. It is only in so far as the
object conceived becomes the object of some sentiment that the conception
of it moves us strongly to feeling and action. I must refer, therefore, to what
I have written on the sentiments and the self-regarding sentiment89. Here I
would insist on the strictness in this point of our analogy between the
individual and the national mind. I have pointed out that the individual’s
idea of himself only develops beyond a rudimentary stage in virtue of and
in so far as this idea becomes the nucleus of a strong self-regarding
sentiment which gives him an interest in himself, directs his attention upon
his own personality and its relations, and impels him to strive to know
himself. So that a developed individual self-consciousness never is and
never can be a purely intellectual growth, but always involves a strong
sentiment, a centering of emotional conative tendencies upon this object,
the self. Exactly the same is true of nations.
Hence national self-consciousness can never develop except in the form
of an idea of strong affective tone, that is to say a sentiment. Hence,
whenever we speak of national self-consciousness or the idea of the nation
as a powerful factor in its life, the sentiment is implied, and I have implied
it when using these expressions hitherto. This national sentiment, which, if
we use the word in its widest sense, may be called patriotism, is, like all the
other group sentiments, developed by way of extension of the self-regarding
sentiment of the individual to the group, and may be further complicated
and strengthened by the inclusion of other tendencies. A point of especial
importance is that this great group sentiment can hardly be developed
otherwise than by way of extension of sentiments for smaller included
groups, the family especially. For the idea of the nation is too difficult for
the grasp of the child’s mind, and cannot, therefore, become the object of a
sentiment until the intellectual powers are considerably developed. Hence
the development of a family sentiment, or of one for some other small
easily conceived group, is essential for the development in the child of
those modes of mental action which are involved in all group feeling and
action. For this reason the family is the surest, perhaps essential, foundation
of national life; and national self-consciousness is strongest, where family
life is strongest.
The development of the group spirit in general and of national self-
consciousness in particular is favoured by, and indeed dependent upon,
conditions similar to those which develop the self-consciousness of
individuals. Here is another striking point of the analogy between the
individual and the national mind. Passing over other conditions, let us
notice one, the most important of all. The individual’s consciousness of self
is developed chiefly by intercourse with other individuals—by imitation, by
conflict, by compulsion, and by co-operation. Without such intercourse it
must remain rudimentary. The individual’s conception of himself is
perpetually extended by his increasing knowledge of other selves; and his
knowledge of those other selves grows in the light of his knowledge of
himself. There is perpetual reciprocal action. The same is true of peoples. A
population living shut off, isolated from the rest of the world, within which
no distinctions of tribe and race existed, would never become conscious of
itself as one people and, therefore, would not become a nation. Some such
conditions obtained for long ages among the pastoral hordes of the central
Eurasian Steppes, which, so long as they remained there, have never formed
a nation; and the same was true of the tribes of Arabia, until Mahomet
impelled them by his religion of the sword to hurl themselves upon
neighbouring peoples.
Of civilised peoples, China has had least intercourse with the outer
world. The Chinese knew too little of other races to imitate them; they did
not come into conflict or co-operation with others, save in a very partial
manner at long intervals of time, or only with their Mongol conquerors,
whom they despised as inferior to them in everything but warfare, and
whom they abhorred. Hence, in spite of the homogeneity of the people, of
the common culture, and of the vast influence of great teachers, national
consciousness and the group spirit in all its forms remained at a low level.
Hence, a great deficiency in those virtues which have their root in the social
consciousness; a low standard of public duty, a lack of the sense of
obligation to society. Hence, the corruptness and hollowness of all official
transactions and political life. Want of honesty in public affairs is not the
expression of an inherent defect of the Chinese character; for in commercial
relations with Europeans the Chinaman has proved himself extremely
trustworthy, much superior indeed in this respect to some other peoples. It
is probable that, if China, like Europe, had long ago been divided into a
number of nations, each of them, through action and reaction upon the rest,
would have developed a much fuller national consciousness than exists at
present and some considerable degree of public spirit and would
consequently have advanced very much farther in the scale of social
evolution, instead of standing still as the whole people has done for so long.
Everywhere we can see the illustrations of this law. Of all forms of
intercourse, conflict and competition are the most effective in developing
national consciousness and character, because they bring a common
purpose to the minds of all individuals; and that is the condition of the
highest degree and effectiveness of collective mental action and volition. It
is under these conditions that the idea of the nation and the will to protect it
and to forward its interests become predominant in the minds of
individuals; and the more so the greater the public danger, the greater and
the more obvious the need for the postponement of private ends to the
general end.
Already there is beginning to develop a European self-consciousness
and a European purpose, provoked by the demonstration of the hitherto
latent power of Asia; and, if a federation of European peoples is ever to be
realised, it will be the result of their further development through opposition
to a great and threatening Asiatic power, a revived Moslem empire, or
possibly a threatened American domination90.
Although war has hitherto been the most important condition of the
development of national consciousness, it is not the only one; and it remains
to be seen whether industrial or other forms of rivalry can play a similar
part. Probably, industrial rivalry cannot; the accumulation of wealth is too
largely dependent upon the accidents of material conditions to become a
legitimate source of national satisfaction; for, unlike the satisfaction arising
from successful exertion of military power, it does not imply intrinsic
superiorities. If the natural conditions of material prosperity could be
equalised for all nations, then the acquisition of superior wealth, implying
as it would superior capacities, might become a sufficiently satisfying end
of national action; just as the equalisation of conditions among individuals
in America has for the present rendered the accumulation of wealth a
sufficient end, because such accumulation implies superior powers and is
the mark of personal superiority.
Other forms of rivalry—rivalry in art, science, letters, in efficiency of
social and political organisation, even in games and sports, all play some
part; and it is possible that together they might suffice to constitute
sufficient stimulus, even though the possibility of war should be for ever
removed91.
But national self-consciousness is not developed by conflict and rivalry
only. It is refined and enriched by all other forms of intercourse. In studying
other peoples, their organisation and their history, we become more clearly
aware of the defects and the qualities and potentialities of our own nation.
And in this way, refinement of national consciousness is now going on
rapidly in the European peoples. The latest considerable advance is due to
the observation of Japan; for this has clearly demonstrated the imperfection
of many conceptions that were current among us and has brought a certain
abatement of national complacency and a greater earnestness of national
self-criticism, which is highly favourable to increase of national self-
knowledge92.
We might place nations in a scale of nationhood. The scale would
correspond roughly to one in which they were arranged according to the
degree to which the public good is the end, and the desire of it the motive,
of men’s actions; this in turn would correspond to a scale in which they
were arranged according to the degree of development and diffusion of the
national consciousness, of the idea of the nation or society as a whole; and
this again to one in which they were arranged according to the degree of
intercourse they have had with other nations. At the bottom of the scale
would stand the people of Thibet, the most isolated people of the world;
near them the Chinese, who also have until recently been almost entirely
excluded from international intercourse. Such peoples have a national
consciousness and sentiment which is extremely vague and imperfect. They
do not realise their weakness, their strength or their potentialities, but have
an unenlightened pride without aspiration for a higher form of national life.
A little above them would stand Russia, which has remained for so long
outside the area of European international life. While at the top of the scale
would be those nations which have borne their part in all the strain and
stress and friction of European rivalry and intercourse.
These degrees of international intercourse have been very largely
determined by geographical conditions; isolation, and consequent
backwardness in national evolution, being in nearly every case due to
remoteness of position. The most important factor of modern times making
for more rapid social evolution is probably the practical destruction or
overcoming of the barriers between peoples; for thus all peoples are brought
into the international arena, and their national spirit is developed through
international intercourse and rivalry.
It is this increasing contact and intercourse of peoples, brought about by
the increased facilities of communication, which has quickened the growth
of national self-consciousness throughout all the world and has made the
principle of nationality or, more properly, the desire for nationhood and for
national existence and development, for self-assertion and for international
recognition, the all-important feature of modern times, overshadowing
every other phenomenon that historians have to notice, or statesmen to
reckon with.
The American nation is interesting in this connexion. If we ask—Why is
their public life on a relatively low level, in spite of so many favouring
conditions, including a healthy and strong public opinion?—the answer is
that they have been until recently too much shut off from collective
intercourse with other nations, too far removed from the region of conflict
and rivalry. And judicious well-wishers of the American nation rejoice that
it has recently entered more fully into the international arena, and has not
continued to pursue the policy of isolation, which was long in favour;
because, as is already manifest, this fuller intercourse and intenser rivalry
with other nations must render fuller and more effective their national spirit,
develop the national will and raise the national life to a higher plane, giving
to individuals higher ends and motives than the mere accumulation of
wealth, and removing that self-complacency as regards their national
existence which hitherto has characterised them in common with the
peoples of Thibet and China.
Chapter XII.
Ideas in National Life
Table of Contents
We have seen that the idea of the nation can and does, in virtue of the
formation of the sentiment of devotion to it, lead men to choose and decide
and act for the sake of the nation; they desire the welfare and the good of
the nation as a whole, they value its material prosperity and its reputation in
the eyes of other nations; and, in so far as the decisions and actions of a
nation proceed from this motive, co-operating with and controlling other
motives in the minds of its members, such decision and action are the
expressions of true collective volition.
It is truly volition because it conforms to the true type of volition.
Individual volition can only be marked off from every impulsive action and
every lower form of effort, by the fact that in true volition, among all the
impulses or motives that may impel a man to action or decision, the
dominant rôle is played by a motive that springs from his self-regarding
sentiment. This motive is a desire to achieve a particular end, which,
viewed as the achievement of the self, brings him satisfaction, because the
thought of himself achieving this end is in harmony with the ideal of the
self which he has gradually built up and has learnt to desire to realize under
the influence of his social setting. The same is true of national volition.
And it is collective volition in so far as the deliberations by which the
decision of the nation has been reached have been effected through those
formally and informally organised relations and channels of communication
and by means of all the various modes of interaction of persons by which
public opinion is formed and in which it is guided and controlled by the
living traditions of the nation.
That this is the true nature of national volition may be more clearly
realized on considering some instances of national action which could not
properly be called the expression of the will of the Nation. A tariff might be
adopted because a large number of men desired it, each in order that he
himself might get rich more quickly; and, even though a large majority, or
even all men, desired it, each for his private end, it would not be the
expression of the national will, it would not be due to collective volition; it
would be the expression of the will of all. Nor would it be an expression of
the national will, even if each believed that, not only he, but also all his
fellows would be enriched, and if he desired it for that reason also; that
would be an expression of the will of all for the good of all. Only if and in
so far as the decision was reached through the influence of those who
desired it, because it seemed to them to be for the good of the whole nation,
would it be the expression of the will of the nation.
And the difference would be not merely a difference of motive; the
difference might be very important in respect both of the deliberative
processes by which the decision was reached and also in respect of its
ultimate consequences. For the will of all for the good of all would have
reference only to the immediate future; whereas the truly national will
would be influenced not only by consideration of the good of all existing
citizens, but, in an even greater degree, by the thought of the continued
welfare of the whole nation, in the remote future.
Again, suppose that, on the occasion of an insult or injury to the nation
(I remind the reader of the incident in the North Sea when the Russian fleet
fired on our fishing boats), a wave of anger against the offending nation
sweeps over the whole country and that this outburst of popular fury
plunges the nation into war. That would be collective mental process, but
not volition; it would be action on the plane of impulse or desire,
unregulated by reflection upon the end proposed in relation to the welfare
of the nation and by the motives to action that are stirred by such reflection.
Again, suppose a nation of which every member was patriotic, and
suppose that some proposed national action were pondered upon by each
man apart in his own chamber, without consultation and discussion with his
fellows in public and private. Then, though the decision would be true
volition, in so far as it was determined by each man’s desire for the national
welfare, it yet would not be collective or national volition; because not
reached by collective deliberation.
We have seen that the idea of the nation, present to the minds of the
mass of its members, is an essential condition of the nation’s existence in
any true sense of the word nation; that the idea alone as an intellectual
apprehension cannot exert any large influence; that it determines judgment
and action only in virtue of the sentiment which grows up about this object
—a sentiment which is transmitted and fostered from generation to
generation, just because it renders the nation an object of value. The
consideration should be obvious enough; but it has commonly been ignored
by philosophers of the intellectualist school. They treat the individual mind
as a system of ideas; they ignore the fact that it has a conative side which
has its own organisation, partially distinct from, though not independent of,
the intellectual side; and consequently they ignore equally the fact that the
national mind has its conative organisation.
Imagine a people in whom anti-nationalism (in the form of
cosmopolitanism, syndicalism or philosophic anarchism) had spread, until
this attitude towards the nation-state as such had become adopted by half its
members, while the other half remained patriotic. Then there would be
acute conflict and discussion, and the idea of the nation would be vividly
present to all minds; but the nature of the sentiment attached to it would be
different and opposite in the two halves; one of attachment and devotion in
the one half; of dislike, aversion, or at least indifference (i.e. lack of
sentiment) in the other half. And the efforts of the one half to maintain the
nation as a unit would be antagonised and perhaps rendered nugatory by the
indifference or opposition of the other half, who would always seek to
break down national boundaries and would refuse co-operation in any
national action, and who would league themselves with bodies of similar
interests and anti-national tendencies in other countries. Then, even though
all might be well-meaning people desiring the good of mankind, the nation
would be very greatly weakened and probably would soon cease to exist as
such.
The illustration shews the importance of the distinction which Rousseau
did not draw in his discussion of the general will—namely, the distinction
between the good of all and the good of the whole, i.e. of the nation as such.
It might be argued that the distinction is purely verbal; it might be said that,
if you secure the good of all, you thereby ipso facto secure the good of the
whole, because the whole consists of the sum of existing individuals; and
that this is obvious, because, if you take them away, no whole remains. But
to argue thus is to ignore the fact on which we have already insisted—
namely, that the whole is much more than the sum of the existing units,
because it has an indefinitely long future before it and a part to play,
through indefinitely long periods of time, as a factor in the general welfare
and progress of mankind.
So much greater is the whole than the sum of its existing parts, that it
might well seem right to sacrifice the welfare and happiness of one or two
or more generations, and even the lives of the majority of the citizens, if
that were necessary to the preservation and future welfare of the whole
nation as such. This is no merely theoretical distinction, it is one of the
highest practical importance, which we may illustrate in two ways.
A whole nation may be confronted with the alternative, may be forced
to choose between the good of all and the good of the whole. Such a choice
was, it may be said without exaggeration, suddenly presented to the Belgian
people, and only less acutely to ourselves and to Italy, by the recent
European conflagration; and in each case the good of the whole has been
preferred. Is it not probable and obvious that, if each or all of these peoples
had consented to the domination of Germany, the material welfare of all
their existing citizens might well have been increased, rather than
diminished, and that their choice has involved not only the loss of life of
large numbers of their citizens and great sufferings for nearly all the others,
but also enormous sacrifice of material prosperity, in order that the whole
may survive and eventually prosper as a nation working out its national
destiny free from external domination? There are, or were, those who say
that they would just as soon live under German rule, because they would be
governed at least as well and perhaps better than by their own government
hitherto; and there is perhaps nothing intrinsically bad or wrong in this
attitude; the question of its rightness or wrongness turns wholly on the
valuation of nationality. It is easier to appreciate this plea on behalf of
another people than our own. One may hear it said even now that, after all,
it would have been better for Belgium that she should have entered into the
group of Germanic powers in some sort of federal system or Customs
union; that, in general, it is ridiculous that the small states should claim
sovereign powers and pretend to have their own foreign policy and so forth;
that they are struggling against the inevitable, against a universal and
necessary tendency for the absorption of the smaller states by the larger.
We may illustrate the difference between regard for the good of all
members of the nation and of the nation itself in another way—namely, by
reference to socialism, the principle which would abolish inequalities of
wealth and opportunity, as far as possible, by abolishing or greatly
restricting the rights of private property and capital, especially the right of
inheritance. There can, I think, be little doubt that the adoption of socialism
in this sense by almost any modern nation would increase the well being
and happiness of its members very decidedly on the whole for the present
generation and possibly for some generations to come. It is in respect of the
continued welfare of the whole and of its perpetuation as an evolving and
progressing organism that the effects seem likely to be decidedly bad. The
socialists are in the main those who fix their desire and attention on the
good of all; hence they are for the most part inclined to set a low value on
nationality, even while they demand a vast extension of the functions of the
State, conceived as an organised system of administration. Those, on the
other hand, who repudiate socialism, not merely because they belong to the
class of ‘Haves,’ must seek their justification in the consideration of the
probable effects of such a change on the welfare of the nation conceived as
an organism whose value far transcends the lives of the present generation.
When, then, we attribute to the idea of the nation or to the national
consciousness this all-important creative, constitutive, and conservative
function, we must be clear that the idea is not an intellectual conception
merely, but implies an enduring emotional conative attitude which is the
sentiment of devotion to the nation; and, further, we must remember that the
nation means not simply all existing individuals, the mere momentary
embodiment of the nation, but something that is far greater, because it
includes all the potentialities embodied in the existing persons and
organisation.
It is the presence and operation in the national mind of the idea of the
nation in the extended sense just indicated that gives to national decisions
and actions the character of truly collective volitions; they approach this
type more nearly, the more the idea is rich in meaning and adequate or true,
and the more widely it is spread, and the more powerful and widely spread
is the sentiment which attaches value to the nation and sways men to
decision and action for the sake of the whole, determining the issue among
all other conflicting motives.
And it is the working of the national spirit and the acceptance of and
devotion to the national organisation which render the submission of the
minority to the means chosen by the majority a voluntary submission; for it
is of the essence of that organisation that, while all accept and will the same
most general end, namely the welfare of the whole, the choice of means
must be determined by the judgment of the majority, formed and expressed
as a collective judgment and opinion by way of all the many channels of
reciprocal influence that the national organisation, both formal and
informal, provides. In so far as each man holds this attitude, esteeming the
nation and accepting loyally its constitution or organisation, the decision
determined by even a bare majority vote of parliament becomes the
expression of the national will; and the co-operation in carrying it out of
those who did not judge the method to be wise, and who therefore voted
against it, yet becomes a truly voluntary co-operation, in so far as they
accept the established organisation.
The point may be illustrated by the instance of a nation going to war. A
large minority may be against war, for reasons which to them may seem to
be of the highest kind; it may be that they judge the nation to be morally in
the wrong in the matter in dispute, or very questionably in the right, as
many Englishmen did during the Boer War; and yet, if, by the accepted
organised channels of national deliberation and decision, war has been
declared, then, although it was their duty to do what they could to make
their opinion prevail before the decision was reached, there is no moral
inconsistency in their supporting the war measures with all their strength. It
is in fact implied in their loyalty, if they are loyal and patriotic, that they
shall yield their individual opinion to the expression of the national will and
shall accept the means chosen to the common end. That is the truth implied
in the phrase—My country right or wrong. Of course, this phrase may be
taken in a reprehensible sense, as meaning that any opportunity of
forwarding the immediate interests of one’s country must be taken,
regardless of the interests of other communities and of the obligations of
common honesty and humanity upon which all human welfare depends.
In the same way, a man might disapprove of a particular tax, say on
liquor, or of obligatory military service; and yet he may accept the national
will and serve faithfully as a soldier, without inconsistency, and without
ceasing to be a free agent truly willing the acts imposed by his position in
the whole organisation; just as during the late war many priests served as
soldiers in the French army. Or, to take an extreme instance, a man who has
broken the law and even incurred the death penalty may be truly said to
undergo his punishment of imprisonment or death as a morally free agent, if
he is loyal to his country and its institutions, accepting the penalty, while
yet believing his action to be right. Such perfect loyalty to the nation is of
course rare; and in all actual nations men have progressed towards it in very
different degrees. Most existing nations have emerged from preceding
despotisms by the repeated widening of the sphere of freedom, as the
growth of loyalty in strength and extension rendered such freedom
consistent with the survival of the State and its administrative functions.
Thus a people progresses from the status of an organism, in which the
parts are subordinated to the whole without choice or free volition on their
part, or even against their wills, towards the ideal of a Nation-state, an
organic whole which is founded wholly upon voluntary contract between
each member and the whole, and in which the distinction between the State
and the nation becomes gradually overcome and replaced by identity. For,
as national self-consciousness develops and each man conceives more fully
and clearly the whole nation and his place and function in it, and grows in
loyalty to the nation, he ceases to obey the laws merely because he is
constrained by the authority and force of the State. An increasing proportion
of citizens obey the law and render due services voluntarily, because they
perceive that, in so doing, they are contributing towards the good of the
whole which they value highly; in so far as they act in this spirit, the actions
and restraints prescribed by law become their voluntary actions and
restraints.
Thus the theory that society is founded upon a Social Contract, which,
if taken as a description of the historical process of genesis, is false, is true,
if accepted as the constitutive principle of the ideal State towards which
progressive nations are tending.
And, as the organisation of a nation becomes less dependent upon outer
authority and upon mere custom and the unreasoning acceptance of
tradition, and more and more upon free consent and voluntary contract, the
nation does not cease to be an organism; it retains that formal and informal
organisation which has developed in large part without the deliberate
guidance of the collective will and which is essential to its collective life;
the national mind, as it grows in force and extension and understanding of
its own organisation, accepts those features which it finds good, and
gradually modifies those which appear less good in the light of its
increasing self knowledge; and so it tends more and more to become a
contractual organism, which, as Fouillée has insisted, is the highest type of
society.
It should be noticed that this ideal of the contractual organism
synthesises the two great doctrines or theories of society which have
generally been regarded as irreconcilable alternatives: the doctrine of
society as an organism, and that of society as founded upon reason and free
will. They have been treated as opposed and irreconcilable doctrines,
because those who regarded society as an organism, taking the standpoint of
natural science, have laid stress upon its evolution by biological accidents
and by the interaction and conflict of many blind impulses and purely
individual volitions, in which collective volition, governed by an ideal of
the form to be achieved, had no part. While, on the other hand, the idealist
philosophers, describing society or the nation as wholly the work of reason
and free will, have been guilty of the intellectualist fallacy of regarding man
as a purely rational being; they have ignored the fact that all men, even the
most intellectual, are largely swayed and moulded by processes of
suggestion, imitation, sympathy, and instinctive impulse, in quite non-
rational ways; and they have ignored still more completely the fact that the
operation of these non-rational processes continues to be not only of
immense influence but also inevitable and necessary to the maintenance of
that organic unity of society upon which as a basis the contract-unity is
superimposed as a bond of a higher, more rational and more spiritual
quality.
The former doctrine logically tends to the paralysis of social effort and
to the adoption of extreme individualism, to the doctrine of each man for
himself, and of laissez faire, doctrines such as those of Herbert Spencer.
The other, the idealist theory of the state as being founded and formed by
reason, tends equally logically towards extreme State socialism; because its
overweening belief in reason leads it to ignore the large and necessary basis
of subrational organisation and operation.
Only a synthesis of the two in the doctrine of the contractual organism
can reconcile them and give us the ideal of a nation in which the maximum
and perfection of organisation shall be combined with the maximum of
liberty, because in it each individual will be aware of the whole and his
place and functions in it, and will voluntarily accept that place and perform
those functions.
The highest, most perfectly organised and effective nation is, then, not
that in which the individuals are disposed of, their actions completely
controlled, and their wills suppressed by the power of the State. It is, rather,
one in which the self-consciousness and initiative and volition of
individuals, personality in short, is developed to the highest degree, and in
which the minds and wills of the members work harmoniously together
under the guidance and pressure of the idea of the nation, rendered in the
highest degree explicit and full and accurate.
The Value Of Nationality
At the present time, while the mass of men continue to accept the duty of
patriotism unquestioningly, and historians for the most part are content to
describe with some astonishment the immense development of nationalism
in the past century, many voices are loudly raised for and against
nationality. The great mass of men no doubt are swept away in the flood of
patriotic feeling. But the war has also intensified the antipathy, and given
increased force to the arguments, of those who decry nationality and
deprecate patriotism—for these are but two different modes of expressing
the same attitude.
There are two principal classes of the anti-nationalists. First, the
philosophic anarchists, who would abolish all states and governments, as
unnecessary evils, men like Kropotkin and Tolstoi. Secondly, the
cosmopolitans, who, while believing in the necessity of government and
even demanding more centralised administration, would yet abolish all
national boundaries as far as possible, boundaries of geography, of
language, race and sentiment, and all national governments, and would aim
at the establishment of one great world state.
Though the aims of these two parties are so widely different, they use
much the same arguments against nationalism. According to the anti-
nationalist view, nationalism and the patriotism in which it is founded are a
kind of disease of human nature, which, owing to the unfortunate fact that
mankind has retained the gregarious instinct of his animal ancestors,
inevitably breaks out as soon as any community begins to come into free
contact and rivalry with other communities, and which tends to grow in
force in a purely instinctive and irrational manner the more these contacts
and rivalries increase.
The liability to patriotism is thus regarded as closely comparable with
mankind’s unfortunate liability to drunkenness, to feel the fascination of
strong liquor—as merely a natural and inevitable result or by-product of an
unfortunate flaw in human nature—a tendency which will have to be sternly
repressed and, if possible, eradicated, before men can hope to live in peace
and tolerable security and to develop their higher capacities.
The fact that patriotism of some degree and form is universally
displayed, and that it breaks out everywhere into heat and flame when
certain conditions are realized, does not for them in any degree justify it;
and it should not, they hold, reconcile us to its continued existence; they
draw an indictment not merely against a whole people, but against the
whole human race. They attack nationalism, firstly, by describing what in
their opinion patriotism is and whence it comes; secondly, by describing
what they believe to be the natural consequences and effects of nationalism.
The most common mode of attack is to identify patriotism with
jingoism; they speak of “jelly-bellied flag-flappers” of flag-wagging and
mafficking; they assert that the essence of patriotism is hatred and all
uncharitableness towards other countries and their citizens.93
Less virulent is the criticism of those who, looking coldly upon
patriotism, describe it as the mere blind expression of the working of the
gregarious instinct among us, and as something therefore quite irrational,
which must and will tend to disappear, as men become more enlightened
and are guided more by reason and less by instinct.94
Again, it is said that patriotism is a form of selfishness and therefore
bad; that it is a limitation of our sympathies, a principle of injustice; that it
stands in the way of the realisation of universal justice, of the universal
brotherhood of man, which is the ideal we obviously must accept and aim
at. Or in other words, and this is the main indictment, it is alleged that
patriotism and nationalism inevitably tend to produce war, that they keep
the rival nations perpetually arming for possible wars and actually in
commercial and economic war, if not at real war. And of course the evils of
warfare and of such perpetual preparation for war are great and obvious
enough in modern Europe. In support of this indictment, they point to the
golden age of the Roman Empire, when the inhabitants of all its parts were
content to sink their differences of race and country and were proud to
proclaim themselves citizens of the Roman Empire; and they say that in
consequence the civilised world attained then a pitch of prosperity and
contentment never known before or since over any large area of the earth.
This is a formidable indictment, to which the exponents and advocates
of patriotism have for the most part been content to reply by renewed
exhortations to patriotism, by emotional appeals, by rhetoric, by the
quotation of patriotic verses, the citation of the glorious deeds of our armies
and soldiers now and in past times, by all the arts of persuasion and
suggestion. As a fine example of this method one may cite Mr Stratford
Wingfield’s History of British Patriotism, in which he not only confines
himself to these methods, but shows a positive dislike and contempt for all
attempts to apply reason and scientific method to the study of human
affairs.95 In maintaining this attitude, the advocates of patriotism give some
colour to the claim of their opponents that patriotism or nationalism is
essentially irrational, in the sense that it is incapable of justification by
reason.
The politicians and historians, on the other hand, who are so generally
demanding that the European settlement after the war must accept
nationality as its fundamental principle, are commonly content to note the
strength and the wide distribution of the patriotic sentiment, without
enquiring into its origin, nature, or value.
Let us examine the arguments against patriotism and then see what
reason can advance in its defence. For, though a rational defence of
patriotism will have little direct effect in making patriots, we may be sure
that, if such defence cannot be maintained, patriotism will have to fight a
losing battle.
In disparaging patriotism by describing it as the work of an instinct, the
gregarious or the pugnacious or other instinct, or of several instincts, its
critics are guilty of two psychological errors and a popular fallacy. The last
is the fallacy that the worth of any thing is to be judged by the course from
which it springs. Even if patriotism were nothing more than the direct
expression of the gregarious instinct which we possess in common with
many of the higher animals, that would not in itself condemn it. But this
description of it, as a product of instinct as opposed to the principles we
attain by reason, involves that false disjunction and opposition of reason to
instinct which is traditional and which the intellectualist philosophers
commonly adopt, when they condescend to recognise in any way the
presence of instinctive tendencies in human nature.
The other psychological error is the failure to recognize that patriotism
although, like all other great mental forces, it is rooted in instinct, is not
itself an instinct or the direct expression of any instinct or group of
instincts, but is rather an extremely complicated sentiment, which has a
long and complex history in each individual mind in which it manifests
itself; that it is, therefore, capable of infinite variety and of an indefinite
degree of intellectualisation and refinement; that the cult of patriotism is,
therefore, a field for educational effort of the highest order, and that in this
field moral and intellectual education may achieve their noblest and most
far-reaching effects.
The psychological justification of patriotism has already been indicated,
but may be concisely stated here. The moral value of the group spirit was
considered in an earlier chapter; we saw how it, and it alone, raises the
conduct of the mass of men above the plane of simple egoism or family
selfishness. The sentiment of devotion or loyalty to any group has this
virtue in some degree; but loyalty to the nation is capable of exalting
character and conduct in a higher degree than any other form of the group
spirit. For the nation alone has continuity of existence in the highest degree;
a long past which gives a large perspective of past history, involving the
history of long series of self-sacrificing efforts and many heroic actions;
and the prospect of an indefinitely prolonged future, with the possibility of
continued progress and development of every kind, and therefore some
security for the perpetuation of the results achieved by individual efforts96.
Further, the nation alone, is a self-contained and complete organism;
other groups within it do but minister to the life of the whole; their value is
relative to that of the whole; the continuance of results achieved on their
behalf is dependent upon the continued welfare of the whole (for example,
the welfare of any class or profession—a fact too easily overlooked by
those in whom class spirit grows strong). Hence, the nation, as an object of
sentiment, includes all smaller groups within it; and, when the nation is
regarded from an enlightened point of view, the sentiment for it naturally
comes to include in one great system all minor group sentiments and to be
strengthened by their incorporation.
It is important to notice also that, just as the minor group sentiments are
not incompatible with, but rather may strengthen, the national sentiment,
when subordinated to and incorporated in it, so the national sentiment is not
incompatible with still more widely inclusive group sentiments—for
example, that for a European system of nations, for the ‘League of Nations’
or for Western Civilisation in general. And, while loyalty to humanity as a
whole is a noble ideal, it is one which can only be realized through a further
step of that process of extension of the object of the group sentiment, of
which extension patriotism itself is the culmination at present for the great
mass of civilised mankind. The attempt to achieve it by any other road is
bound to fail because psychologically unsound97.
Let us note in passing that neglect of this truth gives rise to two of the
extreme forms of political doctrine or ideal, current at the present day; first,
the ideal of the brotherhood of man in a nationless world; secondly, the
extreme form of democratic individualism which assumes that the good of
society is best promoted by the freest possible pursuit by individuals of
their private ends, which believes that each man must have an equal voice
in the government of his country, because that is the only way in which his
interests and those of his class can be protected and forwarded; a doctrine
which regards public life as a mere strife of private and class interests. Both
ideals fly in the face of psychological facts; and, though they are in
appearance extreme opposites, they are apt to be found associated in the
same minds.
At the other end of the scale, we have the philosophical conservatism of
such a thinker as Edmund Burke, which is keenly aware of the organic unity
of society and looks constantly to the good of the whole, deriving from that
consideration its leading motives and principles, and which trusts
principally to the growth of the group spirit for the holding of the balance
between conflicting interests and for the promotion of the public welfare.
Having seen the importance for national life of the idea of the nation,
the diffusion of which through the minds of the people constitutes national
self-consciousness, let us glance for a moment at the way other ideas may
play leading rôles in national life. Such are ideas which became national
ideals, that is to say, ideas of some end to be realised by the nation which
became widely entertained and the objects of strong sentiments and of
collective emotion and desire and which, therefore, determine collective
action.
I shall not attempt to deal separately with various classes of such ideas,
or ideals—the political, the religious, the economic; but shall only note the
fact that they have played and may yet play great parts in the history of the
world.
Men are not swayed exclusively by considerations of material self-
interest, as the older school of economists generally assumed; nor even by
spiritual self-interest, as too much of the religious teaching of the past has
assumed; nor even by consideration of the welfare of the social groups of
which they are members. Many of the great events of history have been
determined by ideas that have had no relation to individual welfare, but
have inspired a collective enthusiasm for collective action, for national
effort, of a disinterested kind; and the lives of some nations have been
dominated by some one or two such ideas. These ideas are first conceived
and taught by some great man, or by a few men who have acquired prestige
and influence; they then become generally accepted by suggestion and
imitation, accepted more or less uncritically and established beyond the
reach of argument and reasoning.
No matter what the character of the idea, its collective acceptance by a
people enhances for the time the homogeneity of mind among them, renders
the people more intimately a unity, and serves also to mark it off more
sharply from other peoples among whom other ideas prevail.
But, besides thus binding together at any period of its history the people
that entertains it the generally accepted idea, if it endures, may produce
further effects by becoming incorporated in the national organisation; in so
far as it determines the form of activity of the people, it moulds their
institutions and customs into harmony with itself, until they become in
some measure its embodiment and expression; and in any vigorous nation
there are usually one or two dominant ideas at work in this way.
It is a favourite dogma with some writers (for example M. le Bon) that
ideas, before they can exert great effects in the life of a nation, must first
become unconscious ideas, incorporated as they say in the unconscious soul
of a people. This is an obscure confused doctrine, which, if it is meant to be
taken literally, we can only reject. If it is to have any real meaning, it must
be taken in the sense that the long prevalence of the ideal moulds the
institutions and customs and the executive organisation of a people, so that
national action towards the ideal end becomes more or less automatic or
routine.
If the ideal so accepted and incorporated in the organised structure of
the national mind, is one that makes for strength and at the same time
permits of progress, it lives on; in other cases it may destroy the nation, or
petrify it, arresting all progress.
Consider one or two examples of ideas that have played dominant rôles
in the lives of nations. They are mostly political, or religious, or, most
powerful of all, politico-religious. The idea of world-conquest has
dominated and has destroyed several great nations, of which the latest
example is the German Empire. The idea of conversion by the sword,
accepted with enthusiasm by the Arab nation, gave it for a time tremendous
energy, but contained no potency of permanent power or of progress. The
idea of immortality, or desire of continued existence after death, seems to
have dominated the minds of the ancient Egyptian people; the idea of
escape from the evils of this world, those who have fully accepted
Buddhism, like the Burmans98. The idea of caste as an eternal and
impassable barrier has largely determined the history of India.
All these are ideas which have proved ineffective to sustain national
vigour or to promote social evolution. It would not be strictly true to say
that the fall, or the unprogressive condition, of the peoples that have
entertained these ideas is the result of those ideas; because the general
acceptance of them proves that they were in harmony with the type of mind
of the people. Yet the formulation of the ideas by the leading minds who
impressed them on the peoples must have accentuated those tendencies with
which they harmonised; and in each case, if the idea had never been
formulated, or if others had been effectively impressed on the mind of the
people, the course of its history would have been changed. Of ideas less
adverse to national life take the idea of ancestor worship, and the idea of
personal loyalty to the ruler, ideas which commonly go together and have
played an immense part in the life of some peoples, notably in Japan; they
have served as effective national bonds in periods of transition through
which despotically ruled populations have progressed to true nationhood.
The idea of the divine right of kings played for a time a similar rôle in
Europe.
A good example of the operation of an ideal in a modern nation is that
of the ideal of a great colonial empire in the French nation. No doubt, hopes
of economic advantages may have played some part in this case; but the
growth of the immense oversea empire of modern France, as well as of the
great extra-European conquests which France has made in the past but has
ceased to control, seems to have been due in the main to the operation of
this ideal in the national mind. France has no surplus population, and no
Frenchman desires to leave his beautiful France; everyone regards himself
as cruelly exiled if compelled to live for a time in any of the oversea
possessions; and most of these, notably the Indo-Chinese Empire are very
expensive, costing the nation far more in administrative expenses than any
profits derived from them, and involving constant risks of international
complications and war, as in Morocco in recent years. Nevertheless, the
ideal still holds sway and, under its driving power, the oversea territories of
France, especially in Africa, have grown enormously. And this ideal has
inevitably incorporated itself in the organisation of the nation, in a colonial
office and a foreign legion, and all the administrative machinery necessarily
set up for securing the ends prescribed by the ideal.
In modern times the most striking illustration of the power of ideas on
national life is afforded by the influence of the ideals of liberty and equality.
It was the effective teaching of these ideals of liberty and equality, primarily
by Rousseau, to a people prepared by circumstances to receive them, which
produced the French Revolution; and all through the nineteenth century
they have continued to determine great changes of political and social
organisation in many countries of Europe and in America.
In England the idea of liberty has long been current and long ago had
become incorporated and expressed in the national organisation; but its
application received a vast extension when in 1834 England insisted on the
liberation of all British-owned slaves and paid twenty million sterling in
compensation. That the idea still lives on among us, with this extended
application, seems to have been proved by the results of recent elections
which were influenced largely by the force of the no-slavery cry in relation
to coloured labour. It is an excellent example of an established collective
ideal against which reason is of no avail.
The ideal of liberty never entered the minds of the most advanced
peoples of antiquity; their most enlightened political thinkers could not
imagine a State which was not founded upon slavery. Yet it has become
collectively accepted by all the leading nations, and the ordinary man has so
entirely accepted it that he cannot be brought to reason about it. Facts and
arguments tending to show that the greater part of the population of the
world might be happier without liberty and under some form of slavery
cannot touch or enter his mind at all.
The ideal of political equality is of still later growth, and is in a sense
derivative from that of liberty; it was in the main accepted as a means to
liberty, but has become an end in itself. It is moulding national organisation
everywhere; through its influence parliamentary government and universal
suffrage are becoming the almost universal rule, and, through leading to
their adoption, this ideal is in a fair way to wreck certain of the less firmly
organised nations, and possibly our own also.
But the ideal which, beyond all others, characterises the present age of
almost all the nations of the world is the ideal of progress. Hardly anyone
has any clear notion what he means by progress, or could explicate the idea;
but the sentiment is very strong, though the idea is very vague. This idea
also was unknown to the leading thinkers of antiquity and is of recent
growth; yet it is so almost universally accepted, and it so permeates the
mental atmosphere in every direction, that it is hard for us to realise how
new a thing in the history of the world is the existence, and still more the
effective dominance, of the idea. It is perhaps in America that its rule is
most absolute; there the severest condemnation that can be passed by the
average man upon any people or institution is to say that it is fifty years
behind the time. The popular enthusiasm for flying-machines, which
threatens to make life almost unlivable, is one of the striking illustrations of
the force of this ideal.
More recent still, and perhaps equally important, is the idea of the
solidarity of the human race and of the responsibility of each nation towards
the rest, especially towards the weaker and more backward peoples. We no
longer cheerfully and openly exterminate an inferior people; and, when we
do so, it is with some expressions of regret and even of indignation.
But this moral idea is still in process of finding acceptance and
illustrates well that process. It has been taught by a few superior minds and
none dares openly repudiate it; hence, it gains ground and is now commonly
accepted, verbally at least, and is just beginning to affect national action.
The four ideas, liberty, equality, progress, and human solidarity or
universal responsibility, seem to be the leading ideas of the present era, the
ideas which, in conjunction with national sentiments, are more than any
other, fashioning the future of the world.
The last two illustrate exceptionally well the capacity of nations to be
moved by abstract ideas not directly related to the welfare of the individuals
whose actions they determine; they show once more how false is the
doctrine that national life is but the conflict of individual wills striving after
individual goods. They show that, through his life in and mental interaction
with organised society, man is raised morally and intellectually high above
the level he could individually achieve.
Chapter XIII.
Nations of the Higher Type
Table of Contents
Let us consider now the type of nation which from our present point of
view is the most interesting, the type which approximates most nearly to a
solution of the problem of civilisation, to the reconciliation of individuality
with collectivity, to the synthesis of individualist and collectivist ideals; that
in which the rights and wills of individuals are not forcibly subordinated to
those of the State by the power of a governing class, and in which the
deliberative side of the national mind is well developed and effective.
Such are in a certain degree the French, but still more the British and the
American nations. In the two latter countries the rights of the individual are
made supreme over all other considerations, the welfare of the whole is
only to be advanced by measures which do not override individual wills and
rights; or, at least, the only power which is admitted to have the right in any
degree to override individual wills is the will of the majority. In such a
nation the greatest efforts are concentrated on the perfection of the
deliberative organisation, by means of which the general mind may arrive at
collective judgment and choice of means and may express its will. A vast
amount of time and energy is devoted to this deliberative work; while the
executive organisation, by which its decisions have to be carried into effect,
is apt to be comparatively neglected and hence imperfect.
These two complementary features of such states we see well
exemplified here and in America99; where the amount of time, money, and
effort spent upon the deliberative processes and the elaboration of the
organisation through which they are effected is enormously greater than in
other nations. And, in spite of the energy expended on deliberative
processes and on the elaboration of their organisation, the interests of the
nation as a whole are not at present forwarded in a manner at all
comparable with those of such a State as Germany. Nevertheless, such
national actions as we do achieve are far more truly the expression of the
national will; and, if the national mind is to be developed to a high level,
this vast expenditure of energy, which to some impatient spirits seems
wasteful and useless, must go on.
As was said in a former chapter, such collective deliberation of modern
nations is only rendered possible by the great facilities of communication
we enjoy; telegraph, post, and railway, and especially the press. The
ancients saw truly enough that, with their limited means of communication,
the higher form of state-organisation must be restricted to a small
population of some thousands only—the City-State.
It is important to note that not only do modern facilities of
communication render possible a truly collective mental life for the large
Nation-States of the present age; but that these modern conditions actually
carry with them certain great advantages, which tend to raise the collective
mental life of modern nations to a higher level than was possible for the
ancient City-State, even though its members were of high average capacity
and many of them of very great mental power, as in Athens.
The assembly of citizens in one place for national deliberation rendered
them much more susceptible to those less desirable peculiarities of
collective mental life which characterise simple crowds; particularly, the
excess of emotional excitement, increased suggestibility, and, hence, the
ease with which the whole mass could be swayed unduly by the skilful
orator. In the modern nation, on the other hand, the transmission of news by
the press secures a certain delay, and a lack of synchronism, in its reception
by different groups and individuals; and it secures also a certain delay in the
action and reaction of mind on mind, which gives opportunity for individual
deliberation. Also the sympathetic action of the mass mind on the individual
mind is in large part indirect, rather than direct, representative rather than
perceptual, and therefore less overwhelming in its effects. These conditions
greatly temper the violence of the emotional reactions and permit of a
diversity of feeling and opinion; an opposed minority has time to form itself
and to express an opinion, and so may temper the hasty and emotional
reaction of the majority in a way that is impossible in a general assembly.
A further advantage of the large size of nations may arise from the fact
that actual decision as to choice of means for effecting national action has
to be achieved by means of representatives who come together in one place.
Representative government is not merely an inferior substitute for
government by general assembly; it is superior in many respects. If each
representative were a mere delegate, an average specimen of the group he
represents, chosen by lot and merely charged to express their will, this
feature would modify the crude collective mental processes in one
important respect only; namely, it would counteract to some extent that
weakening of individual responsibility which is characteristic of collective
mental action. But, in addition to this, internal organisation, in the form of
tradition and custom, comes in to modify very greatly the collective
process.
We see such modifying influence very clearly in the election of the
English House of Commons and in the methods of its operations. Owing
partly to a natural tendency, partly to a fortunate tradition, the people do not
elect just any one of themselves to serve as a delegate or average sample of
the mass; but as a rule they choose, or try to choose, some man who
displays special capacity and special qualifications for taking part in the
national deliberations. In so far as they are successful in this, their
representatives are able men and men to whose minds the social
consciousness, the consciousness of the whole people, of its needs and
tendencies and aspirations, is more fully and clearly present than to the
average mind. They are also in the main men of more than average public
spirit. Hence it is not unknown that a purely working class constituency,
being offered liberal, conservative, and labour candidates, instead of
choosing the labour man, one of themselves, gives him only a small fraction
of the total votes. Then, within the body of representatives, this process, by
which greater influence is given to the abler men, to those whose minds
reflect most fully the whole people, is carried further still. A small group of
these men exerts a predominant influence in all deliberations; and not only
are they in the main the best qualified (for they only attain their leading
positions by success in an intense and long continued competition) but they
are put in a position in which they can hardly fail to feel a great
responsibility resting upon them; and in which they feel the full force of
political traditions. The deliberative organisation of the American nation
illustrates, when compared with our own, the importance of these traditions;
for its lesser efficiency is largely due to the absence of such traditions, and
to the fact that their system banishes from the House of Representatives its
natural leaders and those on whom responsibility falls most heavily.
Lastly, the existence of two traditionally opposed parties ensures that
every important step shall be fully discussed. The traditional division into
two parties, which from one point of view seems so irrational, nevertheless
exerts very important and valuable influences, of which the chief is that it
prevents the assembly of legislators becoming a mere psychological crowd
easily swayed to a decision by collective emotion and skilful suggestion; for
each suggestion coming from the one party acts by contra-suggestion upon
the other and provokes an opposition that necessitates discussion100.
In these two ways, then;—first, through the culmination of national
deliberation among a selected group of representatives, among whom again
custom and tradition accord precedence and prestige to the natural leaders,
the most able and those in whose consciousness the nation, in the past,
present and future is most adequately reflected; secondly, by means of the
party system, which ensures vigorous criticism and full discussion of all
proposals, under a system of traditional conventions evolved for the
regulation of such discussions;—in these two ways the principal vices of
collective deliberation are corrected, and the formal deliberations and
decisions of the nation are raised to a higher plane than the collective
deliberations of any assembly of men lacking such traditional organisation
could possibly attain. The part played by unwritten tradition in the working
of the British constitution is of course immense, as for example, the
existence and enormous prestige of the cabinet, and the tradition that a party
coming into power must respect the legislation of the party previously in
power. Without this last, representative government, or at any rate the party
system, would be impossible. The smooth working of the system depends
entirely upon the influence of these and similar traditions which exist only
in the minds of men. Or, take as another example, the tradition of absolute
impartiality on the part of the Speaker and of loyal acceptance of his rulings
by every member of the House; or the tradition which distinguishes sharply
between political and private relations, in virtue of which the parties to a
most bitter political strife may and very generally do remain in perfectly
friendly private relations.
These and other such traditions, which secure the efficient working of
the organisation for national deliberation, all rest in turn upon a traditional
and tacit assumption—namely, the assumption that both parties are working
for the good of the nation as they conceive and understand it, that both
parties have this common end and differ only in their judgment as to the
means by which it can best be achieved. They rest also on the traditional
and tacit admission that one’s own judgment, and that of one’s party, may
be mistaken, and that in the long run the legislation which any party can
effect is an expression of the organised national mind and is therefore to be
respected. It is this acquiescence in accomplished legislation in virtue of
this tacit assumption which gives to the decisions of Parliament the status,
not merely of the expression of the will of a bare majority, but of the
expression of the will of practically the whole nation. Underlying the
stability of the whole system, again, is the tradition, sedulously fostered and
observed by the best and leading minds, that the raison d’être and purpose
of the representative parliament is to organise, and to give the most
complete possible expression to, the national mind and will; and that no
constitutional change or change of procedure is justifiable unless it tends to
the more complete realisation of these objects.
In virtue of these traditions our Parliament and Press constitute
undoubtedly the best means for effecting organisation of the national mind
in its deliberative aspect that has yet been evolved; and we should
remember this when we feel inclined to gird at the ‘great talking shop,’ at
the slowness of its procedure and at the logical absurdities of the two-party
system; and, above all, we should realize how valuable and worthy of
conservation are these scarcely formulated traditions, for they are
absolutely essential to its efficiency. It is just because the efficiency of the
deliberative organisation of a nation depends upon the force of such
traditions, that, though it is possible to take the system of parliamentary
representation and establish it by decree or plebiscite in a nation which has
hitherto had no such deliberative organisation, it is not possible to make it
work smoothly and efficiently amongst such a people. Hence, although
almost every civilised nation has done its best to imitate the British system
of parliamentary government, hardly any one has made a success of it; and,
in nearly all, it is in constant danger of being superseded by some more
primitive form of government—one need only mention Mexico, Portugal,
Russia, France, Austria-Hungary. In all these countries, and even in
America, there seems to be already a not very remote possibility of the
supersession of parliamentary government by a dictatorship—a process
which has actually occurred in many of the municipal governments of
America, and the fear of which has constantly checked the smooth working
of the parliamentary system in France.
As a single illustration of the way in which the conditions we have been
considering affect the collective acts of the nation, consider what happened
at the time of the Russian outrage in the North Sea during the Russo-
Japanese war. When a Russian fleet fired upon our fishing boats doing
considerable damage to them, the means of communication were
sufficiently developed among us to allow of the action and reaction of all on
each which produces the characteristic results of collective mental action,
the exaltation of emotion, the suggestibility, the sense of irresponsible
power; and, in the absence of the deliberative organisation which, by
concentrating influence and responsibility in the hands of a few of the best
men, controlled and modified this collective action, we should have rushed
upon the Russian fleet and probably have brought on a general European
war. The control and counteraction of this kind of outburst of collective
emotion and impulsive action is one of the heaviest responsibilities of those
to whom predominant influence is accorded.
It is only in virtue of the strong organisation of the national mind resting
upon these long traditions of parliamentary government, that at such a time
control of the popular emotion and impulse is possible. And the weaker and
less efficient is such traditional organisation, the more does any such
incident tend to provoke a collective manifestation which approximates in
its uncontrollable violence and unconsidered impulsiveness to the
behaviour of an unorganised crowd. Hence governments, where the
democratic principle is acknowledged but the traditional organisation is less
strong, are constantly in danger of having their hands forced by some
outburst of popular passion—as in France.
It is worth noting that, when Aristotle inveighed against democracy as
an evil form of government, the only form of democratic government he
had in mind was government by the voices of a mob gathered together in
one place and lacking all the safeguards which, as we have seen, render our
British national deliberations so much superior to those of a mere crowd of
persons of equally good average capacity and character.
But it is not only in the formal deliberations of the nation that internal
organisation, resting on tradition, secures the predominance of the influence
of the best and ablest minds. The same is true of all national thought and
feeling. There exists in every great nation the vague influence we call
public opinion, which is the great upholder of right and justice, which
rewards virtue and condemns vice and selfishness. Public opinion exists
only in the minds of individuals (for we have rejected, provisionally at
least, the conception of a collective consciousness); yet it is a product not of
individual, but of collective, mental life. And it has in any healthy nation far
higher standards of right and justice and tolerance than the majority of
individuals could form or maintain; that is to say, it is in these respects far
superior to an opinion which would be the mere resultant or algebraic sum
of the opinions of all the living individuals. In reference to any particular
matter its judgment is far superior to that of the average of individuals, and
superior probably in many cases to that which even the best individuals
could form for themselves.
How does public opinion come to be superior to individual and to
average opinion? There seems to be something paradoxical in the statement.
The fact is of the utmost importance; for public opinion is the ultimate
source of sanctions of all public acts, the highest court of appeal before
which every executive act performed in the name of the nation must justify
itself. If public opinion were merely the immediate expression of the
collective feelings and judgments of an unorganised mass of men, its
verdicts would be (as we have seen) inferior to those of the average
individuals, whereas, as a matter of fact, its expressions are much superior
to those of the average individuals.
The influence of public opinion is especially clear and interesting in its
relations to law. In this country it is not made by law, but makes law. Where
law is imposed and long maintained by the authority of despotic power, it
will of course mould public opinion; but, in any progressive highly
organised nation, law and the lawyers are always one or two or more
generations behind public opinion. The most progressive body of law
formally embodies the public opinion of past generations rather than of the
generation living at the time.
The fact of the superiority of public opinion is generally admitted and
various explanations are current, for the most part very vague and
incomplete. There is the mystical explanation embodied in the dictum that
the voice of the people is the voice of God. A rather less vague explanation
is that adopted by Mr Beattie Crozier101 (among others). It is said that the
average man carries within him a germ of an ideal of justice and right, and
that he applies this to the criticism or approval of the actions of other men;
though he often fails to apply it to his own actions, because, where his own
interests are concerned, he is apt to be the sport of purely egoistic impulses.
But this explanation is only partially true. It represents the average man
as more hypocritical than he really is, and as falling farther below the
standards he acknowledges than he actually does fall. It leaves unexplained
the fact that he has this sentiment for an ideal of justice and right; and it
proceeds on a false assumption as to the nature of the problem, in assuming
that men judge the actions of other men by higher standards than those
which they apply to their own conduct; whereas this is by no means
generally true.
Is it, then, that superior abilities, which enable a man to gain prestige
and to impress his ideas and sentiments upon his fellow men and so to
influence public opinion, are commonly combined with a natural
superiority of moral sentiment, with a love of right and a hatred of
injustice? There may be some degree of such natural correlation of superior
abilities with superior moral qualities, but the supposition seems very
doubtful; and certainly, if it exists, it is not sufficient to account for the
elevation of public opinion. We frequently see consummate ability
combined with most questionable moral sentiments, as in Napoleon and
many other historic personages.
The true explanation is, I submit, to be found in the basal fact that the
moral sentiments are essentially altruistic, while the immoral and non-moral
sentiments are in the main self-regarding102. Hence, the person who has
great abilities but is lacking in moral sentiments and altruism applies his
abilities to secure his personal satisfactions and aggrandisement; and, in so
far as he aims at affecting the minds of others, he tries only to secure their
obedience to his commands and suggestions, to inspire them with
deference, admiration, fear and awe, and to evoke an outward display of
these feelings. But, as to the ideas and sentiments of the people in general,
save in so far as they affect his own gratification, he cares nothing.
Accordingly we never find great abilities deliberately, consistently and
directly applied to the degradation of public opinion and morals, save
occasionally in relation to some particular end. And we find few or no great
works of literature and art deliberately aiming at such degradation.
But with those persons in whom great abilities are naturally combined
with moral disposition the case is very different. The moral disposition is
essentially altruistic; it is concerned for the welfare of others, of men in
general. Hence such a man deliberately applies his abilities to influence the
minds of others. The exertion of such influence is for him an end in itself.
He seeks and finds his chief satisfaction in exerting an influence, as wide
and deep as possible, over the minds of men; not merely in evoking fear or
admiration of himself, but in inspiring in them the same elevated sentiments
and sympathies which he finds within himself.
For this reason such men as G. F. Watts, Carlyle and Ruskin exert a
much greater and more widespread and lasting influence over the minds of
men than do equally able men who are devoid of moral disposition; for the
former make the exertion of this influence their chief end, while the others
care not at all about the state of public opinion and the minds of the mass.
Still less does the non-moral man of great ability strive with all his powers
to make others act upon base motives like his own and to degrade their
sentiments; rather, he sees that he can better accomplish his selfish ends if
other men are unlike himself and are governed by altruistic sentiments; and
he sees also that he can better attain his ends if he does lip-service to
altruistic ideals; and he is, therefore, apt to exert whatever direct influence
he has over the sentiments of men in the same direction as the moral
leaders, praising the same actions, upholding in words the same ideals. In
this way the men of great abilities, but of immoral or non-moral character,
actually aid the moral leaders to some extent in their work; whereas under
no conditions is the relation reversed; the moral leaders never praise or
acquiesce in bad actions, but always denounce them and use their influence
against them.
It follows that, in a well organised nation, public opinion, which is
formed and maintained so largely by the influence of leading personalities,
will usually be more in conformity with the sentiments of the best men than
of the average man, will be above rather than below private opinion. For, if
the bad and the good men of exceptional powers were equal in numbers and
capacity, the sum of their influences tending directly to exalt public opinion
would be enormously greater than the sum of their influences tending to
degrade it; and, as a matter of fact, the influence for good of a few altruistic
leaders is able to outweigh the degrading influences of a much larger
number of purely selfish men of equally great capacities, and is able to
maintain a high standard of public opinion.
We have distinguished a formal and an informal organisation of the
national deliberative processes, the latter expressing itself as public opinion.
These two organisations co-exist and are, of course, not altogether
independent of one another; yet they may be to a considerable extent
independent; though the more intimate the functional relations and the
greater the harmony between them, the healthier will be the national life.
We may note in passing an interesting difference in respect to
organisation of the national mind between the English and the American
peoples, a difference which illustrates this relative independence of the
formal and informal organisations.
In England both the formal and informal organisations have achieved a
pretty good level; in both cases the best minds are enabled to exert and have
long exerted a dominant influence; and the interaction between the two
organisations is very intimate. But in America, while the informal
organisation expressed in public opinion seems to be very highly
developed, the formal organisation is much inferior; it has not yet such
traditions as give the greatest influence to the best minds and embody the
effects of their influence. And the better Americans tend to value lightly the
formal organisation, to take no part in the working of it, deliberately to
ignore it, and to rely rather upon public opinion to repress any evils when
they are in danger of reaching an intolerable development.
Both in the formal organisation of the national mind, which is the
parliamentary or other national assembly, and in the informal organisation
which is public opinion, we see, then, that (in the nation of higher
civilisation at least) organisation results in a raising of the collective mental
process above the level of the average minds, because it gives a
predominant influence to the best minds who form and maintain the
traditions, especially the moral traditions; and these press upon the minds of
all members of the community from their earliest years, moulding them
more or less into conformity with themselves, fostering the better,
repressing the purely egoistic, tendencies.
And the ideal organisation after which we ought to strive, is that which
would give the greatest possible influence of this sort to the best minds, an
influence which consists not in merely organising and directing the energies
of the people in the manner most effective for material or even scientific
progress, as in modern Germany; but one which, by moulding the
sentiments and guiding the reasoning of the people in all matters, public and
private alike, secures their consent and agreement and the co-operation of
their wills in all affairs of national importance.
When such organisation is in any degree attained and a more or less
consistent system of national traditions is embodied in the political,
religious, literary, and scientific culture, which moulds in some degree the
minds of all men, the national mind clearly becomes, as we said in an
earlier chapter, a system of interacting mental forces which are not merely
tendencies of the living members of the nation, but are also, in an even
greater degree, the ideas and tendencies of the dead; and we see also that in
such a people the national consciousness is most truly embodied, not in the
minds of the average men, but in the minds of the best men of the time.
The term ‘public opinion’ is sometimes, perhaps generally, used in a
looser and wider sense than the meaning implied in the foregoing pages. It
is used in the looser sense by President Lowell in his Public Opinion and
Popular Government. By ‘public opinion’ he seems to mean simply the
algebraic sum or balance of individual opinions; he writes “the opinion of
the whole people is only the collected opinions of all the persons
therein103.” In accordance with this view, he regards representative
institutions as merely one means by which this sum of opinions may be
collected and recorded. And he seems to be prepared to regard the
‘referendum’ or the ‘initiative’ in any of their forms, or other methods of
direct legislation, as equally good methods, if only all individuals would
take the trouble to register their votes upon every question proposed to
them. He is aware, of course, that this can hardly be expected of persons
who have other interests and occupations than the purely political, and that
the direct methods are therefore impracticable as general methods of
legislation. If it were true that representative institutions do and should
merely collect and record the individual opinions of all members of the
public, then it is obvious that each representative should be merely a
delegate sent to record the votes of the majority of his constituents.
Whereas, if representative institutions should, and in various degrees do,
constitute the formal deliberative organisation of the national mind, through
which national deliberation and judgment are raised to a higher plane than
that of a mere crowd, it follows that the representative should exert his own
powers of reasoning and judgment, aided by his special knowledge and
equipment, by the special sources of information that he enjoys, in the light
of the discussions in which he takes part, and influenced by all those
political traditions whose force he experiences in exceptional fulness by
reason of his priviledged position. President Lowell, in discussing the
functions of the representative, does not decide in favour of the former
view, as consistency should perhaps lead him to do; thereby showing that he
is not wholly committed to the individualist view. He discusses the question
whether the member of Parliament or Congress should regard himself as
representing the interests of his constituents alone, or as concerned
primarily and chiefly with the interests of the whole people; and he rightly
inclines to the latter view. This is not quite the same distinction as that
which is insisted upon in these pages. Even if each representative were
concerned only for the welfare of the nation as a whole, yet so long as he
regarded it as his sole function to vote as he believes the majority of the
citizens would vote in any process of direct legislation, he would fall short
of the highest duty which is laid upon him by his position—namely, not
merely that of recording the opinion of the majority, but that of taking part
in the organised deliberative activities of the national mind by which it
arrives at judgments and decisions of a higher order than any purely
individual, or algebraic sum of individual, judgments and decisions104.
Public opinion, in the sense in which I have used the words in this
chapter (which seems to me the only proper use of them) is, then, not a
mere sum of individual opinions upon any particular question; it is rather
the expression of that tone or attitude of mind which prevails throughout the
nation and owes its quality far more to the influence of the dead than of the
living, being the expression of the moral sentiments that are firmly and
traditionally established in the mind of the people, and established more
effectively and in more refined forms in the minds of the leaders of public
opinion than in the average citizen. This tone of the national mind enables it
to arrive at just judgments on questions of right and wrong, of duty and
honour and public desert; though it may have little bearing upon such
practical questions as bimetallism, tariff reform, or railway legislation. The
current use of the term, in this country at least, does, I think, recognise that
public opinion properly applies only to the sphere of moral judgments and
can and should have no bearing upon the practical details of legislation.
Public opinion is, both in its development and in its operations, essentially
collective; it is essentially the work of the group mind. Its accepted
standards of value are slowly built up under the influence of the moral
leaders of past ages; and, in the application of those standards to any
particular question, the influence of the moral leaders of the time makes
itself felt. I have kept in mind in the foregoing pages the public opinion of
the nation; but every community, every association, every enduring group
has its own public opinion, which, though it is influenced by, and indeed is,
as it were, a branch of, the main stem of national public opinion and is
therefore of the same fibre and texture, has nevertheless its own peculiar
tone and quality, especially in regard to the moral questions with which
each group is specially concerned.
Part III.
The Development of National Mind and
Character
Table of Contents
Chapter XIV.
Introductory
Table of Contents
In the first Part of this book we have reviewed the most general principles
of collective mental life, beginning with the unorganised crowd as affording
the simplest example, considering then an army as the simplest example of
the profound modifications of collective mental life effected by
organisation of the group. In the second Part we passed on to apply these
principles to the understanding of the mind of the nation as the most
important, complex, and interesting of all types of the group mind.
In the third Part I take up the consideration in a general way of the
processes by which national mind and character are gradually built up and
shaped in the long course of ages. For, just as we cannot understand
individual minds, their peculiarities and differences, without studying their
development, so we cannot hope to understand national mind and character
and the peculiarities and differences of nations, without studying the slow
processes through which they have been built up in the course of centuries.
In an earlier chapter, in connexion with the question of the importance
of homogeneity of mental qualities as a condition of the existence of the
national mind, I argued that race has really considerable influence in
moulding the type of national mind. I recognized that differences of innate
qualities between races, at any rate between allied subraces, are not great,
and that they can be, and generally are, almost completely over-ridden and
obscured in each individual by the moulding power of the social
environment in which he grows up; but I urged that these racial qualities are
very persistent, and that they exert a slight but constant pressure or bias
upon the development of all that constitutes social environment, upon the
forms of institutions, customs, traditions, and beliefs of every kind, so that
the effect of such slight but constant bias accumulates from generation to
generation, and in the long run exerts an immense influence.
One way of treating the part played by the racial mental qualities in the
development of the national mind would be to attempt to define the racial or
innate peculiarities of the peoples existing at the present time, and to
assume that these peculiarities were produced in the remote past, before the
formation of nations began, and that they have persisted unchanged
throughout the period of the development of nations. Something of this sort
was proposed by Walter Bagehot in his Physics and Politics. He
distinguished in the development of peoples two great periods—on the one
hand the race-making period, which roughly corresponds to the whole
prehistoric period, and on the other hand the nation-making period, which
roughly corresponds to the historic period. This distinction has undoubtedly
a certain validity.
It seems probable that man was evolved from his prehuman ancestry as
a single stock, probably a stock somewhat widely distributed in the heart of
the Eurasian continent, or possibly in Africa according to the recent view of
some authors, or in the area which is now the Indian Ocean. If this be true,
it follows that the differentiation of the mental and physical qualities of the
principal human races, the differentiation of the white and black and yellow
and brown races, as well as of the chief subraces, such as the Semitic, the
races of Europe—the Homo Europaeus, Alpinus and Mediterraneus—was
the work of the immensely prolonged prehistoric period. For these races
and subraces, as we now know them, seem to have been in existence and to
have had recognisably and substantially the same leading qualities, both
mental and physical, that they now have, before the beginning of the
historic period.
The racial differentiation during the prehistoric period must have been
much greater than during the historic period; and this was not only because
the former period was immensely longer, but also because, in all
probability, the rate of racial change has been on the whole slower in the
historic period.
The differentiation of racial types in the prehistoric period must have
been in the main the work of differences of physical environment, operating
directly by way of selection, by way of the adaptation of each race to its
environment through the extermination of the strains least suited to exist
under those physical conditions. But this process, this direct moulding of
racial types by physical environment, must have been well nigh arrested as
soon as nations began to form. For the formation of nations implies the
beginning of civilisation; and civilisation very largely consists in the
capacity of a people to subdue their physical environment, or at least to
adapt the physical environment to men’s needs to a degree that renders
them far less the sport of it than was primitive man; it consists, in short, in
replacing man’s natural environment by an artificial environment largely of
his own choice and creation.
In a second and perhaps even more important way, the formation of
nations with the development of civilisation modified and weakened the
moulding influence of the physical environment; namely, it introduced
social co-operation in an ever increasing degree, so that the perpetual
struggle of individuals and of small family groups with one another and
with nature was replaced by a co-operative struggle of large communities
against the physical environment and with one another. And in this process
those members of each community who, by reason of weakness, general
incapacity, or other peculiarity, would have been liable to be eliminated
under primitive conditions became shielded in an ever increasing degree by
the powers of the stronger and more capable against the selective power of
nature and against individual human forces. And, although within the
community the rivalry of individuals and families still went on, it was no
longer so much a direct struggle for existence, but rather became more and
more a struggle for position in the social scale; and failure in the struggle no
longer necessarily meant death, or even incapacity to leave an average
number of descendants. That is to say, primitive man’s struggle for
existence against the forces of nature and against his fellow men, which
made for racial evolution and differentiation through survival of those fittest
to cope with various environments, tended to be replaced by a struggle
which no longer made for racial evolution towards a higher type, and which
may even have made for race-deterioration, at the same time that
civilisation and national organisation continued to progress.
We may, then, recognise a certain truth in Bagehot’s distinction of two
great periods, the race-making and the nation-making periods. Nevertheless,
it would not be satisfactory to follow the course suggested above and
simply assume certain racial characters as given fixed data without further
consideration. For, firstly, it is interesting and perhaps not altogether
unprofitable to indulge in speculations on the race-making processes of the
prehistoric period. Secondly, although it seems likely that racial changes
have been in the main slower and on the whole relatively slight in the
historic period, yet they have not been altogether lacking; and, in proportion
to their magnitude, such changes as have occurred have been of great
importance for national life; and changes of this kind are still playing their
part in shaping the destinies of nations. Possible racial changes of mental
qualities must therefore be considered, when we seek to give a general
account of the conditions of the development of nations.
On the other hand, we must reject root and branch the crude idea, which
has a certain popular currency, that the development of civilisation and of
nations implies a parallel evolution of individual minds. That idea we have
already touched upon and rejected in a previous chapter, where we arrived
at the conclusion that there is no reason to suppose the present civilised
peoples to be on the whole innately superior to their barbaric ancestors.
If we use the word ‘tradition’ in the widest possible sense to denote all
the intellectual and moral gains of past generations, in so far as they are not
innate but are handed on from one generation to another by the personal
intercourse of the younger with the older generation, and if we allow the
notion of tradition to include all the institutions and customs that are passed
on from generation to generation, then we may class all the changes of a
people that constitute the evolution of a national character under the two
heads: evolution of innate qualities and evolution of traditions. Using the
word ‘tradition’ in the wide sense just now indicated, the traditions of a
people may be said to include the recognised social organisation of the
whole people into classes, castes, clans, phratries, or groups of any kind,
whose relations to one another and whose place in the national system are
determined by law, custom and conventions of various kinds. This part of
the total tradition is relatively independent of the rest, and we may usefully
distinguish the development of such social organisation as social evolution
—giving to the term this restricted and definite meaning—and we may set it
alongside the other two conceptions as of co-ordinate value.
If we thus set apart for consideration under a distinct head the evolution
of social organisation, the rest of the body of national traditions may be said
to constitute the civilisation of a people. For the civilisation of a people at
any time is essentially the sum of the moral and intellectual traditions that
are living and operative among them at that particular time. We are apt in a
loose way to consider the civilisation of a people to consist in its material
evidences; but it is only in so far as these material evidences, the buildings,
industries, arts, products, machinery, and so forth, are the expression and
outcome of its mental state that they are in any degree a measure of its
civilisation. We may realize this most clearly by considering the case of a
people on which the material products of civilisation have been impressed
from without. Thus the peasants of India live amongst, and make use of,
and benefit materially by, the railways and irrigation works created by their
British rulers, and are protected from invasion and from internal anarchy by
the British military organisation and equipment; and they play a subordinate
though essential part in the creation and maintenance of all these material
evidences of civilisation. But these material evidences are not the
expression of the mental state of the peoples of India, and form no true part
of their civilisation; and, in fact, they affect their civilisation astonishingly
little; although if these products of a higher civilisation should be
maintained for a long period of time they would, no doubt, produce changes
of their civilisation, probably tending in some degree to assimilate their
mental state to that of Western Europe.
We may, then, with advantage distinguish between the social
organisation and the civilisation of a people. In doing so we are of course
making an effort of abstraction, which, though it results in an artificial
separation of things intimately related, is nevertheless useful and therefore
justifiable. In a similar way the progress of civilisation may be
distinguished from social evolution. Social evolution is profoundly affected
by the progress of civilisation, and in turn reacts powerfully upon it; for any
given social organisation may greatly favour or obstruct the further progress
of civilisation. There could have been no considerable advance of
civilisation without the evolution of some social organisation; but that the
two things are distinct is clear, when we reflect that there may be a very
complex social organisation, implying a long course of social evolution,
among a people that has hardly the rudiments of civilisation. Extreme
instances of social organisation in the absence of civilisation are afforded
by some animal societies—for example, societies of ants, bees, and wasps.
Among peoples, the native tribes of Australia illustrate the fact most
forcibly. They are at the very bottom of the scale of civilisation; yet it has
been discovered that they have a complex and well-defined social
organisation, which can only have been achieved by a long course of social
evolution. These people are divided into totem clans, which clans are
grouped in phratries, each individual being born, according to well
recognised rules, into a clan of which he remains a life-long member; and
his membership in the clan and phratry involves certain well-defined rights
and obligations, and well-defined relations to other persons, especially as
regards marriage; and these rights, obligations and relations are recognised
and rigidly maintained throughout immense areas.
On the other hand, although no people has attained any considerable
degree of civilisation without considerable social organisation, nevertheless
we can at least imagine a people continuing to enjoy a high civilisation,
practising and enjoying much of the arts, sciences, philosophy, and
literature, which we regard as the essentials of civilisation, yet retaining a
bare minimum of social organisation. And this state of affairs is not only
conceivable, but is held up as a practicable ideal by philosophical anarchists
such as Tolstoi and Kropotkin; and it is, I think, true to say that the
American nation presents an approximation to this condition.
Again, a very high state of civilisation may co-exist with a relatively
primitive social organisation. Thus the civilisation of Athens in the classical
age was equal to, or even superior to, our own in many respects; yet the
social organisation was very much less highly evolved. It had hardly
emerged from the barbaric patriarchal condition, and had at its foundation a
cruel system of slavery105; and it had also another great point of inferiority
—namely, the very restricted number of persons included in the social
system. These deficiencies, this rudimentary character, of its social
organisation was the principal cause of the instability and brief endurance
of that brilliant civilisation.
We have so far distinguished three principal factors or groups of factors
in the evolution of national mind and character: (1) Evolution of innate or
racial qualities: (2) Development of civilisation: (3) Social evolution, or the
development of social organisation.
Now the first two of these we may with advantage divide under two
parallel heads, the heads of intellectual and moral development. No doubt,
the intellectual and the moral endowment of a people continually react on
each other; and many of the manifestations of the national mind are jointly
determined by the intelligence and the morality of a people; especially
perhaps is this true of their religion and their art. Nevertheless, it is clear
that we can distinguish pretty sharply between the intellectual and the moral
traditions of a people; and that these may vary independently of one another
to a great extent. A rich and full intellectual tradition may go with a moral
tradition of very low level, as in the Italian civilisation of the renascence;
and a very high moral tradition with a relative poverty of the intellectual, as
in the early days of the puritan settlements of New England.
The same distinction between the intellectual and the moral level is
harder to draw in the case of the racial qualities of a people, but it
undoubtedly exists and is valid in principle, no matter how difficult in
practice to deal with.
We have, then, to distinguish five classes of factors, five heads under
which all the factors which determine the evolution of national character
may be distributed. They are
(1) Innate moral disposition
} racial qualities.
(2) Innate intellectual capacities
(3) Moral tradition
} national civilisation.
(4) Intellectual tradition
(5) Social organisation.
Every nation that has advanced from a low level to a higher level of
national life has done so in virtue of development or progress in one or
more of these respects. And a principal part of our task, in considering the
evolution of national mind and character, is to assign to each of these its due
importance and its proper place in the whole complex development.
The distinction between the racial and the traditional level of a people is
too often ignored; chiefly, perhaps, for the reason that it has usually been
assumed that whatever is traditional becomes innate and racial through use.
Since in recent years it has been shown that this assumption is very
questionable, a number of authors have recognised the importance of the
distinction as regards the intellectual qualities of a people; but, as regards
the moral qualities, the distinction is still very generally overlooked.
The neglect of these distinctions between the innate and the traditional
has in great measure vitiated much of the keen dispute that has been waged
over the question whether the progress of civilisation depends primarily on
intellectual or on moral advance. For example, T. H. Buckle and Benjamin
Kidd agreed in recognising clearly the distinction between the innate and
the traditional intellectual status of a people; and they agreed in maintaining
that we have no reason to believe that in the historic period any people has
made any considerable advance in innate intellectual capacity; and that any
such advance, if there has been any, has not been a principal factor in the
progress of civilisation. But they differed extremely in that Buckle
maintained that the primary cause of all progress of national life is the
improvement of its intellectual tradition, that is, increase in the quantity and
the worth of its stock of knowledge and accepted beliefs, and improvements
in methods of intellectual operation; and he held that improvements of
morals and of social organisation have been secondary results of these
intellectual gains. Kidd, on the other hand106, maintained that the progress
of European civilisation has been primarily due to an improvement of the
morality of peoples; that this has led to improvement of social organisation;
and that this in turn has been the essential condition of the progress of the
intellectual tradition, because it has secured a stable social environment, a
security of life, a free field for the exercise of intellectual powers; in the
absence of which conditions the intellectual powers of a nation cannot
effectively organise themselves and apply themselves to the understanding
of man and nature, or to securing the traditional perpetuation of the gains
which they may sporadically achieve. We have to examine these views and
try to determine what truth they contain, and to show that they are not
wholly opposed but can in some measure be combined.
I propose to make first a very brief critical survey of some of the most
notable attempts that have been made to account for racial qualities, and I
shall try to supplement and harmonise these as far as possible. We may with
advantage consider at the outset the race-making period, and afterwards go
on to consider changes of racial qualities in the historic period. This Part of
the book is necessarily somewhat speculative, but its interest and
importance for our main topic may justify its inclusion.
Chapter XV.
The Race-Making Period
Table of Contents
Let us now see what can be said about the process of racial differentiation
which, as we saw in the foregoing chapter, was in its main features
accomplished in the prehistoric or race-making period. We cannot hope to
reach many positive conclusions, but rather merely to discuss certain
possibilities and probabilities in regard to the main factors of the
differentiation of racial mental types.
I would point out at once that the answer to be given to the question—
Are acquired qualities transmitted? Are the effects of use inherited? is all
important for our topic. I do not propose to discuss that difficult question
now. I will merely say that the present state of biological science makes it
seem doubtful whether such inheritance takes place, and that, although the
question remains open, we are not justified in assuming an affirmative
answer; that, therefore, we must not be satisfied with any explanation of
racial and national characteristics based upon this assumption; and in the
following discussion I shall provisionally assume the truth of the Neo-
Darwinian principle that acquired modifications are not transmitted.
Assuming, as we must, that all peoples are descended from some one
original stock, the problem is—Can anything be said of the conditions
which have determined the differentiation of races of different mental
constitutions, of the development of racial qualities which, having become
relatively fixed, have led to the evolution of different types of national
organisation and culture? And especially we have to consider the conditions
which have produced, and may still produce in the future, the qualities that
make for the progress of nations.
We must suppose a certain social organisation to have obtained among
that primitive human stock from which all races have been evolved,
probably an organisation in small groups based on the family under the rule
and leadership of a patriarch.
It is possible that considerable divergences of social organisation may
have taken place, without any advance towards civilisation; such
divergences of social organisation must have tended to divert the course of
mental evolution along various lines; but they must themselves have had
their causes; they cannot in themselves be the ultimate causes of divergence
of racial mental types.
Such ultimate causes of the differentiation of mental qualities must have
been of two orders only, so far as I can see: (1) differences of physical
environment; (2) spontaneous variations in different directions of the innate
mental qualities of individuals, especially of the more gifted and energetic
individuals of each people.
In the mental evolution of animals these two factors are not
distinguishable. We may say that the main and perhaps the sole condition of
their evolution is the selection by the physical environment of spontaneous
favourable variations and mutations of innate mental qualities; if we include
under the term physical environment of the species all the other animal and
vegetable species of its habitat. For it is only by its selective influence upon
individual 
variations 
that 
physical 
environment 
can 
determine
differentiation of races.
But with man the case is different; spontaneous variation not only
provides the new qualities which, by determining the survival of the
individual in his struggle for existence with the physical environment,
secure their own perpetuation by transmission to the after coming
generations. The new qualities determine mental evolution in another
manner, by a mode of operation which is almost completely absent in
animal evolution; namely, the spontaneous variations create a social
environment which profoundly modifies the influence of the physical
environment, and itself becomes a principal factor in the determination of
the trend of racial evolution.
Man is distinguished from the animals above all things by his power of
learning. Whereas the behaviour of animals, even of the higher ones,
consists almost entirely of purely instinctive actions, innate modes of
response to a limited number of situations; man has an indefinitely great
capacity for acquiring new modes of response, and so of adapting himself in
new and more complex ways to an almost indefinite variety of situations.
And his new mental acquisitions are not made only by the slow process of
adaptation in the light of his own individual experience of the consequences
of behaviour of this and that kind; as are most of the few acquisitions of the
animals. By far the greater part of the mental stock-in-trade by which his
behaviour is guided is acquired from his fellow men; it represents the
accumulated experience of all the foregoing generations of his race and
nation. Man’s life in society, together with the great plasticity of his mind,
its great capacity for new adaptations, secures him this enormous
advantage; the two things are necessarily correlated. Without the plasticity
of mind, his life in society would benefit him relatively little. Many animals
that lead a social life in large herds or flocks are not superior, but rather
inferior, in mental power to animals that lead a more solitary life; and
indeed this seems to be generally true, as we see on comparing generally
the herbivorous gregarious animals with the solitary carnivores that prey
upon them. The social life of such animals, rendering individual intelligence
less necessary for protection and escape from danger, tends actually against
mental development.
On the other hand, man’s great plastic brain would be of comparatively
little use to him if he lived a solitary unsocial life. His great brain is there to
enable him to assimilate and make use of the accumulated experience, the
sum of knowledge and morality, which is traditional in the society into
which he is born a member; that is to say, the development of social life,
which depended so much upon language and for the forwarding of which
language came into existence, must have gone hand in hand with the
development of the great brain, which enables full advantage to be secured
from social co-operation and which, especially, renders possible the
accumulation of knowledge, belief, and traditional sentiment.
Now this traditional stock of knowledge and morality has been very
slowly accumulated, bit by bit; and every bit, every least new addition to it,
has been a difficult acquisition, due in the first instance to some
spontaneous variation of some individual’s mental structure from the
ancestral type of mental structure. That is to say, throughout the evolution
of civilisation, progress of every kind, increase of knowledge or
improvement of morality, has been due to the birth of more or less
exceptional individuals, individuals varying ever so slightly from the
ancestral type and capable, owing to this variation, of making some new
and original adaptation of action, or of perceiving some previously
undiscovered relation between things.
These new acquisitions, first made by individuals, are, if true or useful,
sooner or later imitated or accepted by the society of which the original-
minded individual is a member, and then, becoming incorporated in the
traditional stock of knowledge and morality, are thereby placed at the
service of all members of that society.
Thus favourable spontaneous variations do not, as with the animals,
render possible mental evolution merely by conducing to the survival of,
and the perpetuation of the qualities of, those individuals in whom the
variations occur. They may do this, or they may not; but, in addition and
more importantly, they contribute to the stock of traditional knowledge and
morality, and so raise the social group as a whole in the scale of civilisation;
they render it more capable of successfully contending against other groups
and against the adverse influence of the physical environment; and they
promote the solidarity of the group by adding to its stock of common
tradition; thus the acquisitions of each member benefit the group as a whole
and all its members, quite apart from any philanthropic purpose or intention
of producing such a result.
The achievement of this unconscious undesigned solidarity of human
societies is one of two great steps in the evolution of the human race by
which the process is rendered very different from, and is raised to a higher
plane than, the mental evolution of the animal world. The second and still
more important step is one which is only just beginning to be achieved in
the present age; I shall have to touch on it in a later chapter.
The original or primary divergence of mental type between any two
peoples must, then, have been due to these fundamental causes—namely,
differences of physical environment and spontaneous variations of mental
structure, the latter adding to the traditional stock of knowledge and belief,
of moral precepts and sentiments.
Intellectual or moral divergence produced by these two primary causes
would tend to determine the course of social evolution along different lines
and so to produce different types of social organisation. And different social
organisations thus produced would then react upon the moral and
intellectual life of the people to produce further divergence; for example,
one type of social organisation determined by physical environment, say a
well developed patriarchal system, may have made for progress of intellect
and morals; another, say a matriarchal organisation, or one based on
communal marriage, may have tended to produce stagnation.
As social evolution proceeded and brought about more extensive and
more complex forms of social organisation, which included, within any one
society or group, larger numbers of individuals in more effective forms of
association, social organisation must have assumed a constantly increasing
importance as a condition of mental evolution relatively to all other factors,
especially as compared with the influence of physical environment; until, in
the complex societies of the present time, it has an altogether predominant
importance. This truth is concisely stated in the old dictum that “in the
infancy of nations men shape the State; in their maturity the State shapes
the men.” Accordingly, in considering the mental evolution of peoples we
must never lose sight of the influence of social organisation. It follows that
the conditions of the mental evolution of man are immensely more complex
than those of the mental evolution of animals.
We must recognise not only the selection, through survival in the
struggle for existence, of new mental qualities arising as spontaneous
variations of individual mental structure. This, which is the only, or almost
the only, process at work in the mental evolution of animals, is immensely
complicated and overshadowed in importance by two processes. The first is
the accumulation of knowledge and morality in traditional forms. The
traditional accumulation, which so far outweighs the mental equipment
possible to any individual isolated from an old society, not only constitutes
in itself a most important evolutionary product, but it modifies profoundly
the conditions of evolution of the individual innate qualities of mind; for
example, the greater and more valuable the stock of traditional knowledge
and morality becomes, the more does fitness to survive consist in the
capacity to assimilate this knowledge and to conform to these higher moral
precepts, the less does it consist in the purely individualistic qualities, such
as quickness of eye and ear, fleetness of foot, or strength and skill of hand.
Secondly, the processes of natural selection are complicated by the social
evolution, which tends progressively to abolish the struggle for existence
between individuals, and to replace it by a struggle between groups; in
which struggle success is determined not only by the qualities of
individuals, but also very largely by the social organisation and by the
traditional knowledge and morality of the groups.
Each variety of the human species, each race considered as a succession
of individuals having certain innate mental qualities, has been evolved,
then, not merely under the influence of the physical environment, like the
animal species, but also and to an ever increasing extent under the influence
of the social environment. The social environment we regard as consisting
of two parts; namely, the social organisation and the body of social
tradition; for these, though interdependent and constantly interacting, may
yet with advantage be kept apart in thought. We must, then, bear constantly
in mind the fact that man creates for himself an environment which
becomes ever more complex and influential, overshadowing more and more
in importance the physical environment.
Here I would revert to some points of the analogy, drawn in Chapter X,
between the mind of a nation and that of an individual. The mind of an
individual human being develops by accumulating the results of his
experience; and so does that of a people. In this respect the analogy holds
good. But the development possible to an individual is strictly limited in
two ways. First, by the short duration of the material basis of his mental
life; secondly by the extent of his innate capacities. Neither of these
limitations applies to the national mind. Its material basis is in principle
immortal, because its individual components may be incessantly renewed;
and its development has no limit set to it by its innate capacities, because
these may be indefinitely extended and improved. In these respects the
national mind resembles the species rather than the individual.
The development of the national mind, and of the minds of those who
share in the mental life of the nation, thus combines the methods and
advantages of the development of individuals and of species, methods
which are essentially different. The result is that the mental development of
man, since his social life began, has been radically different from that of the
animals; it has been a social process; it has been the evolution of peoples
rather than of individuals. The evolution of man as an individual has been
wholly subordinated to that of peoples; and it is incapable of being
understood or profitably considered apart from the development of the
group mind.
Assuming, as we must, that all the races of men are derived from a
common stock, it is obvious, I think, that the first differentiation of racial
types was determined almost exclusively by differences of physical
environment, and that the other conditions only very slowly developed and
did not assume their predominant importance until the time which may be
roughly defined as the beginning of the historic or nation-making period.
Physical environment affects the mental qualities of a people in three
ways: firstly, it directly influences the minds of each generation; secondly, it
moulds the mental constitution by natural selection, adapting the race to
itself; thirdly, it exerts indirect influence by determining the occupations
and modes of life and, through these, the social organisation of a people.
We may consider these three modes of influence in turn.
There has been much speculation on the direct influence of the physical
environment in moulding the mental type of a people, but little or nothing
can be said to be established.
There is a fair concensus of opinion to the effect that what we may call
climate exerts an important influence. In climate the two factors recognised
as of chief importance are temperature and moisture. High temperature
combined with moisture certainly tends to depress the vital activity of
Europeans and to render them indolent, indisposed to exertion of any kind.
On the other hand, high temperature combined with dryness of the
atmosphere seems to have the effect of rendering men but little disposed to
continuous activity, and yet capable of great efforts; it tends to produce a
violent spasmodic activity. A cold climate seems to dispose towards
sustained activity and, when combined with much moisture, to a certain
slowness.
These effects, which we ourselves experience and which we see
produced upon other individuals on passing from one climate to another, we
seem to see impressed upon many of the races which have long been
subjected to these climates; for example, the slow and lazy Malays have
long occupied the hottest moistest region of the earth. The Arabs and the
fiery Sikhs may be held to illustrate the effect of dry heat. The Englishman
and the Dutchman seem to show the effects of a moist cool climate, a
certain sluggishness embodied with great energy and perseverance.
In these and other cases, in which the innate temperament of a people
corresponds to the effects directly induced by their climate, it seems natural
to suppose that the innate temperament has been produced by the
transmission and accumulation from generation to generation of the direct
effects of the climate. The assumption is so natural that it has been made by
almost every writer who has dealt with the question. And these instances of
conformity of the temperament of peoples to the direct effects of climate are
sometimes offered as being among the most striking evidences of the reality
of hereditary transmission of acquired qualities; and the argument is
reinforced by instances of what seem to be similar results produced by
climate on physical types. Thus, it is said that in North America a race
characterised by a new specific combination of mental and physical
qualities is being rapidly formed; and it seems to be well established that
long slender hands are among these features; for in Paris a specially long
slender glove is made every year in large quantities for the American
market. Again, we see apparently a change of physical type in the white
inhabitants of Australia. They seem to be becoming taller and more slender
‘cornstalks’; and this is commonly regarded as the direct effect of climate.
Now, that a new race or subrace with a specific combination of qualities
should be forming in America is certainly to be expected from the fact that
the intimate blending of a number of European stocks has been going on for
some generations. But what gives special support to the assumption that
these new qualities are the direct effects of climate is that these qualities,
the physical at least, seem to be approximations to the type of the Red
Indians, the aboriginal inhabitants. And, it is said, this approximation of
type can only be due to hereditary accumulation of the direct effects of the
climate on individuals.
Another way in which climate has been held to modify racial mental
qualities by direct action is through the senses, especially the eye. M.
Boutmy, in his book on the English people makes great play with this
principle107. He points out that the thick hazy state of the air, so common in
our islands, renders vague and dull all outlines and colours, so that the eye
does not receive that wealth of well-defined hues and forms which give so
great a charm to some more sunny lands, such as the Mediterranean coast
lands. Hence, he says, the senses become or remain relatively dull, and the
sense-perceptions slow and relatively indiscriminating. Such relative
deficiency of aesthetic variety and richness in the appearance of the outer
world produces secondarily a further and deeper modification of mental
type. In the lands where nature surrounds man with an endless variety of
rich and pleasing scenes, he can find sufficient satisfaction in mere
contemplation of the outer world; and, when he takes to art production, he
tends merely to reproduce in more or less idealised forms the objects and
scenes he finds around him; his art tends to be essentially objective. On the
other hand, in the dull northern climes, man has not ever at hand these
sources of satisfaction in the mere contemplation of the outer world;
consequently he is driven back upon his own nature, to find his satisfactions
in a ceaseless activity of mind and body, but chiefly of the latter. Hence,
races so situated are characterised by great bodily activity and their art and
literature are essentially subjective. The thick air, the monotony of vague
form and colour, drive the mind to reflection upon itself; and in art the
objects of nature serve merely as symbols by aid of which the mind seeks to
express its own broodings. “The painter paints with the intentions of the
poet, the poet describes or sings with the motives of the psychologist or
moralist. All the literature of imagination of the English shows us the
internal reacting incessantly upon the external with a singular power of
transfiguration and interpretation108.” Hence also poetry is the privilege of a
few rare spirits and is for them the product of deep reflection, not a simple
lyrical expression in which all can equally share.
It is certainly true that climate tends to produce these effects by its
direct action on individuals. Anyone who has lived for a time in the
southern climes must have noted these effects upon himself. But we have
no proof that the effects of climate are directly inherited. It suffices to
suppose that the direct effects are imposed afresh by the climate on the
minds of each generation. This view is borne out by the fact that two races
may live for many generations in the same climate and yet remain very
different in temperament in these respects; for example the Irish climate is
very similar to the English, perhaps even more misty and damp; yet the
Irish have much more wit and liveliness than the English. And in every case
in which adaptation to physical environment has clearly become innate or
racial, an explanation can be suggested in terms of selection of spontaneous
variations, or of crossing of races. Thus, the approximation of the American
people to the type of the aboriginals, if it is actual, and some observers deny
it, may well be due to the small infusion of the native blood which has
admittedly taken place. It may well be that certain qualities of the Red
Indian, for example, the straight dark hair and prominent cheek bones, are
what the biologists call ‘dominant characters’ when the Indian is crossed
with the European; that is, qualities which always assert themselves in the
offspring, to the exclusion of the corresponding quality of the other race
involved in the cross. If that is so, a very small proportion of Indian blood
would suffice to make these features very common throughout the
population of America. As an exception to the supposed law of direct
hereditary adaptation to climate take the colour of the skin. The black
negroes live in the hot moist regions of Africa, and it has been said that
pigmentation is the hereditary effect of a hot moist climate. But there are
men of a different race who have long lived in an equally hot and moist
climate, but who do not show this effect—namely, tribes in the heart of
Borneo, right under the equator, whose skins are hardly darker than the
average English skins and less dark than the Southern Europeans’. Take
again the indolence of the peoples of warm hot climates and the energy of
peoples of colder climates. These certainly seem to be racial qualities; but
their distribution is adequately explained by the indirect effect of physical
environment exerted by way of natural selection; and these differences of
energy afford the best illustration of such indirect action of physical
environment in determining racial mental qualities.
Before considering the question further, let us note yet another way in
which the physical environment affects men’s minds and has been supposed
directly to induce certain racial qualities. Buckle pointed out with great
force the influence on the mind of what he called the external aspects of
nature. He showed that where, as in India and the greater part of Asia, the
physical features of a country are planned upon a very large scale; where
the mountains are huge, where rivers are of immense length and volume,
where plains are of boundless extent, and the sun very hot, there the forces
of nature are exerted with an intensity that renders futile the best efforts of
man, at any rate of man in a state of low civilisation, to cope with them. In
such countries men are exposed to calamities on an enormous scale, great
floods, violent storms and deluges of rain, earthquakes, excessive droughts
resulting in famine and plague; and they are exposed to the attacks of many
dangerous animal species, which are bred by the great heat in the dense and
unconquerable forests. These disasters have repeatedly occurred on a scale
such that in comparison with them the recent earthquake in California
appears a mere trifle. Millions have been destroyed in a few hours in some
of the floods of the Yellow River of China.
The magnitude of these objects and the appalling and irresistible
character of such devastating forces produce, said Buckle, two principal and
closely allied effects upon the mind; they stimulate the imagination to run
riot in extravagant and grotesque fancies; at the same time, they discourage
any attempt to cope with these great forces and to understand their laws,
and thus keep men perpetually in fearful uncertainty as to their fate; for they
cannot hope to control it by their own unaided efforts.
Hence, the encouragement of superstition; hence, the dominance of a
degrading religion of fear throughout the greater part of such regions;
hence, the supremacy of priests and religious orders and the discouragement
of scientific reasoning. Hence, in the arts, the literature, and the religion of
India, we see a dominant tendency to the grotesque, the enormous, the
fearful; we see gods portrayed with many arms, with three eyes and terrible
visages. The legends of their heroes contain monstrous details, as that they
lived for many thousands or millions of years. “All this,” says Buckle, “is
but a part of that love of the remote, that straining after the infinite, and that
indifference to the present, which characterises every branch of Indian
intellect. Not only in literature, but also in religion and in art, this tendency
is supreme. To subdue the understanding, and indulge the imagination, is
the universal principle. In the principles of their theology, in the character of
their gods, and even in the form of their temples, we see how the sublime
and threatening aspects of the external world have filled the mind of the
people with those images of the grand and the terrible, which they strive to
reproduce in a visible form, and to which they owe the leading peculiarities
of their national culture.”109
That these peculiarities of the mental life of such peoples are causally
related with those terrible aspects of nature is, I think, sufficiently
established by Buckle. But if we admit this, there remain two questions: (1)
Have these tendencies become innate racial qualities? (2) If so, how have
they been rendered innate? Buckle did not raise these questions and offered
no opinion in regard to them. But he seems to have assumed that these
tendencies have become innate; and there is much to be said for that view.
Yet, if that could be shown conclusively, it still would not prove inheritance
of these acquired qualities. It may have resulted in some such way as this:
the physical environment stimulates the imagination, and it represses the
tendency to control imagination and superstition by reason and calm inquiry
after causes; acting thus upon successive generations of men, it determines
the peculiarities of the religious system and of the art and literature of the
people. Individuals in whom the same tendencies are innately strong will
then flourish under such a system; whereas those whose innate tendencies
are in the direction of reason and scepticism will find the system
uncongenial, unfavourable for the exercise of their best powers; they will
fail to make their mark; they may, as in many instances of European
inquirers, actually have lost their lives or their liberty through the religious
zeal of those who maintain the traditional system. Thus the social
environment, working through long ages, may have constantly determined a
certain degree of selection of the innate tendencies congenial to it, and a
weeding out of the opposed tendencies; until the former have predominated
in the race110.
We have here a very important principle which we must constantly bear
in mind—namely, that not only the physical environment, but also the
social environment, may determine the survival of those temperaments and
qualities of mind best fitted to thrive in it, and, by handicapping those least
fitted to it, may gradually bring the mental qualities of the race into
conformity with itself. We shall later see other examples by which this
principle is more clearly illustrated.
We conclude that, while physical environment may act powerfully upon
the minds of individuals, moulding their acquired qualities in the three ways
noticed—namely, influencing the mind through bodily habit, through the
senses, and through the imagination—there is no sufficient evidence that
the acquired qualities so induced ever become innate or racial characters by
direct transmission. In those instances in which the racial qualities
approximate to these direct effects of physical environment, it may well be
because the physical environment has brought about adaptation of the race
by long continued selection of individuals, or because it has determined
peculiarities of social environment, which in turn have brought about
adaptation of the racial qualities by long continued selection.
Chapter XVI.
The Race-Making Period (continued)
Table of Contents
We considered in our last chapter the principal modes in which physical
environment affects the character of a people—namely, (1) influence on
temperament exerted chiefly through climate acting upon the bodily
functions: (2) influence through the senses, exerting secondary effects upon
the higher mental processes: (3) direct influence on the imagination. We
concluded that these effects become innate in some degree; though whether
they are impressed on the race by direct inheritance, or by processes of
direct or of social selection, or in all three ways, remains an open question.
We distinguished, besides these direct modes of influence, two indirect
modes by which physical environment affects the mind and character of a
people: (1) by its selective action on individuals apart from its influence
upon their minds: (2) by determining occupations and social organisation.
We may consider them in turn.
It is recognised, as I pointed out above, that the races inhabiting hot
moist countries are commonly indolent, while those of the moderately cold
and moist climates tend to be extremely active and energetic.
This difference is well brought out by Mr Meredith Townsend in an
essay on the charm of Asia for the Asiatics111; and he is speaking not of
Asia in general but of Southern Asia. He says Asiatics “will not, under any
provocation, burden themselves with a sustained habit of taking trouble.
You might as well ask lazzaroni to behave like Prussian officials.” After
quoting Thiers’ description of the immense labours of detailed
administration which he supported while minister of State, he says “No
Asiatic will do that.... One half the weakness of every Oriental government
arises from the impossibility of finding men who will act as M. Thiers did.”
These races, bred in the tropics, are in fact incurable lotus-eaters, their chief
desire is for the afternoon life or, as is commonly said of the Malays
throughout the Eastern Archipelago, they are great leg-swingers, they prefer
to undertake no labour more arduous than sitting still swinging their legs.
All this, though more or less true of the tropical races in general, is pre-
eminently true of those inhabiting regions which are moist as well as hot,
the Malays, the Burmese, the Siamese, the Papuans, the Negroes of the
African jungle regions.
Such peoples have failed to acquire the energy which leads men to
delight in activity for its own sake, not merely because a hot moist climate
inclines directly to indolence, but rather because the prime necessities of
life are to be had almost without labour; the heat dispenses with the
necessity for clothing and shelter, while the hot sun and the moisture
provide an abundance of vegetable food in response to a minimum of
labour. Hence, no man perishes through lack of energy to secure the prime
necessities of life; and there has been no great weeding out of the indolent
by severe conditions of life, such as alone can produce an innately energetic
race, one that loves activity for its own sake. For the same reason these
same peoples also exercise but little foresight, they are naturally
improvident; the abundance of nature renders it possible to survive and
propagate without any prudent provision for the future.
Contrast with these races the northerly races—in Asia the Japanese,
whose energy and industry we all recognise, and the northern Mongols or
Tartars, who have so often overrun and conquered with fire and sword the
less energetic peoples of the south, or the Goorkhas or Pathans of the
highlands of northern India. But more especially contrast with them the
English people. M. Boutmy rightly asserts that “the taste for and the habit
of effort must be regarded as the most essential attribute, the profound and
spontaneous quality, of the race112.” It is displayed in the English love of
sport and adventure and travel, especially in such recreations as mountain
climbing, which is pre-eminently an English sport; also throughout our
social life, in the intensity of commercial and industrial activity, often
carried on ardently by men far removed from any necessity of making
money. In our political life, where a vast amount of effort is constantly
expended in achieving comparatively small results, we always seem to
prefer to achieve any reform by the methods which give scope to and
demand the greatest amount of public activity and effort. It is shewn also in
the immense amount of public service rendered without remuneration, for
the mere love of activity and the exercise of power. It is very striking in
English colonies in tropical lands, and has been no doubt an important
factor in our success in tropical administration and in colonisation.
Boutmy is inclined to attribute to this love of activity, as a secondary
effect, the dislike of the mass of Englishmen for generalisations and for
theoretical construction; for, he says, these are the results naturally achieved
by the reflective mind, whereas the English mind gets no time for
reflection, its attention is perpetually drawn off from general principles by
its tendency to pursue some immediate practical end. Hence, he says,
abstraction is subordinated to practical ends and does not soar for its own
sake. This truth is well illustrated by the fact that all our English
philosophers, Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, Mill, Bentham, Spencer, etc., have
been practical moralists, and have conducted their investigations always
with an eye to concrete applications to the conduct of the State or of private
life.
Boutmy regards this love of activity, together with foresight and self-
control, as racial qualities engendered by the severity of the climate,
working chiefly by way of natural selection. In the prehistoric period more
especially, when man had little knowledge of means of protection from
climate and hardship such as have been developed by civilised societies,
those individuals who were deficient in these qualities must have
succumbed to the rigours of the climate, leaving their more energetic
fellows to propagate the race.
That there is truth in the view is shown by the fact that the degree to
which the love of activity is developed seems to vary roughly with the
severity of the climate even among the closely allied races of Europe. As
we pass northward from the coast of the Mediterranean, we find the quality
more and more strongly marked; and it is in accordance with this principle
that the dominant power, the leadership in civilisation, has passed gradually
northwards in the historic period. Civilisation first developed in the sub-
tropical regions, in which the abundance of nature first gave men leisure to
devote themselves to things of the mind, to contemplation and inquiry;
while the northern races were still battling as savages against the
inclemency of the climate, were still being ruthlessly weeded out by the
rigorousness of the physical environment, and so were being adapted to it,
that is to say, were being rendered capable of sustained and vigorous effort.
But, as the means of subduing nature and of protecting himself against
nature have been developed by man, the dominance has passed successively
northwards to peoples whose innate energy and love of activity were more
highly developed in proportion to the severity of the selection exerted upon
many preceding generations.
The severe climate has not been the only cause of this evolution of an
energetic active type. No doubt military selection played its part also. The
Northern races of Europe, more particularly the Nordic, the fair-haired
long-headed race, underwent a prolonged and severe process of such
military group selection, before branches of it settled in our island; and,
among the qualities which must have tended to success and survival in this
process, energy and capacity for prolonged and frequent effort, especially
bodily effort, must have been one of the chief. Still, even such group
selection was probably a secondary result of the direct climatic selection;
for it must have been the love of activity and enterprise that led these
peoples perpetually to wander, and so to come into conflicts with one
another, conflicts in which the more energetic would in the main survive
and the less energetic succumb. In part also it must have been determined in
the third and the most indirect manner in which physical environment
shapes racial qualities—namely, by determining occupations and modes of
life, and through these the forms of social organisation, both of which then
react upon the racial qualities.
In illustration of this third mode of action of physical conditions, let us
take a striking difference of mental quality between the French and the
English peoples, and inquire how the difference has arisen; a difference
which is recognised by every capable observer who has compared the two
peoples and which has been of immense importance in shaping the history
of the modern world. I mean the greater sociability of the French and the
greater independence of the English, a greater self-reliance and capacity for
individual initiative. The difference finds expression in every aspect of the
national life of the two peoples. The sociability and sympathetic character
of the French, on which they justly pride themselves113, is the inverse
aspect of their lack of the characteristic English qualities, independence and
self-reliance. In political life the difference appears in the centralised
organisation of the French nation, every detail of administration being
controlled by the central power through a rigidly organised hierarchy of
officials, in a way that leaves no scope for initiative and independence in
local administrations. Connected with this is the almost universal desire of
educated men to become state functionaries, parts of the official machinery
of administration, and the consequent excessive growth of this class of
persons.
The same quality of the French shows itself in the tendency to prefer the
monarchical rule of any man who shows himself capable of ruling, a
tendency which constantly besets the republican State with a well-
recognised danger. These are not local and temporary manifestations, but
have characterised the French nation throughout the whole period of its
existence. In the feudal period which preceded its formation, there was
considerable local independence; but the feudal system was due to the
dominant influence of Frankish chiefs, of the same race as our Saxon
forefathers, who overran most of France as a ruling caste, but did not
contribute any large element to the population, and whose blood therefore
has been largely swamped. It appears in the greater violence among the
French people of collective mental processes, those of mobs, assemblies,
factions, and groups of all kinds. Each individual is easily carried away by
the mass; there are none to withstand the wave of contagion and, by so
doing, to break and check its force.
In England on the other hand political activity has always been
characterised by extreme jealousy of the central power, and by the tendency
to achieve everything possible by local action and voluntary private effort.
All reforms are initiated from the periphery, instead of from the centre as in
France. Great institutions, the universities, schools, colleges, hospitals,
railways, canals, docks, insurance companies, even water supplies and
telephones and many other things which, it would seem, should naturally
and properly be undertaken by the State, or other official public body, have
been generally set on foot and worked by individuals or private associations
of individuals. Even vast colonial empires—India, Rhodesia, Canada,
Sarawak, Nigeria, North Borneo—have been in the main acquired through
the enterprise and efforts of individuals or associations of individuals; the
State only intervening when the main work has been accomplished.
In their religion, too, the English are markedly individualistic; our
numerous dissenting bodies have mostly dispensed with the centralised
official hierarchy which in Roman Catholic countries mediates between
God and man, and have insisted upon a direct communion with God; and
we have many little churches each of which governs itself in absolute
independence of every other. In the family relations the same difference
appears very strongly. The French family regards itself, and is regarded by
law, as a community which holds its goods in common; each child has his
legal claim upon his share, relies upon his family for support in his struggle
with the world, and is encouraged by his parents to do so. In the English
family, on the other hand, the father is a supreme despot, who disposes of
his property as he wills. The children are not encouraged to look for further
support, when once they become adult, but are taught that they must go out
into the world to seek their fortunes unaided. At an early age, the English
boy is usually thrust out of the family into the life of a school in which, by
his own efforts, he must find and keep his position among his fellows; and
he lives a life which, compared with that of the French boy, is one of
freedom and independence. In the distribution of the people on the land we
see the same difference of mental qualities revealed. The French peasants
are for the most part congregated sociably in villages and small towns; the
English farmer builds his homestead apart upon his own domain. And this
determines one of the most striking differences in the aspect of the rural
districts of both countries. In the towns also the same tendencies are clearly
shown; in the separate little homes of the English and in the large houses of
the French shared by several families.
It is in the expansion in the world of the two peoples that the effects of
this difference are most clearly expressed and assume the greatest
importance. The English race has populated a vast proportion of the surface
of the world, and rules over one-fifth of the total population. Whereas the
French people, who have conquered large areas, have never succeeded in
permanently colonising any considerable portion of their conquests and
they have failed to maintain their domination in many regions where they
have for a time established it. In every extra-European region where they
have come into conflict with the English race they have been worsted.
The secret of the difference in the expansion of the two peoples is the
difference of innate mental quality that we are considering, enhanced by the
differences of custom and of political and family organisation engendered
by it. For, like all other innate tendencies, the two to which we are referring
obtain accentuated expression through moulding customs, institutions and
social organisation in ways which foster in successive generations just those
tendencies of which these institutions are themselves the traditional
outcome and expression. Thus, it is the individualistic nature of the
political, religious, and family organisation of the English people which,
having been engendered by innate independence of character and having in
turn accentuated it in each generation, has enabled the people to achieve its
marvels of colonisation and tropical administration. We see these tendencies
playing a predominant part in the history of every British colony.
The difference was well brought out by Volney, a French observer of the
French and English colonists in the early days of the settlement of North
America. He wrote “The French colonist deliberates with his wife upon
everything that he proposes to do; often the plans fall to the ground through
lack of agreement.” “To visit one’s neighbours, to chat with them, is for the
French an habitual need so imperious that on all the frontier of Louisiana
and Canada you will not find a single French colonist established beyond
sight of his neighbour’s home.” “On the other hand, the English colonist,
slow and taciturn, passes the whole day continuously at work; at breakfast
he coldly gives his orders to his wife; ... and goes forth to labour.... If he
finds an opportunity to sell his farm at a profit, he does so and goes ten or
twenty leagues further into the wilderness to make himself a new home114.”
It is the French authors themselves who have most insisted upon this
mental difference between the French and the English, which seems to be
determining a great difference in the destinies of the two peoples; and most
of them, while justly valuing the sympathetic and sociable quality of the
French mind, deeply regret its lack of the English independence115. There
has been no lack of speculation and inquiry as to the origin and causes of
this supremely important difference. It is perhaps worth while to glance at
some of these attempts.
The most superficial attempt at explanation is to say that the political
and social institutions of the French people foster in each individual the
social tendencies in question, while the English institutions develop their
opposites. It is true, but it obviously is not the explanation of the difference;
for that we must go further back, in order to find the origin of these
differences of institution.
An explanation a little less superficial is that the domination of the first
Napoleon and the strong centralised system of administration established by
him accounts for the difference. But the permanence, if not the very
possibility, of that system, and the rise to power of Napoleon himself, were
but symptoms of this deep-lying tendency of the French mind.
Buckle, recognising the profound difference which we are considering,
summed it up in the phrases ‘the dominance of the protective spirit in
France’ and of ‘the spirit of independence in England,’ He attributed the
former partly to the influence of the Roman Catholic Church in France with
its centralised authoritative system, partly to the long prevalence of the
feudal system of social organisation, under which every man was made to
feel his personal dependence upon the despotic power of an independent
noble and was accustomed to look to him for all initiative and guidance—
was trained to obey a despot, whose absolute jurisdiction and whose title to
his lands and rights was unchallenged. The system, he said, culminated in
the despotism of Louis XIV, by the subjection of the previously independent
nobles to the king, and was revived in a different form, immediately after
the great revolution, by Napoleon.
The dominance of the spirit of independence among the English people
he would explain also from the character of their political institutions
during recent centuries. After recounting the political history of England
from the sixteenth to the eighteenth century, and after showing how the
people during that period repeatedly succeeded in asserting its liberties
against the encroachments of the kings, he wrote—“In England the course
of affairs, which I have endeavoured to trace since the sixteenth century,
had diffused among the people a knowledge of their own resources and a
skill and independence in the use of them, imperfect indeed, but still far
superior to that possessed by any other of the great European countries,”
But he was not wholly satisfied with this explanation; he added—“Besides
this, other circumstances, which will be hereafter related, had, as early as
the eleventh century, begun to affect our national character and had assisted
in imparting to it that sturdy boldness, and at the same time, those habits of
foresight, and of cautious reserve, to which the English mind owes its
leading peculiarities.”
When we turn to his account of the primary cause of English
independence116, we find that it was, in his view, that the feudal system was
established by William the Conqueror in a form different from that
obtaining on the continent. The nobles received their lands directly from the
king as grants, and all land owners were made to acknowledge their direct
obligation to him. The nobles were in consequence too weak to set up their
own power against that of the king, and therefore they called the people to
their aid in resisting the power of the king; hence, the people early acquired
rights and privileges and the habit of organised resistance to the central
authority. “The English aristocracy, being thus forced by their own
weakness, to rely on the people, it naturally followed that the people
imbibed that tone of independence and that lofty bearing, of which our civil
and political institutions are the consequence, rather than the cause. It is to
this, and not to any fanciful peculiarity of race, that we owe the sturdy and
enterprising spirit for which the inhabitants of this island have long been
remarkable.”
“The practice of subinfeudation, became in France almost universal.”
The great lords subgranted parts of their lands to lesser lords, and these
again to others, and so on—“thus forming a long chain of dependence, and,
as it were, organising submission into a system.” In this country, on the
other hand, the practice was actively checked. “The result was that by the
fourteenth century the liberties of Englishmen were secured,” and the spirit
of independence had become a part of the national character; that is to say,
Buckle maintained that three centuries of a different form of the feudal
system sufficed to produce this profound difference between the French and
English peoples.
Boutmy also fully recognises the important difference between the
innate qualities of the French and English; and he also would explain it as
the effect of political institutions since the middle ages, but on lines
somewhat different from Buckle’s—namely, that England was early ruled
by a king invested with great power, and inclined to all the excesses of
arbitrary rule. Hence the first need of the people was to fortify themselves
against his power. All the law of England carries the imprint of this fear and
this defiance. The parliament has been set up against the crown, the judges
against parliament, and the jury against the power of the judges; and so,
ever since the conquest, individuals have been accustomed to think, and to
assert, that their persons, their purse, and their homes are inviolable; and
that the State is an enemy whose encroachments must be resisted. This way
of thinking has by long usage become instinctive, increasing from
generation to generation; until the horror of servitude has become rooted in
the Englishman’s temperament, and the desire of independence has become
a native and primary passion.
Both Buckle and Boutmy agree, then, that the English love of liberty is
due to England having been conquered and ruled by a powerful king, and
that in France the opposite effect is to be attributed to the same cause—
namely, the influence of despotic rulers. Surely this is to reverse cause and
effect. If the English people had not already possessed the sturdy spirit of
independence when they were conquered by the Norman, his strong
centralised rule would only have rendered them still less independent and
would have fostered the spirit of protection, as Buckle calls it. If the
national characters had been reversed in this respect, how easy it would
have been to show that the dependence of the English character was due to
the strong rule of a foreign despot, William of Normandy, while the French
independence was due to the existence in feudal times of many centres of
independent power, the nobles, each capable of resisting the central
authority! It was just because this spirit was theirs already that the English
people resisted their kings and were able to secure their liberties by setting
up institutions congenial to their nature, institutions and customs which
have fostered in each individual and each generation the spirit of
independence inherited as a racial quality, and which possibly, though by no
means certainly, have further intensified the racial peculiarity.
Another cause for the difference of institutions is assigned by Sir Henry
Maine. He pointed to the great influence of Roman law upon French
institutions; he showed how the French lawyers, brought up in the school of
Roman law and holding the Roman Empire as the ideal of a political
organisation, threw all their weight upon the side of the monarchy, and in
favour of centralised administration. More, perhaps, is due to this influence
than to the causes assigned by Buckle and Boutmy; but no one of these
alleged causes, nor all of them combined, can be accepted as adequate to
explain the origin of the difference of national characters. These authors fail
also to make clear how the political institutions can have modified
character. Boutmy frankly assumes use-inheritance, which, as I have said,
is, in the present state of science, an unwarrantable assumption.
That these qualities of the French and English peoples are innate racial
qualities, evolved during the race-making or prehistoric period, is proved
not only by the inadequacy of any assignable causes operating during the
historic period, but also by the fact that similar qualities are described by
the earliest historians as characterising the ancestors, or the principal
ancestral stocks, of the two peoples, when they first appear in history. It is
proved also by the fact that other branches of the Nordic race have
displayed similar qualities, more especially the Dutch, and also the
Normans, who, though they have long formed part of the French State in
the political sense, and have suffered most of the political influences
assigned as causes of the spirit of protection, not only displayed the spirit of
independence in the highest degree ten centuries ago, but are admitted to be
still distinguished from the bulk of the French people by the greater
individualism of their character, just as they are still markedly different in
physical traits. They offer one of the best examples of fixity of the physical
characters of a race. No one can travel in Normandy without being struck
by the very marked and distinctive physical type, which, according to all
accounts, is that of the Norman who came over to England with the
Conqueror; and there is every reason to believe that the mental qualities of
the race have been equally fixed and enduring.
Julius Caesar, Tacitus, and other early historians have described for us
the leading qualities of the Gauls on the one hand and of the Teutons on the
other. Fouillée in his Psychology of the French People has brought together
the evidence of these early historians on the point; it shows that the Gauls
and the Teutons were distinguished very strongly by the same differences
which obtain between the French and English peoples at the present time,
especially the difference in respect of independence and initiative, the
origin of which we are seeking to explain. The Gauls were eminently
sociable people, sympathetic, emotional, demonstrative, vivacious, very
given to oratory and discussion, vain and moved by the desire of glory,
capable of great gallantry, but not of persevering effort in face of
difficulties, easily elated, easily cast down. And, what from our point of
view is especially important, they were readily led by the chiefs, to whom
they were attached by the bonds of personal loyalty; and they were
constantly banding themselves together in large groups, under such leaders
as attained popularity by their superior qualities; and, again, they were
dominated by the priestly caste, the Druids. The Gauls even had those
family institutions which characterise the modern French and which have
been held to be the expression of their recently acquired qualities and
traditions; namely, the family had the character of a community in which
the wife had equal rights with the husband, and the children were regarded
also as members of the community having their equal claims upon the
family property. And society was bound together by a system of patrons and
clients, a system of personal dependence.
On the other hand, the Teutonic people, as described by the same
ancient authorities, displayed a decided individualism in virtue of which
their social organisation was more rudimentary. The father was supreme in
the family, and his power and property descended to his eldest son. They
were a more phlegmatic people, but of great energy and persistence. Unlike
the Gauls, they were dominated by no priestly caste. The religious rites
were conducted by the elder men.
The Gauls were a mixed people of whom the minority, constituting the
nobility, were of the tall, fair, long-headed Nordic race, while the majority,
the mass of the common people, were of the short, dark, round-headed race.
And these, as the numerous observations of the anthropologists show,
constitute to-day the bulk of the population, except in Normandy and the
extreme north-east of France.
The Teutons or Germans of Caesar and Tacitus, on the other hand, were
of the fair Nordic race; and the Anglo-Saxons who overran Britain, together
with the Danes and Normans, who, with the Saxons, formed the principal
ancestral stock of the English, were of this same Nordic race, or Northmen,
as we may call them.
Now, it might seem useless to attempt to arrive at any conclusions as to
the influences that shaped these races in prehistoric times. But an attempt
has been made by one of the schools of French sociologists, which, in spite
of its speculative character, seems to be worthy of attention. This is the
school of ‘La Science Sociale,’ founded seventy years ago by Fredericq le
Play and more recently led by Ed. Demolins and H. de Tourville. Aided by
a number of ardent disciples, they have made a special study of the
influence of physical environment in determining occupations and social
organisation, and in moulding indirectly through these the mental qualities
of peoples. That is their great principle. They rightly, I think, insist upon the
relatively small importance of political institutions in moulding a people,
regarding them as secondary results of the factors which, determining the
private activities of men and women at every moment of their lives from the
cradle to the grave, exert a far greater and more intimate influence upon
their minds. In two fascinating volumes117 Demolins has summed up the
principal results of this school and attempted to trace the conditions that
have determined the differentiation of all the principal races of the earth;
and de Tourville has applied the same principles and traced their effects in
European history118.
It is a curious fact that the work of the Le Play school is almost entirely
ignored by the other French sociologists and anthropologists. It is seldom
referred to by them, and outside France also it has not received the attention
it deserves. Much of it is of the nature of brilliant speculation, and is
regarded no doubt as unsound by many more sober minds. Yet, when we
attempt to understand the evolution of man in the prehistoric period,
brilliant speculation becomes a necessary supplement to the work of
measuring skulls and digging up ruins, to which some less ingenious
workers confine themselves. And, of all the conclusions of the Le Play
school, their account of the origin of the distinctive characters of the
Northmen is one of the most striking and satisfactory; while their account
of the origins of the Gauls and of their peculiar social organisation and well
marked mental traits is also among their best work.
Chapter XVII.
The Race-Making Period (continued)
Table of Contents
The Influence of Occupations and of Race-crossing
In the foregoing chapter we noticed certain well-marked and generally
recognised differences of national character presented by the French and the
English peoples—namely, the greater independence of the English, the
greater sociability of the French people; and we noted how these differences
of national character show themselves throughout the institutions of the two
nations, and how they have played a great part in determining the difference
of their histories; especially, we saw, how they are of prime importance,
when we seek to account for the greater expansion of the English people
throughout the world.
We then noticed several attempts that have been made, by Buckle,
Boutmy, Maine and others, to account for these differences as results of
differences of political institutions during the last thousand years. We found
that all these attempts fail, and that the differences of political institutions,
which these authors have regarded as the causes of the differences of
national character, are really the expressions of a fundamental racial
difference; that, in short, these authors have inverted the true causal
relation. I then drew attention to the work of the school of Le Play and
especially to its fundamental principle—namely, that, while peoples are in a
state of primitive or lowly culture, their geographical or physical
environment determines their occupations and, through their occupations,
their social organisations, especially their domestic organisation; and that
particular modes of occupation and of social organisation of a primitive
people, persisting through many generations, mould the innate qualities and
form the racial character.
I said that two brilliant workers of the school—namely, Demolins and
de Tourville—had applied this principle to account for those differences
between the national characters of the French and English peoples which
we were considering. I have now to reproduce their account in as condensed
a form as possible.
Demolins claims to show that the short dark round-headed people, who
formed the bulk of the Gauls and also of the population of modern France,
came, in prehistoric times, from the Eurasian steppe region, reaching France
by way of the valley of the Danube, a long narrow lowland region confined
on the north by the Carpathians and mountains of Bohemia, on the south by
the Balkans and Swiss Alps. He supposes that, for long ages, they had lived
as pastoral nomads on the steppes. By examining the nomads who still lead
the pastoral life on the steppes, he shows the kind of social organisation to
which this pastoral life inevitably gives rise and under which they lived;
and he traces the effects which such occupation and such social
organisation produce on the mental qualities of a people.
The system is the patriarchal system par excellence. It is something
very different from the Roman system characterised by the patria potestas,
which the writings of Sir H. Maine have perhaps tended to confuse with the
true patriarchal system. The patriarchal system of the pastoral nomads is
essentially a communal system, under which all the brothers, sons, and
grandsons of the patriarch form, with their families, a community which
holds all the property, consisting of flocks and herds, in common; each
member having his claim to his share of the produce, each doing his share
of the common labour, and each having a voice in the regulation of the
affairs of the family. Such a system represses individualism; there is no
individual property, there are no individual rights, duties, or responsibilities;
no scope for individual initiative; the individual is swallowed up in the
community; superior energy or enterprise bring no superior rewards, but
rather tend to social disorganisation and to the detriment of the individual
who displays them. Further, the work of looking after the herds of cattle is
easy and delightful, calling for no sustained exertion; and the herds provide
every necessary article of food, clothing, and shelter. Beyond the family
group there exists no political organisation; for the group is self-supporting
and independent, it has no need of relations with other groups, and each
group lives far apart from others, wandering in some ill-defined region of
the immense plain.
The peculiarities of this social organisation and of this mode of life are
clearly created by the physical environment, by the boundless grassy plains,
which enable each family group to maintain a large troup of cattle, chiefly
horses. At the same time, these conditions render necessary the co-operation
of all the members of the family in the common work of tending the cattle;
while the necessity of continually moving on to fresh pasture prevents the
growth of any fixed forms of property and of any more elaborate social
organisation.
It is an extremely stable and persistent mode of life and of social
organisation. So long as the geographical conditions remain unchanged, it is
difficult to see how any change would take place in it, how any progress
towards civilisation could begin. And, as a matter of fact, the people who
have remained in these regions continue to lead just the same patriarchal,
pastoral, nomadic life. Long ages of this mode of life may well put upon a
people the stamp of sociability and communism and kill out individualism
and individual initiative! Demolins points out in a very interesting way how
these effects of the patriarchal system of the pastoral nomads are displayed
most clearly still by the population of southern Russia, who, of all the
settled European peoples descended from such pastoral nomads, have
suffered fewest disturbing influences; how still the individual is
subordinated to the community, to the mir, by which all private life and
industrial activity is directed and which is the owner of the principal
property, namely the land; and how, in consequence, the people remain
devoid of all individual initiative and enterprise.
The Celts arriving in Gaul retained these qualities and something of the
patriarchal organisation, although they were no longer simply pastoral
nomads; for, in the course of their migrations, they had been forced to take
up agriculture and the rearing of other domestic animals, especially the pig,
through lack of sufficient open steppe land. While in this disorganised
condition in Gaul, they were overrun by tribes of the Nordic race, who
established themselves as a conquering nobility, superimposing upon the
rudimentary political organisation of the Celts a loose military organisation
of clans; each clan was led by a popular warrior who attached to himself by
his personal qualities as large as possible a number of clients or clansmen,
acquiring rights over their land and property, in return for the patronage and
protection he offered them. These nobles with their blood relatives were the
tall fair-haired Gauls described by Caesar. The Celts lent themselves readily
to this system based on personal loyalty and leadership, owing to their lack
of independence of character engendered by long ages of the patriarchal
communal régime. And the new social organisation fostered and developed
still more through many generations the spirit of dependence, the tendency
to look for authoritative guidance and control to some recognised centre of
power.
Under the two circumstances, the long régime of patriarchal
communism and the subsequent prevalence for many generations of the
clan system, we may see, according to Demolins, the causes of those deep-
seated tendencies of the French nation (summed up by Buckle in the phrase
the spirit of protection) which throughout their history have played so large
a part in shaping the destinies of the people, and which are still the source
of grave anxiety to many patriotic Frenchmen.
It is interesting to note that among the Celtic populations of the British
Isles the same features have been clearly displayed. We see among them the
clan-system with its dual ownership of the soil, which has been perpetuated
in Ireland to the present day and has received more formal and legal
recognition from the British government in its recent legislation. We see the
strong clannish spirit and relative lack of independence. These qualities are
clearly shown by the Celtic Irish, even when they have been compelled by
necessity to emigrate to America. There they are not found to be pioneers
on the frontiers of civilisation, but rather remain herded together in clannish
communities in the cities of the eastern states, where they create such
powerful unofficial associations as ‘Tammany Hall.’
Demolins’ account of the genesis of the spirit of independence and
enterprise of the Anglo-Saxons is still more interesting and seductive. He
supposes that their ancestors also came originally in very remote times from
the Eurasian steppes; but that is a disputable point and forms no essential
part of his argument. They settled in prehistoric times around the coasts of
the Baltic and the North Sea, especially in Scandinavia. And the physical
peculiarities of this region impressed upon their descendants the qualities
which have enabled them to play a leading part in the destruction of the
Roman power and in the development of the civilisation of modern Europe,
and which have established them in almost every part of the world as a
dominant race, increasing in power and numbers at the expense of other
peoples.
What, then, are these physical conditions?
Scandinavia is a mass of barren mountains coming down in almost all
parts abruptly to the sea. Its coast line is indented by innumerable fiords and
bordered by thousands of small islands; and the sea which washes these
coasts is warmed by the Gulf Stream. This sea, owing to its warmth and to
the existence of a great bank which lies near the surface and runs parallel to
the coast line, is extremely rich in fish. Hence, the Nordic tribes who settled
in Scandinavia inevitably became a sea-faring folk, spreading slowly along
the coasts in small boats, supporting themselves in large part upon the fish
which they caught in the sea; for the land is barren, while the sea offers
ideal conditions for fishing in small boats. But, unlike the herds of pastoral
peoples, sea-fishing does not provide all the necessities of a simple life. It
must be combined with agriculture. Hence, the ancient Northmen became a
race of hardy seafarers who at the same time practised agriculture.
The character of the land which was available for the necessary but
supplementary agriculture was all important. It consisted, as it does still, of
small isolated strips of cultivatable soil at the feet of the mountains where
they plunge into the sea. On such land it was impossible for the family to
retain the form of a patriarchal community. The fertile areas were too small
to support such communities, and the individualistic form of family was
inevitably evolved. On each small plot of cultivatable land a little farm was
formed, a homestead in which lived a family restricted to father, mother,
and children. As the children grew up, it was impossible to support them on
the one small farm or to divide it among them; one son alone was chosen as
the inheritor of the paternal farm; and each of the others had to seek a new
piece of land, build a new homestead, and acquire his own boat.
Thus, the family was forced to become the individualistic family; and
the home of each such family was necessarily isolated, widely separated
from that of every other, owing to the scattered distribution of the little
areas of fertile soil. Thus were formed the first homes in the English sense
of the word; the home in which the father rules supreme over his own little
household, brooking no interference from outside; the home in which the
children are brought up to look forward to establishing, each child for
himself, similar independent individualistic homes. Such homes have been
established by the Northmen in every part of the world in which they have
settled; and they are peculiar to them and their descendants.
It is obvious that all the very limited domains of the Scandinavian
coasts must have been fully occupied in the way described in a
comparatively few generations after the process of settlement began. This
seems to have occurred about the fourth or fifth century A.D. Then the
younger sons, for whom there was no place at home and for whom there
remained no spots suitable for homesteads in their native land, were sent
out into the world to seek their fortunes. They banded themselves together
to man single boats, or formed fleets of boats; and, leaving their parents and
women-folk behind, set out to conquer for themselves new homesteads.
Large numbers, sailing to the southern shores of the Baltic and up the Weser
and the Elbe, settled on the plains of Saxony; and from this new centre they
again spread, as the Anglo-Saxons to England, and as the Franks to Gaul.
Others settled directly in northern France and became the Normans. Others,
the Varegs, penetrated the plains of Russia and established themselves as
princes over the Slav population.
This was a migration such as had never before been seen; bands of
armed men, all young or in the prime of life, coming not as mere robbers,
but seeking to conquer for themselves and to settle upon whatever land
seemed to them most desirable. Everywhere they went they conquered and
either exterminated or drove out the indigenous population, as in the south
and east of England, or established themselves as an aristocracy, a ruling
military caste, as the Franks in the north-east of Gaul. And everywhere they
established firmly their individualistic social organisation, especially the
isolated homestead of the individualistic family, characterised by the
despotic power of the father and by great regard for individual property and
for the rights of the individual as against all State institutions and public
powers. In hostile countries the homestead became a fortified place, or at
least was furnished with a fortified keep or castle; and in those regions,
such as Gaul, in which the indigenous population was not exterminated, the
feudal system was thus initiated. Everywhere they carried their spirit of
independence, enterprise, and initiation.
It was the swarming of the young broods of Northmen in search of new
homes that caused the Romans to describe these Northern lands as the
womb of peoples, and to regard them with wonder and something of fear.
These qualities and habits continued to be displayed in the highest
degree by the Normans after their first settlement in the north of France.
The younger sons kept up the good old fashion of going out into the world
to seek a fortune or rather a territory, which often was a dukedom or a
kingdom. Their most characteristic performance was the conquest of the
greater part of Italy. A little before William of Normandy and his
companions secured for themselves domains in this country, Norman
knights, engaging in enterprises that might well have seemed absolutely
foolhardy, had established themselves in Mediterranean lands. Some two
thousand Normans, arriving Viking fashion in their small ships, conquered
Sicily and the south of Italy and divided these lands among themselves; and
for a time they introduced order and a settled mode of life among the
peoples of those parts. The leading spirits among them were ten sons of one
Norman gentleman, Tancrède de Hauteville, the father of twelve sons of
whom two only remained at home, while each of the others carved out for
himself a domain in Italy. As Demolins remarks, these families, retaining
undiminished their individualistic tendencies and spirit of independence,
were veritable factories of men for exportation.
The modern Frenchman, says Demolins, would regard as the height of
folly the enterprises of the old Northmen, who, mounted on their frail ships,
quitted each spring the coast of Scandinavia, launched out on the wild sea,
landed, a mere handful of men, on the coasts of Germany, Britain, or Gaul,
and there with their swords carved out domains and made new homesteads.
It was thus that the ancestors of Tancred had acquired the manor of
Hauteville, and it was thus that his sons conquered Italy and Sicily.
It was in a very similar way that, in a later age, men of the same breed
carried to the new world the same individualistic institutions and the same
spirit of independence, and in doing so, laid the sure foundations of the
immense vigour and prosperity of the American people.
There is one almost more striking illustration of the great and lasting
effects upon character and institutions of the mode of life of the Northmen
determined by their physical environment. It is furnished by the character
and habits of the people who still dwell in the plains between the mouths
and lower parts of the Weser and the Elbe, a region which was naturally one
of the first to be conquered and occupied by the Northmen. This territory is
an infertile sandy plain, and at the time of the coming of the Northmen had
but scanty population; hence, instead of becoming the military and ruling
caste of a subject people, the Northmen became themselves peasants and
farmers. In doing so, they retained all the characteristic features of the
individualistic family and have perpetuated them, together with the spirit of
enterprise and independence, undiminished to the present day.
In this region each farm is a freehold which has remained in the hands
of the same family for long periods, in many cases for hundreds of years.
Each farm has its isolated homestead inhabited by the head of the family,
his wife and young children, and one or two hired servants. Each homestead
is well nigh completely self-supporting and lives almost independent of the
outside world. In spite of the isolation, which might have been expected to
engender an extreme conservatism and backwardness of culture, these
farmers have continued to exhibit the old Northmen’s spirit of enterprise
and their power of voluntary combination in the pursuit of individual ends.
They were the first in Europe to establish a society for the scientific study
of agriculture, and they have thus maintained themselves in the first rank as
cultivators of the land, quite without State assistance. In the same way and
at an early date they established schools for their children. They have
continued to produce large families and have retained the custom of
handing over the farm and homestead intact to one son, chosen for his
ability to manage it; while all the other sons keep up the old custom of
going out into the world to seek their fortunes, in the shape of new
homesteads.
Most striking of all, they still do this in the old Norse fashion as nearly
as possible. In one district these farmers combined their efforts some sixty
years ago and built a ship which, since that time, has sailed every year to
South Africa, carrying there the surplus sons in search of new domains for
themselves. In that far country their spirit of independence finds satisfaction
in establishing new homesteads, new families of the individualistic type,
and in perpetuating their traditions of enterprise and self-reliance.
It is because the modern Scandinavians are of the same stock, fashioned
for long ages by the same physical environment, that they have continued to
emigrate in large numbers to North America, where some of their ancestral
race landed centuries before Columbus was born, and where, in the newly
opened territories of Canada and the United States, they are generally
recognised as being among the best of the settlers.
Demolins does not enter into the question—How did the institutions and
mode of life of these or other peoples, determined by physical environment,
bring about adaptation of racial qualities to the environment? He seems to
assume in all cases use-inheritance. But if, as seems possible or even
probable, this is a false assumption, we may still see clearly that, in the case
of the Northmen at least, adaptation may well have been effected by
selection. The conditions of life of these Northmen were such that in each
generation the majority of men could become fathers of families only after
carrying through successfully an enterprise in which a bold independence of
spirit was the prime condition of success.
Those who were deficient in the spirit of independence must have
shrunk from these wild expeditions in search of new homes to be won only
by the sword, or must in the main have failed to attain the end; remaining at
home, or returning there after failing in the enterprise to which they proved
unequal, to finish their days as bachelor uncles at the paternal hearth. This
process, carried on for many generations, would lead to the evolution of just
those qualities which are characteristic of their descendants in all the many
parts of the earth where they now rule. Not only must such social selection
have been operative during the period of settlement of Scandinavia; but
each great migration to a new area must have sifted out the most
independent and enterprising spirits to be the founders and fathers of the
new branch of the race119. Thus the descendants of the pilgrim fathers were
the product of three such processes of severe selection; the migration from
Scandinavia to Northern Germany; that from Germany to England; and that
from England to America. No wonder that they proved themselves well able
to cope with the hardships and dangers of a new continent inhabited by
savages only less fiercely tempered than their own stock by many
generations of warfare! When we thus find the same institutions and the
same mental traits characterising, from the dawn of history to the present
time, all the widely separated branches of one racial stock and of this stock
alone, we realize how powerful over the destiny of nations is the influence
of racial character formed in the long prehistoric ages; we see how futile it
is to attempt to explain the mental traits of a people by the history of their
political institutions during a few recent centuries; we understand that these
institutions are the effects, not the causes, of those mental qualities and that,
even among the peoples who have attained the highest degree of
civilisation, racial qualities remain of supreme importance.
The Crossing of Races
Before passing on to the consideration of evolutionary changes during the
historic period, a few words must be said about the crossing and blending of
races. Such blending has been, no doubt, one of the principal causes of the
great variety of human types at present existing on the earth. It has been
going on for long ages in almost all regions; but especially in Europe and
Africa. All existing stocks (with few exceptions) are the products of race-
blending. No one of the existing European peoples is of unmixed stock;
every one is the product of successive mixtures and blendings of allied
stocks; and the mixing and blending still goes on; while in America (both
north and south) the greatest experiments in race-blending that the world
has yet seen are taking place before our eyes.
Authors differ widely as to the results of the crossing of human races
and subraces. Some assert that the effect of crossing of races is always bad,
that the cross-bred progeny is always inferior to the parent stocks. They
make no allowance for unfavourable conditions, especially the lack of the
strong moral traditions of old organised societies. Others maintain the
opposite opinion. Both opinions are probably correct in a certain sense. I
think the facts enable us to make with some confidence the following
generalisation. The crossing of the most widely different stocks, stocks
belonging to any two of the four main races of man, produces an inferior
race; but the crossing of stocks belonging to the same principal race, and
especially the crossing of closely allied stocks, generally produces a
blended subrace superior to the mean of the two parental stocks, or at least
not inferior.
This generalisation cannot yet be based on exact and firmly established
data, unfortunately; but it is in harmony with old established popular
beliefs, and with what we know of the crossing of animal breeds; and it is
borne out by a general inspection of many examples. For instance, the
blending of the white, negro, and American stocks, which has been going
on in South America for some centuries, seems to have resulted in a subrace
which up to the present time is inferior to the parent races; or at any rate to
the white race. So the mulattoes of North America and the West Indies,
although superior in some respects to the pure negroes, seem deficient in
vitality and fertility, and the race does not maintain itself. The Eurasians of
India are commonly said to be a comparatively feeble people. The blend of
the Caucasian with the yellow race is also generally of a poor type.
Examples abound in Java of people of mixed Javanese and Dutch blood;
and they are for the most part feeble specimens of humanity. It is generally
recognised that a recently blended stock may produce a few individuals of
exceptional vigour and capacity and physical beauty. But setting these
aside, the blended stock seems to be inferior in two respects: (1) a general
lack of vigour, which expresses itself in lack of power of resistance to many
diseases and in relative infertility; so that the blended stock can hardly
maintain its numbers; (2) a lack of harmony of qualities, both mental and
physical. It may be that such lack of harmony is the ground of the relative
infertility of blended stocks. It expresses itself in the inharmonious
combination of physical features, characteristic of the mongrel. The negro
race has a beauty of its own, which is spoilt by blending.
As regards mental constitution, although we cannot directly observe and
measure these disharmonies of composition, there seems good reason to
believe that they exist. The soul of the cross-bred is, it would seem, apt to
be the scene of perpetual conflict of inharmonious tendencies. This has been
the theme of many stories, and, though no doubt many of them are
overdrawn, there is no reason to doubt that they in the main depict actual
experience or are founded on close observation.
It is on the moral, rather than the intellectual, side of the mind that the
disharmony seems to make itself felt most strongly; and the moral
detachment of the cross-bred from the moral traditions of both the parent
stocks is possibly due in part to a certain lack of innate compatibility with
those traditions, as well as to social ostracism; the cross-bred can assimilate
neither tradition so easily and completely as the pure-bred stocks.
It is possible, though this is a still more speculative view, that the same
is true of the intellectual constitution of the mind.
The superiority of subraces formed by the blending of allied stocks
seems to fall principally under two heads: (1) a general vigour of
constitution; (2) a greater variety and variability of innate mental qualities.
The greater variability of qualities of a subrace renders that race more
adaptable to changing conditions; for racial adaptability depends upon the
occurrence of abundant spontaneous variations. A large variety of innate
qualities renders a race capable of progressing rapidly in civilisation; it
renders it more capable both of producing novel ideas and of appreciating
and assimilating the ideas, discoveries, and institutions of other peoples;
and such imitative assimilation from one people to another has been a main
condition of the progress of culture.
It is, of course, well recognised that the great centres of development of
culture have been the places where different peoples have come most freely
into contact, notably the centre of the old world where Asia, Africa, and
Europe meet together. This was the area in which the three great races of
Europe came first into contact and mingled freely. Some authors attribute
the fertilising influence upon culture wholly to the blending or contact of
cultures; but there is good reason to believe that it is largely due also to
race-blending.
We might compare in this respect the three great culture areas of the old
world—Europe, India and China. The Chinese afford an instance of one
relatively pure race occupying a very large area. In spite of its early start
and great mental capacities, its culture has stagnated. The stock was perhaps
too pure. India on the other hand seems to owe its peculiar history largely to
the fact that its population in almost all parts has been made up from very
widely different races—white, yellow and black; the heterogeneity has been
too great for stability and continued progress. In Europe different branches
and sub-branches of the white race, that is of stocks not too widely different
in constitution, have undergone repeated crossing and recrossing.
It is worth while to point out that, if our generalisation is valid, it
follows that race-blending has been an important factor in the progress of
civilisation. And the generalisation has also an important bearing upon one
of the most urgent problems confronting the statesmen of the world at the
present time, and not only the statesmen but all the citizens of the civilised
states, especially the citizens of the British Empire and of America. For it
justifies abundantly the refusal of the white inhabitants of various countries
to admit immigrants of the yellow or negro race to settle among them; and
it justifies, and more than justifies, the objection to intermarriage with those
other races which Englishmen have upheld wherever they have settled, and
which most other peoples have not upheld120.
In all the currents of heated discussion as to the rights and wrongs of the
treatment of other races, this question of the kind of subrace which will
result from intermarriage is generally left in the background; whereas its
importance is far greater than that of all other considerations taken together.
Some, like Sir S. Olivier121, are content to approve race-blending on the
ground that it improves the inferior race. But the racial qualities of the
leading peoples of the world are too precious to be squandered in the
process of improving in some uncertain degree the quality of the
overwhelming mass of humanity of inferior stocks; the process would
probably result in the total destruction of all that humanity has striven and
suffered for in its nobler efforts.
It is an interesting question—When two races or subraces are crossed,
do they ever produce a homogeneous and true subrace, exhibiting a true and
stable blend of the qualities of the parental stocks? Or does the blend
always remain imperfect, with many individuals in whom the qualities of
one or other of the parental stocks predominate? The answer seems to be
that a stable subrace may be formed in this way, though usually not until
free intermarriage has gone on for many generations. According to the most
recent doctrine of heredity, the Mendelian, every human being is a mosaic
or patchwork of unit qualities, organs, or capacities, each of which is
inherited wholly from one of the parents and not at all from the other. If this
view is well founded, it follows that there can be no true blending of these
unit qualities. But still the mosaic may be so finely grained and the unit
qualities derived from the two parents so closely interwoven, that each
individual may present an intimate mixture of the parental qualities, may
represent for all practical purposes a blending of the two stocks.
Chapter XVIII.
Racial Changes During the Historic Period
Table of Contents
We have found reason to believe that national character, as expressed in the
collective mental life of any people, is only to be understood and explained
when we take into account the native or racial mental qualities of the
people; and we have seen reason to think that these racial qualities were in
the main formed in the prehistoric or race-making period; we have noted
some of the principal attempts to throw light on the prehistoric moulding of
races. But these racial qualities, although very persistent, are not
unalterable. We must, therefore, consider whether, and in what ways, the
racial mental qualities of a people may have been changed during the
nation-making or historic period. What are the factors which determine
such changes? What is their influence on the destiny of nations?
The most diverse opinions are still held in regard to the question of the
extent and nature of changes of innate mental qualities of peoples during
the historic period, the period during which a people, or a branch of a
people, attains political unity and becomes a nation.
There is no doubt that the moulding power of physical environment
tends to become greatly diminished during this more settled period of the
life of a people, and that, in so far as changes take place, they are
determined principally by racial substitutions and by social selections
within a people, rather than by the mere struggle for survival of individuals
or of family groups against the inclemency of nature or against other
individuals and groups.
The former of these two modes of change, substitution, has undoubtedly
been effected on a large scale, producing in certain instances radical
changes in the racial quality of the populations of some countries; that is to
say, there has been more or less gradual substitution of one race for another,
while the nation as a geographical and political entity, with its language and
much of its laws, institutions, and customs, lives on without complete
breach of continuity, and the people, although by blood radically changed,
continues to regard itself as the same people, accepting as its own the
traditions of those predecessors whom they mistakenly regard as their
ancestors.
Perhaps the most striking and complete change of this sort in European
history was the change of racial character of the Greek people. It is now
pretty well established that the Greek population of the classical age was an
incomplete blend of two of the three great European stocks, namely Homo
Europaeus, the northern, fair, long-headed type of tall stature, and of H.
Mediterraneus, the short dark long-headed type of the Mediterranean coast
lands. The Pelasgians, who, as we now know, had achieved a civilisation of
a type that was widely spread through southern Europe as long as three
thousand years or more before our era, seem to have been of this
Mediterranean race.
Rather more than a thousand years before our era, the Pelasgian
population of Greece and the neighbouring regions began to be overrun and
conquered by tribes of the fair Northern race which came in successive
invasions, the Thracians, the Hellenes, the Achaeans, the Ionians, and later
the Dorians. Just as, at a later period, men of the Northern race established
themselves as a military aristocracy over the Celtic peoples of western
Europe, so these invading tribes established themselves as a military
aristocracy over the populations of Mediterranean race; and, as in the
former case, so here, they intermarried largely with the people they
conquered and formed an imperfectly blended population, in the upper
social strata of which the fair type was predominant, in the lower strata the
dark type.
From this happy blending of two races was formed the people which,
under the favourable geographical and social conditions of that time and
place, evolved the civilisation that culminated after six hundred years in the
Athenian culture of the time of Pericles. And then, after a very short time,
the whole of that splendid civilisation faded away, and the Greek people
sank to a position of slight importance from which it has never again risen.
After having displayed in several departments of the intellectual life a
power and originality such as have never been approached by any other
people, they became a people of very mediocre capacities, devoid of power
of origination and purely imitative.
That this profound change in the mental qualities of the population of
Greece was due to substitution of one racial stock by an inferior one is
beyond question. That a great change of racial type was effected is
sufficiently proved by the comparison of the physical type of the modern
with that of the ancient Greeks. The modern are predominantly dark and
round headed; the ancient were distinctly long headed, as shown by a
sufficient number of skull measurements; and they were, as regards the
dominant class at least, predominantly fair in colour. It has been supposed
that the many references to the fair hair and complexion of heroes and gods
were due to fair persons being very rare and hence an object of special
admiration; but there is no ground for this. The way in which this racial
substitution took place is also pretty clear; and the rapid, almost sudden,
decline of the intellectual productivity of the Greek people coincided in
time with the racial change.
The first and most important factor in the extermination of the best
blood of ancient Greece was military selection. Military group selection in
the prehistoric period had, no doubt, played a great part in bringing about
the evolution of the superior mental qualities of the European peoples,
especially of the fair northern race. So long as the peoples consisted of
more or less wandering tribes of pure race, which waged a war of
extermination upon one another, the peoples and tribes of superior mental
and moral endowments must in the main have survived, while those of
inferior endowments went under. But, so soon as the Nordic tribes became
settled as aristocracies ruling over the Pelasgian populations, the effects of
military selection tended to be reversed; instead of making for racial
improvement, they made for deterioration. That racial deterioration occurs
under these conditions seems to be an almost general law; it has been
exemplified among many different peoples. The many small Greek states
were almost perpetually at war with one another; and the result of the
warfare was not so much the wholesale extermination of the people of any
one state, as the killing off in large numbers of the younger men of the
ruling caste, the free citizens of whom the armies were almost entirely
composed.
The wars between Sparta and Athens were the most destructive and
tragic of all in this respect. We know that the numbers of Spartans of the
aristocratic class, never very large, became fewer and fewer, in spite of
efforts made to keep up the number by admitting to citizenship persons not
of pure Spartan blood; and that Sparta was eventually destroyed simply for
lack of men, men of the ruling class122.
In Athens and other states the depleting agencies were more numerous.
Frequent wars played the same part as in Sparta; and the number of free
men was further diminished by the repeated founding of colonies, in which
a relatively small number of persons of Greek blood became swallowed up
in a large population of mixed and inferior origin. In some states, in Athens
especially, the political conditions worked powerfully in the same direction.
Prominent citizens were perpetually exiled or condemned to death,
sometimes in considerable batches. It is said that at certain times two-thirds
of the citizens of certain states were living in exile; and the exiles, going to
the colonies or other foreign lands, were for the most part lost to the Greek
people.
Then, with the blooming period of Greek intellect, came the loss of the
ancient religious beliefs, beliefs which had strengthened the family and
made each man anxious to have many sons that the rites might be duly
performed for the repose of his shade. Coinciding with this was the great
increase of luxury which made large families too expensive, save for the
most wealthy; while at the same time the abundance of slave labour kept
down the rate of remuneration of all handicrafts, and so condemned the
class of free Greek artisans to a state bordering on poverty. Hence, the free
citizens of pure blood, already largely reduced in numbers, ceased to
multiply; and the number of the citizens was only sustained by the
admission to citizenship of foreigners, freed slaves, and various elements of
different and inferior racial origins.
Hence, at the time that the battle of Chersonese was fought and the
Macedonians attained the supremacy, the Greek citizens were no longer the
same racial aristocracy which had produced the finest flowers of Greek
culture. But the work of substitution was still only partially accomplished.
In the time of the Roman domination of Greece, the remnants of the true
Greek aristocracy were removed by the slave trade. Tens of thousands of
Greeks of all classes were brought together to the slave markets; while
those men of talent who escaped that fate emigrated to Rome to seek their
fortunes by teaching the Greek language and art and philosophy. Later still
came the Goths, who sacked the towns and destroyed or drove out the
inhabitants. Then followed successive invasions of Slavs from the north;
and lastly, the domination of the Turk well-nigh completed the extinction of
the old aristocracy.
The modern Greek people is descended largely from Slav invaders and
largely from the numerous and prolific slave population of the great age of
Greece, but hardly at all from the men who made the greatness of that age.
Though the change and deterioration of the racial mental qualities of the
Greek people by racial substitution is the most striking example in history,
it is by no means the only one123.
The substitution in that case was largely by elements drawn from other
regions and peoples. But a similar substitution and consequent change of
innate mental qualities may go on slowly within any people which has been
formed, as have almost all the present European nations, by an incomplete
blending of two or more racial stocks; it may be effected by internal
selection without any introduction of new elements from any other region.
Before considering an example of the process, let us note certain facts
which show that there may well have taken place, throughout the historic
period, changes of the composition of peoples by internal substitution or
changes of the mental constitution by internal selections—that is to say, by
the more rapid multiplication of certain mental types and the relative
infertility of other types. Consider first the striking fact that the populations
of the various European countries seem for the most part to have remained
almost stationary as regards numbers, or even in some cases to have
diminished greatly in numbers, throughout the period between the Roman
domination and the later part of the eighteenth century. The population of
Spain is said to have declined from forty millions under the Roman rule to
only six millions in the year 1700 A.D. The population of Great Britain is
said to have increased from five millions to six millions only during the
seventeenth century; and it is certain that in the main it had increased at an
even slower rate, or not at all, in the preceding centuries since the Norman
Conquest; whereas in the nineteenth century it increased from thirteen
millions to nearly forty millions; that is to say, it trebled itself in the
century; and even that rate of increase is considerably less than the possible
maximal rate.
The same is roughly true for most of the European countries; their
populations, throughout great stretches of the historic period, remained
stationary or increased only very slowly. Now when, during any period, a
population does not multiply at the maximal physiological rate, changes of
its character may well be taking place; for, in proportion as the rate of
increase falls below the maximal, there is a lack of fertility in the
population or in some part of it; if this relative infertility affects equally all
parts and classes of the population, it will produce no change of its
composition; but if it is selective, if for any reason it affects one class, or
persons of some one kind of temperament or mental type, more than others,
then this class or this temperament or this form of ability tends rapidly to
diminish and to disappear from among that people.
The causes of the relative infertility may be divided into two classes: (1)
those which operate by killing persons before they have completed their
middle life; (2) those which restrict fertility without killing. Both may be
selective in their action. The former kind is alone operative in determining
evolution in the animal world and probably also among the less civilised
peoples; but, as civilisation advances, the causes of infertility of the other
kind increase constantly in effectiveness, while the former operate with less
and less intensity. It is through the causes which diminish fertility merely,
rather than exterminate individuals, that changes of racial quality of nations
are now being, and in the future will be, principally determined. Selection
of this kind is usually distinguished from the various modes of natural
selection which work by extermination, by the name ‘reproductive
selection.’ Briefly, natural selection operates by means of selective death
rate, reproductive selection by means of selective birth rate.
No doubt, disease, especially in the form of plagues and epidemics, was
one of the principal causes of the slowness of increase of population
throughout the Middle Ages. And this was probably non-selective as
regards mental qualities, although it was strongly selective as regards power
of resistance to disease, and has left the European peoples more resistant to
most diseases than any other peoples, save perhaps the Chinese124.
But many other causes of selection were at work. Disease presumably
has not affected mental qualities by selection; although by direct action and
mental discouragement it may have tended to the decay of civilisations; it
has been argued, for example, that malaria played a great part in the decay
of classical antiquity, that it was introduced some centuries B.C. and
enfeebled the population of Greece and Italy.
More interesting, from our point of view of the influences affecting the
mental constitution of populations, is the effect of alcohol. Dr Archdall Reid
has argued very forcibly that resistance to the attraction of alcohol is a
mental peculiarity which a race only acquires through long exposure to the
influence of abundant alcohol; that populations are resistant just in
proportion to their past exposure to it—as is true in the main of epidemic
and endemic diseases—and that in both cases this is due to selection.125
Much careful painstaking work by continental anthropologists seems to
have proved that a change of racial composition through internal selection
has been and still is going on in both the German and French people. The
facts have been worked out by O. Ammon126, Hensen and De Lapouge127.
They show, chiefly by means of the comparison of the forms of large
numbers of skulls, that throughout the historic period the French and
German peoples have been becoming more and more round headed, that the
type of Homo Alpinus, the short dark round-headed race, has been gaining
upon the type of Homo Europaeus.
We have seen that the latter stock of the fair northern type constituted
the upper class among the Gauls of Caesar’s time; and the invasions of
Franks and Normans must have added considerably to their numbers; yet, in
spite of that, the mental and physical characters of this race are said by
these authors to be now very much rarer than formerly, owing to the
internal selections which have favoured the Alpine type. These took the
following forms. In the first place, in the early Middle Ages, it is said, the
Nordic type, being a military aristocracy, suffered, as in ancient Greece,
proportionally far greater losses in warfare than the Alpine type. Secondly,
the severe persecutions of Protestants in France drove into exile, besides
killing many others, large numbers who were for the most part of the fair
race, because, as we have seen, this race does not easily remain content
within the Roman Church. It is said, for example, that, after the revocation
of the Edict of Nantes, so large a number of Protestants passed into Prussia
that the rise of Prussia as a powerful State was the immediate consequence,
with of course an equivalent loss to France. De Lapouge considers this the
greatest blow that France has suffered in the historic period. Normandy
alone, it is reported, sent 200,000 Protestants to Prussia. But the most
important and curious factor has been, according to De Lapouge, what he
calls the selection by towns. He shows, by comparison of masses of
anthropological observations, that the Nordic type has been predominantly
attracted to the towns (which fact he attributes to their more restless
enterprising character) while the dark type has been more content to lead
the quiet agricultural life128. He points out that the town-life stimulates to a
new struggle for adaptation, from which differentiation of classes results;
the longheads maintain their numbers better and rise in the social scale.
Further, he shows that town-life makes against fertility, owing to a number
of psychological influences—the stimulation of ambition and of the
intellect, the luxurious habits, the weakening of family life, the break with
the past and its family traditions, the uncertainty of the future, the
weakening of religious sanctions; and he gives reason to believe that in this
way the towns have been, through many generations, weeding out the
elements of the fair race and determining an ever increasing predominance
of Homo Alpinus.
In order to understand the importance of these internal selections, it is
necessary to realise that their effects are cumulative in a high degree, when
the same influences continue to work through many generations. Thus, if
within any people there are two equally numerous classes of persons of
different mental constitution, A and B, and if these constitutions determine
that the one group A has a net birth rate of three children per pair of adults,
while the other B has a birth rate of four per pair of parents; then, in the
third generation after one century, the numbers of the two classes, other
things being the same for both, will be as ten to sixteen. After two centuries
the one class will be more than twice as numerous as the other; and after
three centuries the numbers of the class A will constitute about fifteen per
cent, only of the whole population. Late marriage is also very important.
Suppose that of two classes, A marries at 35, and B at 25 years, and that
each produces four children per marriage; then (other things being the
same) after three and a half centuries B becomes four times as numerous as
A. These two factors generally work together.
But, apart from the change of racial composition of a heterogeneous
nation by internal selection of this sort, changes of the constitution of even
a racially homogeneous people may be produced through selection affecting
persons of particular mental tendencies. One of the most striking instances
of this is the elimination of the religious tendencies from the constitution of
a people by negative selection through the action of the Roman Church129.
For many centuries the Roman Church has attracted to her service very
large numbers of those who were by nature most religiously minded, and it
has imposed celibacy upon them, it has forbidden them to transmit their
natural piety to descendants. In Protestant countries this process of negative
selection of the religious tendencies was continued for a much briefer
period than in the Catholic countries. It is maintained with much
plausibility that we may see the result in the fact that sincere and natural
piety is far commoner in the Protestant countries than in the Roman
Catholic; that in the two countries Italy and Spain, in which the influence of
the Roman Church has been greater than in any others, the people are now
the least religiously minded of any in Europe; that with them religion has
become purely formal and external, that the mass of the people, though
outwardly conforming, is absolutely irreligious; that in fact this form of
religion tends to exterminate itself in the long run by insisting upon that
form of reproductive selection130.
Another striking instance of the incidence of negative selection upon
certain mental qualities of a people is afforded by the history of Spain. In
the sixteenth century Spain attained to a supreme position of power and
grandeur among the nations of the world, such as has been rivalled by
Rome alone in all history; and then very rapidly her power decayed, and
ever since she has remained one of the most backward of European peoples,
contributing little to European culture, to science, art or philosophy,
incapable of developing without the aid of foreigners her rich industrial
resources, impotent in war, entirely devoid of enterprise and originality. To
what is this great change due?
It is not due to any adverse change of climate, to devastation by war or
plague or famine, nor is it due to any change in geographical or economic
relations. Spain remains more happily situated as a centre of commerce than
any other country of the world. The mass of the people remains vigorous,
proud, and virile. It is the intellect of the nation alone which has decayed, or
rather it is the intellectual life of the nation that has become utterly stagnant.
Buckle drew a vivid picture of the stagnation of the Spanish intellect
and sought the explanation of it in the great power wielded by the Roman
Catholic Church, which, he said, had successfully fostered the spirit of
protection and superstition, had discouraged every effort of the intellect,
and utterly repressed the spirit of inquiry, to the free activity of which all
progress of civilisation was, in his opinion, due. Here, again, modern
science shows that Buckle was led into error by his ignorance of the
importance of the biological factors, the racial qualities and the changes
produced in them by selection.
Galton and, still more fully, Fouillée have shown that the stagnation of
the intellect of the Spanish people and the consequent decay of the power
and glory of Spain have been chiefly due to the fact that the people of Spain
ceased to produce those men of exceptional mental endowments, of
intellectual energy and enterprise and independence of character, on whom
primarily depend the power and prosperity of any nation and who are the
most essential factors in the progress of the civilisation of any people, who
in short are essential for the growth and endurance of national mind and
character. And this was because during some centuries intellectual power,
enterprise, and energy were steadily weeded out by a rigorous process of
negative selection. In the first place, the Church, having attained enormous
power, became in two ways a tremendous agency of negative selection.
First, she made celibate priests of a very large proportion of all those whose
natural bent was towards the things of the mind, multiplying monastic
orders excessively. Secondly, by means of the Inquisition she destroyed
with fire and sword or drove into exile through many generations all those
who would not conform to her narrow creed, who combined intellectual
power with independence and originality of spirit and a firm will. In
addition she drove out all the Jews and all of Moorish origin.
The second mode of negative selection, namely persecution exerted by
the Church, was no doubt the more important, but the former also must
have had a great effect. We are helped to realize the probable magnitude of
the effect by reflection on facts set out in an article by Bishop Welldon131.
He shows the great part played in English civilisation since the reformation
by the sons of the English Clergy; including as they did a number of men of
the highest achievements in all departments of our national life. If all those
sons of clergy who have shown exceptional abilities, and all their
descendants, had by the rule of celibacy been prevented from coming into
existence, how disastrous would that have been for the English people, how
much less successful and vigorous would the nation have become!
A second powerful agency of negative selection was the immense
colonial empire which Spain so rapidly acquired, especially her American
conquests. The whole people was seized with the desire to enrich
themselves with the gold of the New World, and was fascinated by the idea
of imitating the romantic adventures of Cortes and Pizarro. Great numbers
of the bolder and most capable spirits set out for the New World, and there
either lost their lives or remained to mix their blood with that of the native
Indians or the imported negroes. In either case their stock was lost to the
mother country.
The third and culminating cause was the career of military aggression
pursued by Charles V; this completed the extermination of the aristocracy
of ability and finally plunged Spain into an intellectual torpor which has
persisted ever since and from which she can only be raised up by a
succession of men of first-rate intellect and character: men such as she
seems incapable of producing, because her people has thus been drained of
all its most valuable elements, because her eugenic stocks have been
exterminated.
The fall of Spain illustrates not only the operation of internal social
selection affecting certain mental qualities; it illustrates also once more,
even more clearly than the fall of Greece, the fact that the civilisation of a
people and its power and position in the world depend altogether upon its
intellectual aristocracy, and that the fall of a people from a high place
necessarily follows the failure to continue to produce such an aristocracy.
In the civilised nations of the modern world, the most important kind of
selection at work at the present time is what is distinguished as ‘economic
selection’ working in conjunction with the formation of the social classes. It
has no doubt operated at various times among other civilised peoples, but
never so strongly and universally as at present.
All the leading civilised nations have passed, in the eighteenth and
earlier part of the nineteenth centuries, through a period in which the
discoveries of science have enormously increased the productive powers of
man and man’s control over, and power of resistance to, the forces of
nature. The result has been that everywhere civilised populations have
multiplied at a great rate, in a way that has never before occurred. But now
this period seems to have definitely come to an end, and to have been
succeeded by a new period characterised by three features which threaten to
exert a most deleterious effect upon the innate mental qualities of peoples.
(1) The world is becoming filled up; the untouched wealth of enormous
territories no longer lies open to the grasp of the bold and enterprising. The
coloured races are entering into the economic competition in the way
foreshadowed by the late C. H. Pearson132. The high organisation of every
form of economic activity renders the competition for wealth everywhere
extremely severe. And at the same time men have come to regard as
necessities of life what, but a few generations ago, were the luxuries of the
wealthy or unknown even to them; that is to say, the standard of comfort
has risen greatly. The combined result of these changes is the increased
difficulty of maintaining a family in the upper strata of society.
(2) There has been a great development of humanitarian sentiment, one
result of which has been the breaking down of class-barriers and the
perfecting of the social ladder; at the same time it has produced such
changes of our laws and institutions as tend in an ever increasing degree to
lighten the economic burdens of the poor and to consummate by social
organisation the abolition of natural selection; that is to say, these changes
are putting a stop to the repression by natural laws of the multiplication of
the less fit, those least well endowed mentally and physically. The recent
great decline of infant mortality is one evidence of this.
(3) The influence of religion and custom has weakened, and men are
more disposed to adopt the naturalistic point of view, to believe that this life
is not a mere preparation for an infinitely longer life elsewhere, but that it is
all they can certainly reckon upon and, therefore, is to be made the most of;
while at the same time they are oppressed by the severity of the economic
competition and by a sense of the lack of any ultimate purpose, end, or
sanction of human effort.
The combined result of these three changes is a strong tendency to
reverse the operation by which nature has secured the evolution of higher
types of mind—namely, by breeding in the main from the higher types in
each generation. We see a tendency for the population to be renewed in
each generation preponderantly from the mentally inferior elements, those
whose outlook hardly extends beyond the immediate future and who have
not learnt to demand for themselves and their children favoured positions in
the great game of life. The effects of these three changes operate in the
following manner. The rate of reproduction, the birth rate, of nearly all
civilised countries is falling rapidly (although the death rate also falls). This
diminution of rate of reproduction is due to increase of celibacy, abstention
from marriage, to increase of late marriage, and to voluntary restriction of
the number of the family in marriage.
Now, it is shown statistically that this falling off of fertility chiefly
affects the classes above the average of ability, the upper and middle classes
and also the superior part of the artisan classes133. These classes have been
formed and are maintained by the operation of social and economic
competition; they have long been, and are still, perpetually recruited in each
generation from the lower strata, by the rise into them of the abler members
of the lower strata. Hence, economic selection, under our present social
system, seems to be working strongly for the mental deterioration of the
most highly civilised peoples; the social ladder, becoming more nearly
perfect, perpetually drains the mass of a people of its best members,
enabling them to rise to the upper strata where they tend to become
infertile134. Galton and Prof. Karl Pearson have insisted most strongly upon
these tendencies. But they have not escaped the notice of continental
authors. M. Jacobi135 has written a large volume packed with historical
illustrations to prove inductively the law that aristocracies always die out,
or are only maintained by constant recruiting from below, or in other words
that aristocracies tend to become infertile. And the modern tendency which
we have just now considered under the head of economic selection may be
regarded as falling under the head of this law, a case of the extension of the
law to democratic communities and the natural aristocracies of ability
which are generated in them.
We may perhaps state the principal causes of this tendency in general
terms as follows: the acquirement by any class of leisure, culture, and the
habit of reflection (the malady of thought) partially emancipates that class
from the empire of instinct, custom, and the religious sanctions of morality;
and these are the great conservative agencies under the influence of which
men not so emancipated continue to multiply according to the law of nature.
These instincts, customs, and religious sanctions of morality, which lead
men to multiply freely, have been acquired for the good of the race or of the
society considered as an organism whose life is of indefinitely long
duration; and in some respects they are opposed to the pleasure and welfare
of the individual life. The habit of reason and reflection tends to lead men to
act for their own immediate welfare, rather than for the future welfare of the
race or of society, and to refuse to make those sacrifices of ease and to
undertake those responsibilities and efforts which the care of a family
imposes and which alone can secure the welfare of the future generations. It
is in respect to these duties that the great antagonism between religion and
reason appears in its most significant aspect.
The tendency for the upper classes to die out and to be replaced
constantly from the lower social strata by the aid of the social ladder is no
doubt stronger now than in foregoing ages. But it has always been
operative; and this is widely recognised; while the comfortable inference
has often been drawn that the process is not only inevitable but actually
beneficial and desirable. It is said that the upper classes inevitably become
effete, and that the lower constitute an inexhaustible reservoir of mental and
moral excellences, from which they are and can be indefinitely renewed;
and thus the population is always rising in the social scale, a state of affairs
which makes for social happiness.
But, if we take a longer view, the prospect is not so comforting; it seems
only too probable that this constant dying away of society at the top and the
renewal of the upper strata from the lower, by the agency of the social
ladder, must sooner or later result in a serious deterioration of the lower
strata, at least in draining it of its best stocks. There is also a return or
downward current of less strength, which returns to the lower strata the
failures, the incompetents, and the degenerates of the upper. And these two
currents must, it would seem, in the course of ages render it impossible for
the lower strata to continue to supply the superior elements required to
maintain the upper. If and when that stage is reached, national decay must
set in.
In England, where the operation of the social ladder has been more
effective and of longer duration than in any other country, there are
indications that this stage is at hand. Our social ladder has provided and still
provides a splendid array of talent, but already it has produced, as its
complement, a large mass of very inefficient population. Foreign observers
are constantly impressed with this; Mr Collier Price136, for example, tells us
that the million best of our population is the finest in the world; but that our
lowest stratum is the most degraded and hopelessly inefficient.
Looking at the course of history widely, we may see, then, in the
differentiation of social classes by the social ladder and in the tendency of
the upper strata to fail to reproduce themselves, an explanation of the cyclic
course of civilisation. This has been ascribed by some authors137 to race-
crossing, followed by blending, and ultimately by stagnation consequent
upon complete blending and the flowering period which coincides with it.
But we now have a more adequate explanation of the decay which follows
upon the blooming period. It is not mere stagnation, resulting from the
achievement of social harmony and the relaxation of efforts at social
adaptation and achievement of all kinds. The decline is probably due as
much, and perhaps in a much higher degree, to the exhaustion of the mass
of the population, the completion of the draining process by which,
throughout the whole period of the development of the cycle of civilisation,
the best elements and strains have been drained off from the lower strata,
brought to the top, and strained off.
It is interesting to speculate on the possible effect on this process of the
fact that we are becoming more clearly conscious of these tendencies and
subjecting them to scientific inquiry. Already the legislature has taken one
small step of a eugenic nature and is soon to take another. The important
thing is that we should recognise that men are not the helpless sport of blind
forces, that mankind can control its own destiny in ever increasing degree
as knowledge grows.
A word may be said in regard to sexual selection, which probably
played a part in the evolution of the mental capacities of men. It would
seem that, in the peoples among whom monogamy is the rule, it no longer
operates to any appreciable degree. With the general excess of females, we
could suppose that it still tended to race improvement only if the unmarried
women were on the whole distinctly inferior to the married. But, if there is
any difference, it is probably the other way; because the most able women
are more and more attracted into independent careers. The further the so-
called emancipation of women goes, the more will this be the case.
Civilisation, then, tends from the first to put an end to that elimination
of the less fit individuals by the severities of Nature which we call natural
selection; and, as soon as it has passed beyond its earliest stages, it brings to
an end also the mortal conflicts of social groups and the consequent group
selection, which was in all probability a main factor of racial progress in the
prehistoric period. It abolishes also at an early stage the improving
influence of sexual selection, which was probably the third principal
condition of the development of the higher powers of mankind.
Civilisation replaces these modes of selection, which make for
improvement of the racial qualities of peoples, by a number of modes of
social selection, nearly all of which must have been, so far as we can see,
negative or reversed selections—that is, selections making for deterioration
of the mental qualities of the civilised peoples. In place of natural selection,
group selection, and sexual selection, we have had at work, within each
people in increasing degrees, various forms of social selection—military
selection, selection by the towns, selection by the church, political selection
with its exiles and its colonial system, and lastly economic selection, which
has become exceedingly influential in recent years among ourselves. And
all these, so far as can be seen, have operated mainly, among some peoples
and in some ages very powerfully, to diminish the fertility of the best
elements of the population and so to produce actual retrogression of the
average intellectual capacity of peoples, and especially to deprive them of
eugenic stocks, the stocks which were most fertile in individuals of
exceptional capacity on whom the progress of civilisation and the relative
power of nations chiefly depend.
M. de Lapouge’s investigations of the matter have led him to a very
melancholy conclusion. He attaches especial importance to urban selection,
as he calls it, in weeding out the best stocks. He writes—“There is no more
agonising question than that of the exhaustion of our intellectual reserves by
the influence of city-life. The public and our statesmen do not suspect it.
But nevertheless it is the great danger of modern societies and especially of
France. Of all the devastating influences which we have called social
selections, selection by the town makes most powerfully for deterioration of
peoples. Our towns are destroying all of the intelligent and energetic that
have been spared us by the long centuries of disastrous selections. France
has lost in the past almost all her dolicho-blond elements, and now are
disappearing those of mixed stock and the best of the short-headed type. In
all the continent of Europe the hour is at hand when there will remain only
the inert and used up débris of our dead nations, pitiable remnants who will
be the prey of unknown conquerors. Thus perished the Hellenic world, thus
will perish the whole of our civilisation, if man does not make application
of his knowledge of the principles of heredity, that tremendous power
which to-day is bringing death and stagnation, but by the control of which
science will enable us to secure safety and national vigour138.”
It is possible that this conclusion gives too dark a picture of the
tendencies of social selection in the civilised nations; but it does seem
probable that with the advance of civilisation the tendency to reversed
selection becomes strong139. We are at any rate compelled to conclude that
it is impossible to discover evidence of any influences that can have made
at all strongly for progressive evolution of intellectual capacity during the
historic period; whereas a number of forms of selection seem to have
worked against it and must at least have counterbalanced any factors
making for improvement, and that therefore no advance has taken place in
intellectual capacity but more probably some deterioration has already
occurred.
The conclusion thus reached deductively is well borne out by the small
amount of inductive evidence that is available. Such comparison as we can
make between the leading modern nations and the civilised nations of
antiquity tends rather to show that both as regards the average man, and as
regards the intellectual endowment of exceptional men and the proportion
of such men produced, the advantage lies with the ancient peoples. And the
comparison of skull capacity or size of brain decidedly supports this
conclusion. It has been found by a number of anthropologists that the
average skull capacity of men of the late Stone Age in Europe was equal to,
or greater than, that of modern Europeans. And in the main, on the large
average, intellectual capacity varies with the size of the brain.
Our seeming intellectual superiority is a superiority of the traditional
store of intellectual gains, a superiority of knowledge and of the instruments
of the intellect, of language, and of the methods of mental operation by
which knowledge is obtained, especially the mathematical and scientific
methods in general140. Consider a single example frequently quoted to show
the intellectual inferiority of the modern savage. It is said—Here is a poor
savage who cannot count above ten without the help of his fingers and toes
or other tallies; and we generally forget that we also should be incapable of
counting above ten, had not our ancestors slowly devised the system of
enumeration or verbal counting, and that, given such a system, the poor
savage would be able to count as well as any of us.
The reader may be prepared to accept this conclusion as regards the
intellectual capacities of mankind, and yet may be inclined to say—Surely
the civilised peoples have progressed as regards their moral qualities
throughout the historic period! Let us, therefore, consider this point
separately for a moment.
Is there reason to believe that there has been progress of the innate
moral disposition during the historic period? Here we are on still more
difficult ground than when we considered the question of the progress of
innate intellectual capacity.
The essence of the higher morality is the predominance of the altruistic
motives over the egoistic, in the deliberately reasoned control of conduct.
But morality in this sense is relatively rare in every age, and the great mass
of moral conduct of men in general is the issue of mental processes of a
simpler kind; it consists in doing what one believes to be right, in acting
according to what one believes to be one’s duty; no matter how that belief
may have been arrived at. The tendency to do what one believes to be right,
which for the vast majority of men has always been simply the tendency to
conform to the code of morals accepted by his society, has an innate basis
which may properly be called the social or moral disposition. At present I
am not concerned to define the elements of our nature which make up the
moral disposition141. The morality of a people, objectively considered, is
the outcome of the interaction between their moral disposition, on the one
hand, and the moral environment of the individuals, on the other; and the
latter consists of two parts: (1) the traditional system of precepts, customs,
laws, in short the code: (2) the traditional system of sanctions by which the
code is upheld and enforced.
If we compare, in respect to this moral nature, the members of primitive
societies with those of highly civilised societies, applying simply the
criterion of conformity of conduct to the accepted code, we shall be
impelled to the conclusion that the former, the savages and barbarians, have
in general the moral nature much more highly developed than the members
of civilised societies; for they conform on the whole very much more
strictly to their moral codes. But such a conclusion would be hardly fair to
the civilised peoples; first, because their social environment is more
complex, so that the bearing of their moral code is less simple and direct; it
is less easily obeyed, because its teachings are more generalised in form and
do not provide clear irresistible rulings for all or any large proportion of the
much greater variety of situations with which individuals find themselves
confronted. Secondly, because the code is a higher one and makes greater
demands upon the self-control of individuals. Thirdly, because not only is
the code less clear and direct, but also the sanctions of conduct, civil and
religious, are generally less obvious and immediate; and the effectiveness of
both code and sanctions is weakened by the co-existence, within complex
civilised societies, of more or less rival codes and systems of sanctions,
which inevitably weaken the authority of one another; whereas the code and
sanctions of the savage or barbarous society reign absolutely and without
rivalry, so that men are not led to question their authority.
The conditions of moral conduct are, then, so different as to forbid any
attempt to compare the innate moral dispositions of primitive and civilised
peoples; and all we can do, in order to arrive at an opinion, is to consider
whether the conditions have been such as to favour the evolution of the
moral disposition, the innate basis of the social tendencies, during the
nation-making period.
There can, I think, be no doubt that the principal condition of the
evolution of the moral nature was group selection among primitive societies
constantly at war with one another. In conflicts of that kind it must have
been the solidarity of each group, resting upon the moral dispositions of
individuals, the tendency of each individual to conform to the law and
moral code of the society and to stand loyally by his leaders and comrades,
which, more than anything else, determined success and survival in the
struggle of the group for existence. At first, the nature of the code must
have been of relatively small importance; the all important condition of
survival of the group must have been the strict obedience to it on the part of
the members of the group.
This is not a deduction only from general principles. One may observe
the effect of tribal conflict, on comparing, in various parts of the world,
tribes that have long been subjected to its influence with closely allied
tribes that have long led a peaceful existence142.
At a later stage, as the traditional codes of morality became
differentiated and more complex with the increasing complexity of
societies, the nature of these codes must have acquired an increasing
influence in determining group survival; but it must still have been
subordinate in importance to the degree of development of the moral
disposition; for a society with an inferior moral code, strictly conformed to
by its members, would in the long run have better chances of survival than
one with a higher code less strictly observed. Hence, the higher more
difficult codes could only be attained by those peoples among whom the
instinctive basis of social conduct had become highly evolved by a long
process of group selection.
But, on passing into the stage of settled societies of large extent, that is
to say, as peoples passed from the stage of tribal organisation to that of
national organisation, the evolution of the social disposition through the
mortal conflict of groups must have tended to come to an end; because
group selection became less active, the conflicts between the larger and less
numerous societies or groups became rarer and also less fatal to the
vanquished societies. In other words, during the historic period failure in
conflict has not usually meant extermination; national cultures and the
power and glory of nations have come and gone, but the various peoples,
the units of conflict, have in the main survived their failures and persisted in
living. Group selection, the main condition of evolution of the social
disposition, has, therefore, been abolished; and of the various forms of
social selection operating within societies, the chief of which we have
briefly noticed, no one seems to have been of a nature to produce further
evolution of the social disposition; all of them must rather have operated
adversely to it. Military selection, selection by the Church’s rule of
celibacy, political selection—all these must have fallen most heavily on the
individuals in whom the social disposition was strong, whose conduct was
influenced largely by the sense of duty, and less by the individual impulses
and desires.
We may conclude, then, with some confidence that there has not been
further evolution of the innate moral disposition in the historic period. This
conclusion is greatly at variance with popular conceptions; we are apt to
pride ourselves upon our superior morality; to point to our humanitarian
laws and institutions, to our tenderness for the weak, the poor, and the
suffering; to our regard even for the welfare of savage peoples, whom we
no longer deliberately exterminate, and for domestic animals; and to
suppose that all this shows modern civilised men to be innately superior in
morality to their ancestors and to the barbarous peoples. But our conclusion
that the difference implies merely an evolution of moral tradition, not of
moral nature, will appear probable if we reflect upon the fact that a
widespread change of this kind in respect to some department of conduct
has sometimes been produced within a very short space of time, even within
the lifetime of one generation. Take the attitude of Englishmen towards
slavery and the African slave trade. It is hardly more than half a century
since large numbers of Englishmen, or men of English origin, owned great
gangs of slaves or drew their wealth from slave labour; yet now most of us
look with horror upon slavery of every kind. Take the case of kindness to
domestic animals. It is a comparatively recent tradition; and, within the
memories of those who are not yet middle-aged, a great improvement has
taken place. Again, there are many persons who, while tender to their
domestic animals, are entirely brutal where wild animals are concerned,
since public opinion or traditional morality does not yet bear so strongly
upon our relations to them. Again, it is not long since in our factories, our
prisons, our schools, the most horrible tortures were applied to our fellow
citizens without provoking any protest; while now we display perhaps an
excessive tenderness and have passed law after law to protect the feeble
against the strong.
The mental development of peoples in the historic period has, therefore,
not consisted in, nor been caused by, nor in all probability has it been
accompanied by, any appreciable evolution of innate intellectual or moral
capacities beyond the degrees achieved in the race-making period, before
the modern nations began to take shape. There is no reason to think that we
are intellectually or morally superior by nature to our savage ancestors.
Such superiority of morals and intellectual power as we enjoy has resulted
from the improvement and extension of the intellectual and moral traditions
and the accompanying evolution of social organisation.
A different conclusion was reached by the late Benjamin Kidd in his
Social Evolution, which has enjoyed a very wide circulation143, and it
seems worth while therefore to examine very briefly the author’s position.
Mr Kidd saw clearly and argued convincingly that the innate intellectual
capacities have not improved during the historic period; but he held that the
innate moral tendencies have been greatly improved during this period; or
rather he distinguished between the innate moral tendencies and the innate
religious tendencies; and, while rejecting Herbert Spencer’s view that the
moral tendencies (as thus arbitrarily distinguished from the religious
tendencies) are slowly becoming improved and strengthened in the civilised
peoples, he held that the innate religious tendencies are being greatly
improved and strengthened; and he regarded this as the underlying
condition of all ‘social evolution.’ In support of his view he cited an
impressive array of facts illustrating the general softening of manners and
morals among the civilised peoples, especially the legislative changes
which have given political power to the masses of the people. That these
evidences of a general softening of manners and a great extension of social
sympathy are very striking we must all agree; but Kidd advanced no serious
argument in favour of his contention that these changes have been due to
some change or improvement of the innate qualities of the peoples among
whom they have appeared. And he did not suggest any way in which this
alleged improvement or accentuation of the innate religious tendencies may
have been brought about. He attributed it wholly to the influence of the
Christian religion. Now, if Kidd had accepted the Lamarckian principle of
the transmission of acquired tendencies or effects of use and habit, he might
reasonably have attributed the alleged improvement to such influence. But
he sternly rejected that principle and proclaimed himself a rigid exponent of
the Neo-Darwinian school, which attributes all racial changes to selection.
He even assumed the truth of the doctrine that, in the absence of selective
processes making for its improvement, every race must inevitably
degenerate. It might, then, have been expected that he would have
attempted to show how Christianity can be supposed to have favoured the
improvement by selection of the innate religious tendencies. Yet he made no
attempt in this direction. He seems to have been aware that his view
encounters a great difficulty in the fact that Christianity powerfully swayed
the peoples of Europe for many centuries during which little or no progress
in civilisation was effected, whereas rapid and accelerating progress of
many kinds has marked the last three centuries. He sought to meet this
difficulty by attributing the rapid progress of recent centuries to the
influence of the Protestant form of Christianity, alleging that it promotes the
evolution of the religious tendencies more powerfully than other forms. Yet
this view of the matter, even if it were acceptable, would leave the
Reformation itself quite unexplained. Kidd seems to hint that, throughout
the earlier centuries of the dominance of the Christian religion in Europe, it
was slowly effecting the alleged improvement of the religious tendencies in
the mass of the people, without these being able to manifest themselves in
social life, until they somehow broke loose at the time of the Reformation
and began for the first time to operate on a great scale and with tremendous
force. The view might have some plausibility coming from the mouth of a
disciple of Lamarck, but it cannot be reconciled with Kidd’s strictly Neo-
Darwinian principles. There is, then, nothing in Kidd’s grandiloquent and
loosely reasoned, but always interesting pages, to justify any belief in the
improvement of the innate moral disposition during the historic period144.
Before leaving this difficult question of the extent and nature of changes
in the innate qualities of peoples during the historic period, I would define
in the following way the position that seems to me to be well founded.
There have been no considerable changes of innate qualities; and what
changes have occurred have probably been of the nature of retrogression,
rather than of advance or improvement; and this is true of both intellectual
and moral qualities. The improvements of civilised peoples are wholly
improvements of the intellectual and moral traditions. All the great and
obvious changes of social life are in the main changes of these traditions.
Nevertheless, such differences of innate qualities as exist between the
different peoples are very important, because of their cumulative influence
upon their traditions. And, especially, the innate superiorities of the leading
peoples, though relatively small, are of essential significance; and it is of
the first importance for the future prosperity of the great nations of the
present time that they should not suffer any deterioration of their innate
qualities; for they alone have attained just such a level of innate excellence
as renders possible the existence of civilisation and the growth and
continued progress of great nations. Especially is it essential that they
should continue to produce in large numbers those persons of exceptional
moral and intellectual endowments, whose influence alone can maintain the
vitality of the national traditions and who alone can add anything of value
to them.
Chapter XIX.
The Progress of Nations in Their Youth
Table of Contents
We have found reason to believe that during the historic period the peoples
of Europe have made no progress in innate qualities, moral or intellectual;
yet that period has been characterised by immense mental development, a
development essentially of the collective mind. The most striking result of
the formation of nations and the development of civilisation has been this
replacement of the progress of the individual mind by the progress of the
collective national mind. And the most interesting and important problem of
group psychology is—What are the conditions of the progressive
development of the collective mind?
I insist that this is distinctly and primarily a psychological problem. The
conclusion we have just reached, to the effect that it is not produced by and
does not imply a racial evolution, shows that it is not to be regarded as a
biological problem. It cannot be treated as a problem of economics or of
politics; these sciences only touch its fringe at special points.
We have before us the significant fact that in some cases the collective
mind of a nation has remained stationary at a rudimentary stage of
development for long ages; while in other nations the collective mind has
developed at a constantly accelerating rate, becoming more highly
differentiated and specialised and at the same time more highly integrated,
has in fact developed in a way closely analogous to the evolution of the
individual mind. The collective mind, in thus developing, reacts upon the
development of individual minds, raising all far above the level they could
independently attain and some in each generation to a very high level both
intellectually and morally.
The merest outline of a discussion of this great problem is alone
possible. I can do no more than offer some suggestions toward the full
solution of it. Let us note, first, that continued progress, far from being the
rule, as is commonly assumed by popular writers, has been a rare exception,
as Sir H. Maine pointed out in Ancient Law. He wrote—“In spite of
overwhelming evidence, it is most difficult for a citizen of Western Europe
to bring thoroughly home to himself the truth that the civilisation which
surrounds him is a rare exception in the history of the world.” “It is
indisputable that much the greatest part of mankind has never shown a
particle of desire that its civil institutions should be improved, since the
moment when external completeness was first given to their embodiment in
some permanent record. Except in a small section of the world, there has
been nothing like the gradual amelioration of a legal system.” And what is
true of systems of law is true of all the other elements of the intellectual and
moral tradition which constitute a civilisation or national culture.
Sir H. Maine added—“The difference between the stationary and
progressive societies is, however, one of the great secrets which inquiry has
yet to penetrate.” His own contribution, which he regarded as a partial
solution only, was that the difference depends in part upon the period at
which the customs of a people become codified in written law. If, as the
tribes of a people become settled and enter upon a national existence, there
is no written code of law and custom, customs, he urged, which at their
origin were socially advantageous tend to become extended by analogy to
other fields of practice and to assume an excessive and senseless rigour; for
example, the custom of cleanliness becomes the exceedingly elaborate
ritual of purification, which among the Hindus limits and restrains social
life at every point. Or a useful distinction of classes becomes a rigid caste
system, than which nothing is more prejudicial to progress, intellectual or
moral. The continuation of the process of extension by analogy through
long ages has resulted in nearly all the uncivilised and less civilised peoples
of the modern world being bound down on every hand by a system of rigid
and worse than useless customs, which, restricting both thought and action,
render progress impossible. On the other hand, early codification of custom
in a system of written laws secures that thereafter custom shall not develop
in this blind unintelligent and socially prejudicial manner, but shall be
developed only by deliberate intention and the reasoned fore-thought of the
ruling powers of society; it will then develop in the main, in spite of many
mistakes, in a way which promotes the efficiency of social life and the
welfare of society.
Maine’s suggestion is in harmony with the fact that the progressive
peoples have not been those who invented or learnt the art of writing at an
early period. Writing and the written codification of customary law could
not be invented by any people until they had attained to a settled life and a
considerable degree of social organisation; and then, when the invention
was worked out sufficiently, the damage had been done, socially
advantageous customs had already degenerated into useless rites and
ceremonial observances; and writing served only to establish these more
firmly, to fix their yoke upon the necks of the people, as in the case of the
Hindus.
On the other hand, the progressive peoples have been those who
remained in a savage or barbarous condition until a relatively late period,
and who then acquired by imitation the arts of writing and of reducing
custom to written law, acquired them in a fully developed condition from
the peoples who had invented and developed these arts. They have,
therefore, enjoyed the advantages of written laws from the beginning of
their civilisation.
But, as Maine recognised, the acquisition of writing at the outset of
national life is by no means sufficient to account for the progressiveness of
the nations of South and Western Europe; we must seek other causes and
conditions of their mental progress.
We have already noted certain features of the racial constitution which
were probably essential to the continued progress of the European peoples
—namely, the high degree of evolution of the social disposition through
group selection in the long prehistoric or race-making period; a group
selection which probably was far more severe and prolonged than the
peoples of any other part of the world were subjected to; and which in turn
was due probably, as we have seen, to the great diversity of physical
surroundings and to the comparative severity of the climate of Europe,
especially of the northerly parts in which the most progressive European
race was formed; for these physical conditions generated in the race an
innate energy, a capacity for sustained effort.
Without the highly developed social disposition in the mass of their
members, primitive societies could not have survived those changes of
custom and institution which were essential features of their progress.
Without their innate energy, active rivalry and competition, which have
been chief factors in social progress, would not have been constant features
of the relations of these societies. Still the possession of a highly evolved
social disposition by the European peoples does not in itself suffice to
account for the continued mental evolution of the leading nations. For not
all the European peoples have progressed; and, of those that have
progressed, some have done so much more effectively than others.
Let us first examine the question—In what has progress primarily
consisted? Has it been primarily a progress of the moral or of the
intellectual traditions? As I mentioned in an earlier chapter, we have here
one of the main points of dispute.
Buckle was the great advocate of the primacy of intellectual
development in the sense of increase of natural knowledge. The argument
by which he sought to establish the position runs as follows: Progress must
have been due to improvement either of moral or of intellectual principles.
But moral principles have been almost the same in all ages. “To do good to
others; to love your neighbour as yourself; to honour your parents—these
and a few others, are the sole essentials of morals; but they have been
known for thousands of years, and not one jot or tittle has been added to
them by all the sermons, homilies and text-books which moralists and
theologians have been able to produce.” On the other hand, knowledge and
intellectual principles have made immense strides; hence all progress must
have been primarily intellectual rather than moral. Buckle did not deny that
there has been some moral progress; rather he insisted upon it as an
essential feature of the progress of civilisation; but it has, according to him,
consisted only in the more effective operation of unchanging principles, and
this more effective operation is secondary to, and due to, intellectual
progress.
I think we must agree with Buckle that the increasing store of
knowledge and the increased command over nature that comes with it has
been the primary condition of the progress of nations. For, since the early
middle ages, the moral natures of men and the teaching of Christianity have
been the same in all essentials; yet for many centuries there was practically
no progress. Kidd himself admitted that progress only set in rapidly about
the time of the Reformation. And it is notorious that this progress, including
the Reformation itself, was due to the stimulation of the intellect by a
number of influences—by the renewed study of classical art and literature,
by the discovery of the New World, by the increased intercourse of nations
resulting from the improvement of the art of navigation, by the
accumulation of wealth and the formation of a powerful middle class. It is
clear also that religion, far from having been the sufficient cause or
instrument of progress, was largely responsible for the stagnation of the
middle ages, through sternly repressing the sceptical spirit and leading off
men’s minds from inquiry into natural laws, to the discussion of many
topics on which it was impossible to achieve knowledge and which were
necessarily barren of results making for human progress. Nevertheless the
Christian religion has in the long run co-operated in forwarding the mental
evolution of the European peoples in an important manner which we must
briefly consider later—namely, through its effects upon social organisation.
Without raising the question of the natural or supernatural origin of
religion or of any particular religion, we may say that from the point of
view of national life, a religion is essentially a system of supernatural
sanctions for social conduct, for conduct conforming to the moral code of
the society, and especially for customs regulating the family and the
relations of the sexes, on which, more than on anything else, social stability
depends. It is, thus, the great conservative agency; for it enforces the
observance of custom by a system of rewards and punishments; in the
earlier stages of society, especially by punishments. It is essentially
intolerant of change of custom or belief; and even the Christian religion has
exemplified this principle in the terrible persecutions and innumerable wars
for which it has been responsible.
The great function and tendency of any religion, once established
among a people, is to preserve intact the current moral code and to secure
conformity to it. Nevertheless, some religions are less prohibitive of
progress than others; and, when such a religion replaces a more restrictive
one, an important condition of progress is realised. But, in so far as progress
is then favoured, this is not due to the changed operations of the religious
emotions and sentiments; it is due to the great religious teachers who have
succeeded in breaking down the bonds imposed by the more primitive
religion, and so have given freer play to the intellectual faculties; the
improvements of religious systems have been negative or permissive
conditions of progress, rather than its effective cause.
Progress has, then, always resulted primarily from the gains made by
the intellect and added to the intellectual tradition, that is to say, from the
progress of knowledge. Nevertheless, the free play of the intellect is always
a danger to society, for the reason that the customs and moral code of a
society, however imperfect and sanctioned by a religion however narrow,
are yet the bonds by which alone it can be held together; to their influence
has been largely due in every age the subordination by the members of a
society of their individual egoistic ends to the welfare of the society as a
whole.
The spirit of inquiry, which always leads men to question the authority
of these customs and moral codes and of their religious sanctions and thus
tends to weaken them, is, then, a socially disruptive force, at the same time
that it is the source of all progress. Hence, though the free play of the
intellect and of the spirit of inquiry may secure for a time the rapid progress
of civilisation, it cannot alone secure continued progress. Continued
progress has only resulted where there has been maintained a happy balance
between the conservative and the progressive forces, between the authority
of custom and the moral code on the one hand and the free activity of the
intellect on the other. Wherever the progressive force has outrun the
conservative, progress has been first rapid and then has come abruptly to an
end. Greece exemplified this process in the clearest manner. It was the
excessive seeking of individuals for their own power and glory,
unrestrained by the customs and religious systems which their intellect had
outgrown, that ruptured the bonds of society, plunged the State into war and
civil strife, and eventually destroyed it by the extermination of the Greek
aristocracy. The same is true of the brilliant but brief periods of rapid
progress exhibited by the medieval Italian States. Intellect outran and
undermined morals, and progress was brought to an end.
Some observers have maintained that history will pass the same verdict
upon modern France, and that most of our leading nations of the present
day are seriously threatened by the same danger.
Any long continued progressive evolution of the mind of a people has
been, then, a rare exception in the history of the world; partly because the
free play of the spirit of inquiry and of the intellectual faculties, which is the
source of all progress, exerts a socially disruptive tendency, so that progress
is by its very nature dangerous to the stability of any nation; but partly also
because the free play of the spirit of inquiry has been so rarely achieved or
permitted, so that even such progress as has led on to social disruption has
been exceptional.
A long period of intellectual and moral stagnation in the rigid bonds of
custom and religion has been the rule for nearly all the peoples of the earth,
so soon as they had attained to a settled mode of existence. The primary
question, then, to be answered in seeking to account for the progress of
nations, is—What conditions enabled the spirit of inquiry to break the
bonds of custom and religion and to extend man’s knowledge of man and of
the world in which he lives?
Bagehot, in considering more particularly the progress of political
institutions, put the problem in much the same way. He pointed out that the
first age of the life of nations is always an age dominated by custom resting
on unquestioned religious sanctions; an age in which there is often a vast
amount of discussion of detail, as, for example, discussion of the details of
military expeditions, but never discussion of principles; and he maintained
that an age marked by the discussion of principles, involving the
questioning of traditions, moral and intellectual, initiates and characterises
every period of progress.
There is much to be said for the view that the most important condition
of progress in its earlier stages was in most cases, perhaps in all, the
conquest of a more primitive people by one more advanced in culture or of
superior racial type, who remained to settle in the conquered territory, and,
not driving out or exterminating the conquered inhabitants, established
themselves as a governing class. History and archaeology show that this
occurred at least once in most of the areas where nations have developed
spontaneously to any considerable degree; the earliest known instances
being those of Egypt and Chaldea as long as ten thousand years ago. The
same thing occurred again in India, and later still in Greece; and throughout
early European history the process was frequently repeated in various areas.
Every one of the modern peoples of Europe has been formed through such
fusion by conquest of two peoples, in some instances several times
repeated; and, though none of these modern European peoples originated
their own civilisations, but largely took over by imitation the civilisation
ready made for them by the more precocious peoples of Asia and by Greece
and Rome, these fusions and the resultant composite character of the
European peoples no doubt have tended greatly to promote progress. And it
is easy to see how in several ways such a fusion by conquest of two peoples
must have tended to set free the spirit of inquiry, that prime condition of
progress. Three of these seem to have been of chief importance.
The most obvious way in which progress has been promoted was that
the conquering invaders became a leisured aristocracy, having their material
needs supplied by the labour of the indigenous population, which became a
more or less servile class. All the ancient civilisations were thus founded
upon servile labour. We may be sure that, until such a social system resulted
from conquest, no people made much progress; because all individuals were
fully occupied in securing their means of subsistence, either by warfare, by
the tending of herds, or by agriculture. Each people was self-supporting,
and knew no or few needs beyond those which their own labour was able to
supply; and labour was individual, or was co-operative only among small
groups, such as the communal family groups. It could, therefore, undertake
no great works, whether of building or engineering, such as large public
buildings, irrigation, or road making. Each family consumed what it
produced, and consequently there was no large accumulation of capital; for
there were no motives for storing up their primitive wealth, and generally
no wealth of durable and storable form.
But, as soon as a ruling class could dispose of the labour of a large part
of the population, making them work for a mere subsistence wage, there
was initiated that régime of capital and labour on which, up to the present
time, all civilisation has been founded. Wealth was accumulated; great
works, such as the pyramids, demanding enormous expenditure of human
life and work, could be undertaken; and a leisured class was created, which,
being freed from the necessity of bodily toil, was able to turn its energy to
speculative inquiry, to the enjoyment of art and luxury, to directing and
organising the labour of the multitude, to inventing the tools that render
labour more effective, to studying natural phenomena such as the cycle of
the seasons, a more accurate knowledge of which added to the productivity
of labour; for it was in the service of wealth production, that in the main
science arose, especially mathematics and mechanical and astronomical
science, arithmetic and geometry through the need of a practical art of
measurement, astronomical science through the need of foreseeing the
seasons.
The desire to enjoy art and luxury is one which feeds itself and grows,
when once aroused; and it was these growing desires of the leisured and
wealthy classes which created trade, or at any rate first developed it beyond
the merest rudiments; and in doing so led to regular and friendly intercourse
between nations.
A second very important result of such fusion by conquest must have
been the breaking up to some extent of custom and the weakening of the
religious sanctions. Under the new régime, both the conquering and the
conquered peoples would find their old customs unsuited to their novel
social relations, and inadequate to regulate their changed occupations. The
old customs of both would inevitably be thrown into the melting pot; at the
same time the religious sanctions of both would be weakened by the
intimate contact of two systems, neither of which, in the presence of a rival
system, would henceforth be able to claim unquestioned authority, until one
had suppressed the other or a stable synthesis of the two had been effected.
So long as each individual never had intercourse with any but those who
accepted the national or tribal religion, it was well-nigh impossible for
anyone to question its authority; but as soon as the devotees of two religions
lived intermixed, the question—Which religion was true? must inevitably
have arisen in some minds. The weight of custom and of religious
sanctions, which lies so heavily on a primitive society, restricting all
enterprise, forbidding inquiry and repressing the use of the intellectual
powers, would thus be lightened and scope be given for experiment in
thought and action. And either people, coming into more or less intimate
contact for the first time with a system of beliefs and customs and
institutions other than their own, must have been led to compare, discuss,
and reflect upon these things; the sceptical spirit and the intellect must have
been greatly stimulated. There must have been a conflict of ideas and the
initiation of an age of discussion. In short such a fusion by conquest must
have broken up what Bagehot calls the ‘cake of custom’ as nothing else
could, and so have rendered the intellectual and moral traditions once more
plastic and capable of progress.
No doubt in many cases such disintegration of the old systems went too
far, and the society, before it could evolve anew a sufficiently strong and
adequate system of customs and sanctions, went to pieces. In modern times
many primitive societies have been broken up and destroyed in just this
way—namely, their customs and the religious sanctions of their morality
have been undermined and weakened by the contact of the more complex
systems of civilised men, and they have not been able to assimilate the new
system rapidly enough to enable it effectively to replace their own shaken
and decaying code.
A third way in which the fusion by conquest of two peoples must have
made for progress was by biological blending, the crossing by intermarriage
of the two stocks. We have seen that there is a considerable amount of
evidence to show that, when two stocks are very widely different in mental
and physical characters, the result of crossing is likely to be bad, the crossed
race is likely to be inferior to, and less fit for the battle of life than, both
parental stocks; the characters of individuals will be apt to be made up of a
number of elements more or less inconsistent with one another; such a
composite character made up of inharmonious elements will be apt to be
unstable and constantly at war with itself. Character of this kind and the
tragic struggles to which it is liable to find itself committed has been well
described in fiction by a number of authors, especially in stories of the
Mulattoes of America. On the physical side it has been shown that such
cross-bred races tend to die out owing to lack of balance of the physical
constitution.
On the other hand, we saw that the crossing of two closely allied racial
stocks seems to have a tendency to produce a cross-bred race superior to
both parent stocks, and especially to produce a variable stock. It is, I think,
probable that the frequently repeated blending of allied stocks in Europe has
been the fundamental biological condition of the capacity of the European
peoples for progressive national life.
In the case of the conquest of one people by another differing very
markedly in racial qualities, there seem to be two alternatives equally
prejudicial to the continued progress of the nation so formed. On the one
hand, free intermarriage may take place, resulting in an inferior cross-bred
race incapable of high civilisation, as seems to have occurred in most of the
countries of South America, where it is with the greatest difficulty that the
outward forms of the high civilisation which they have imitated from
Europe are maintained. On the other hand, where especially the outward
physical characters are very different, the conquering people may hold itself
apart from the conquered, and maintain itself as a ruling class, which prides
itself on the purity of its blood and which tends to harden into a caste. Such
conquest without subsequent blending gives rise to a civilisation which,
being founded upon a rigid caste system, is incapable of continued progress.
This is what has happened in India. The fair-skinned Aryan invaders
despised the dark-skinned indigenous peoples, whom they spoke of as being
scarcely human, and, in spite of a good deal of crossing, they have in theory
and in the case of the Brahmans at least to a considerable extent in practice,
maintained the purity of their blood, by means of the development of the
caste system.
Europe on the other hand was fortunate in that all the different peoples,
or most of the peoples, from which its nations have been formed were of
allied race; they were all, with few exceptions, of the white race,
sufficiently nearly allied not to produce inferior cross-races but rather to
produce some superior subraces. The conquered peoples have been so
similar to their conquerors in physical type that crossing could take place
without the cross-bred offspring bearing the indelible marks of inferior or
mixed parentage, such as a dark skin or a woolly head. Hence, although
caste systems were formed, they did not prove rigid; free intermarriage took
place, and it was not impossible for individuals of the conquered race or of
the mixed stock to rise into the superior ruling class. The importance of this
may be seen, on reflecting how the merest trace of negro-blood in
individuals of mixed origin in North America is apt to show itself in the
physical features and how, even in that enlightened and Christian country, a
trace so revealed suffices to condemn a man, no matter how great his
powers or refined his character, to remain a member of the inferior caste.
But, apart from the possible improvement of the racial qualities of the
whole people, or of the average individuals in general, which may well
have occurred in Europe, the biological blending of allied races may give
important advantages to the resulting people in another way—namely, by
increasing its variability, the variability of its mental qualities. If a people is
extremely homogeneous in the racial sense, it may be expected to display
little variability, its members will be of essentially similar mental qualities
and of a uniform level of mental capacity; and this will tend to make them a
very stable, but a very conservative unprogressive, nation. This seems to be
true of China, and to be in large part the source of its extreme stability and
extreme conservatism.
Where, on the other hand, a people is formed by the intimate blending
by intermarriage of two or more racial stocks, it is likely to be a variable
one; there will be large departures in many directions from the average type
of mental ability, and there will be individuals varying by excess of
development of various capacities as well as others varying by defect of
development.
And a people of variable and therefore widely diversified mental
capacities will, even though its average capacity is no greater than that of a
more homogeneous people, be more likely to make progress in civilisation,
and this for three reasons.
First, variability is the essential condition of all race progress by
biological adaptation; for it is by the selection of variations, the survival and
multiplication of types varying in certain directions in larger proportions
than the average type, that all race progress and adaptation seems to have
been achieved. Hence, increased variability, resulting from the blending of
races, will render a people so formed capable of race progress and of more
rapid adaptation; for example, in the peoples of Northern Europe it would
have favoured the adaptation of the constitutions of the people to the
severity of the climate and to those peculiar social conditions which, as we
have seen reason to believe, have been the source of their unique
combination of qualities.
Secondly, variability of mental qualities would be favourable to the
coming of the age of discussion; for in such a people custom would rule
with less force, its sway would be more apt to be questioned and disputed,
than among a highly homogeneous people.
Thirdly, and this is probably the most important manner in which race
blending has favoured the progress of nations, among the variations from
the average type produced by race crossing would be men of exceptional
capacities in various directions.
We have already noted that all progress of the intellectual and moral
traditions eventually depends upon the activities of men of exceptional
powers of various kinds, upon the great religious or ethical teacher, the
inventor, the artist, the discoverer. A people may, like the Chinese, have a
high average capacity of intellectual ability; but, if it cannot from time to
time produce men of far more than average capacity along various lines, it
will not progress very far spontaneously. Exceptional intellectual capacity
is, however, a variation from the type, as the biologists say, just such as may
be expected to result from race blending; there will be, among the variations
in all directions, variations in the direction of exceptional capacity of
various kinds. Hence a nation of blended variable stocks will, other things
being the same, be far more likely to be capable of continued evolution than
a homogeneous people of equal average mental capacity, among whom few
men are capable of rising to any distinguished height.
This view of the effects of race blending is borne out empirically by the
comparison of the peoples of the world. The European peoples have been
the most progressive, and they, more than all others, have been formed by
repeated blendings of allied stocks. Within Europe it is the peoples among
whom this blending has been carried furthest who have proved most
progressive—the French, the English, and the Italian; and, conversely, the
least blended peoples have been the most backward, and have contributed
least to the general progress of civilisation in Europe; for example the large,
almost purely Slav, population which forms the bulk of the Russian nation.
We pass on to consider other conditions which have contributed to
setting free and stimulating the spirit of inquiry. We have seen that physical
environment played a predominant part in moulding the mental qualities of
races in the prehistoric period. And we must recognise that, although with
the beginning of settled national life it probably ceased to modify race-
qualities to any considerable extent, it has yet been important in favouring
the rapid evolution of the intellectual tradition of some peoples, and this in
several ways. First, by its direct influence upon the minds of individuals.
Buckle and others have pointed out that, while, in India and throughout a
great part of Asia, the physical environment was unfavourable to
intellectual progress, while its vast and terrible aspects fertilised the
superstition of the people, and repressed the spirit of inquiry by rendering
hopeless any attempt to cope with its terrific displays of force, in Europe
and especially in South and Western Europe, the comparatively small scale
on which the physical features are planned and the relative feebleness of the
forces of nature encouraged men to adopt a bolder attitude towards them.
Buckle, contrasting Greece with India in this respect, showed how the
physical features of both countries were reflected in their national cultures;
how, while the Hindus cringed in fear before monstrous and cruel gods, the
Greeks fashioned their gods in their own image, simply personifying each
leading human attribute, and made of them a genial family of beings,
differing from men and women in little but their immortality and their
superior facilities for the enjoyment of life. In general the buoyancy and
serenity of the Greek attitude towards life and nature reflected the beautiful,
secure and diversified aspects of their physical environment. In such an
atmosphere the spirit of inquiry would naturally flourish more freely than
where man’s spirit was oppressed by the fear of terrible and uncontrollable
forces and where he was made to feel too keenly the limitations of his
mental and physical powers. Buckle summed up his review of these effects
as follows:—“In the civilisations exterior to Europe, all nature conspired to
increase the authority of the imaginative faculties and to weaken the
authority of the reasoning ones. In Europe has operated a law the reverse of
this, by virtue of which the tendency of natural phenomena is, on the whole,
to limit the imagination, and embolden the understanding; thus inspiring
man with confidence in his own resources, and facilitating the increase of
his knowledge, by encouraging that bold, inquisitive and scientific spirit,
which is constantly advancing and on which all future progress must
depend.”
I think we must accept this view of the importance of the direct action
of physical environment on the minds of individuals. To deny, as Hegel did,
the important influence of physical environment upon the development of
Greek culture, because the Turks have enjoyed a similar climate without
producing a similar culture, is unreasonable. The progress of civilisation has
always been the result of a multiplicity of causes and conditions; and we
cannot deny all importance to any one, whether race or climate or social
organisation or religion or any other, because in some particular instance it
has failed to produce the progress of which in other instances it has been
one of a number of co-operating causes.
The diversity and small scale of the physical features of South and
Western Europe has favoured the progress of the intellectual tradition in
another important way. The land is divided by natural barriers into a
number of natural territories, the population of each of which has naturally
tended to become one nation and to develop a national culture. In this way
there arose a number of nations and States in close proximity with one
another, yet each developing along its own lines. When the development of
wealth and commerce brought these diversified cultures into friendly
intercourse with one another, the exchange of ideas and the general
imitation of the useful arts of one people by its neighbours must have made
very strongly for progress; the culture of each of a group of neighbouring
peoples no longer progressed only by the addition of the ideas and
inventions of its own exceptional intellects, but each group had the
opportunity of selecting and imitatively adopting whatever seemed to them
best among the ideas, the arts and inventions of the neighbouring peoples.
It is generally admitted that this was one of the main conditions of the
rapid development of the culture of the ancient Greeks, situated as they
were within easy reach of several of the oldest civilisations, those of Egypt
and of South-Eastern Asia; they were also within reach of a number of less
civilised peoples, and therefore enjoyed opportunities for trade of a kind
which, being peculiarly lucrative, has in all ages hastened the acquisition of
wealth and capital and stimulated the development of commerce. All the
most progressive European peoples have enjoyed similar advantages; and it
has been maintained with some plausibility that the principal cause of the
shifting of the centre of progressive civilisation from the Eastern
Mediterranean to the west of Europe has been the improvement of the art of
navigation and the discovery of the New World and of the sea route to Asia
and the East Indies; for these gave the western countries the most
advantageous positions for the conduct of a world wide commerce. No
doubt the factor mentioned has been important in producing this change.
But, when we consider the ancient European civilisations and compare
them with our own, we realize that, in spite of all the circumstances which
we have enumerated and briefly considered as factors stimulating the spirit
of inquiry and making for progress of their intellectual tradition, and in
spite of their brilliant and in some respects unapproachable achievements,
they were nevertheless radically incapable of continued progress. Greek
civilisation certainly progressed at a marvellous rate for some centuries; yet
there is every reason to believe that it bore within itself the inevitable
causes of its ultimate decay or stagnation. And, when we consider Roman
civilisation, we see that, through all the long centuries of the greatness of
Rome, it was essentially unprogressive. There was no continued evolution
of the national mind and character. Save in respect to the single province of
law, Roman civilisation, when it entered upon the period of its decay, had
not appreciably progressed in any essential respects beyond the stage
reached more than a thousand years earlier. Rome was in fact less truly a
nation in its later than in its earlier age. It had superficially imitated rather
more of Greek culture and it had incorporated a number of bizarre elements
from the many peoples which had been brought under the sway of the
Roman sceptre; but neither in religion, nor in philosophy, nor art, nor
science, nor in any of the practical modes of controlling the forces of
nature, had it made any substantial gains; and its social organisation tended
more and more to the type of a centralised irresponsible bureaucracy145.
On the other hand, it cannot be denied that in the last thousand years the
nations of Western Europe have made immense progress; nor that this
progress has been accelerating from century to century in a way which
seemed to reach a climax in the wonderful century just closed; though there
appears good prospect of continued progress and perhaps of continued
acceleration throughout the century to come and perhaps for many more.
What then is the cause of this great difference between the civilisation
of Western Europe and all preceding civilisations? The difference is, I think,
essentially due to difference of social organisation. As argued in a previous
chapter, social organisation was of less influence in the earlier ages, but has
assumed a constantly increasing importance throughout the evolution of
civilisation; and it is now predominant over all other conditions. We must,
then, first define this difference of social organisation; secondly, we must
show how it makes for progress; and thirdly, conjecture how the social
organisation of Western Europe, so favourable to the continued
development of nations, has been brought about.
The great difference which divides the social organisation of the modern
progressive peoples from that of all the ancient European civilisations is
that, under it, the individual enjoys greater liberty and more securely
founded rights as against the community, and as against all other
individuals. This change is summed up in Sir H. Maine’s dictum that “the
movement of progressive societies has hitherto been a movement from
status to contract.”
All the ancient civilised societies, Greece and Rome no less than all the
others, rested upon the fundamental assumption of the absolute supremacy
of the State, the assumption that the individual existed only for the State
and that the welfare of the State was the supreme end to which all
individual rights and liberties must be subordinated absolutely, was the end
to the securing of which all custom, and all law, all social and family
relations and institutions and religion itself were but the means. And the
State was a politico-religious organisation, membership of which implied
the blood-relationship of its citizens and a common participation in the
state-religion; while the State gods were conceived as being themselves
ancestors, or in some other way kinsmen, of the citizens146. This bond of
blood or kinship between the members of the State and its gods went back
to the earliest times. It is the rule of almost all savage peoples; and the
religious rites of many include some rite symbolising or renewing this
blood bond, such as smearing the blood of the kinsmen on the altars of the
gods, or drinking the blood of some animal which is held to be the symbolic
representative of the god. And the supreme end of the State itself was the
increase of its own power and stability, through the exercise of military
power and through military conquest.
All human beings outside the State, outside this moral-politico-
religious-bond, were regarded as prima facie enemies of the State, without
rights of any sort, without even the slightest claim to humane treatment.
Hence, in war the slaughter of the conquered was the rule; and the practice
of making slaves of prisoners of war and of conquered peoples only arose
through its profitableness, and was regarded as a great concession to the
victims, whose natural fate was sudden death. Under this system, which
inevitably became to some extent a caste system, with a caste of freemen or
citizens ruling over slaves, each individual was born to a certain status as a
member of a particular family. His position and duties and rights in the
family were rigidly prescribed by custom, and the law took account only of
the relations of the family to the State.
Chapter XX.
The Progress of Nations in Their Maturity
Table of Contents
In the foregoing chapter we have noted the great fact that the leading
modern nations of Western Europe have shown a much greater capacity for
progress than all the earlier civilised peoples, not excepting those of ancient
Greece and Rome. I urged that this difference between the ancient and the
modern European civilisations seemed to be chiefly due to a difference of
social organisation. I pointed out how the older nations were essentially
caste nations, resting on a basis of slavery, and how all individual rights
were entirely subordinated to the welfare of the State, a politico-religious
organisation held together by the bond of kinship; how, within that
organisation, the rights of each person were strictly defined throughout his
life by the status to which he was born; and how all persons outside this
organisation were regarded as natural enemies, towards whom no
obligations of any kind were felt. We have now to notice that the form of
social organisation towards which all the leading modern nations have been
tending, and which some of them have now pretty well achieved, is one in
which the last vestiges of the caste system and the rigid bonds of customary
status are rapidly being abolished. In this new organisation social classes
persist, but they are no longer castes; all members of the nation are regarded
as being by nature free and equal; a career is open to every talent, and any
man may rise to any position by the exertion of his abilities. His position is
one of extreme liberty as compared with that of any member of the ancient
nations. He has definite rights as against the State. The State claims only a
minimum of rights over him, the right to prevent him interfering with the
rights of his fellow-citizens, the right to make him pay for his share of the
privileges conveyed by its activities. And these rights it claims in virtue of
contract between each citizen and all the rest. For each citizen is free to
throw off his allegiance to the State and to leave it at will, and his
continuance as a citizen of the State implies his acceptance of the contract.
Even in religion, personal liberty has at last been achieved; religion is
no longer a State-religion, the gods are no longer the national gods, and
each man may accept any religion or none. This is the most striking
instance of the immense distance, as regards the liberty of the individual,
that divides the modern from the ancient nations. For with the latter, the
function of religion was to preserve the security of the State; and to
question it in any way was to threaten the State, a principle fully acted upon
by Athens in the time of her highest enlightenment and glory.
The change is very striking also as regards the attitude of the citizens of
one State towards those of any other and towards even the members of
savage and barbarous communities. We no longer regard ourselves as
devoid of all obligation towards such persons. Rather we tend to treat them
as having equal rights with ourselves, the few specifically national rights
excepted, and as having equal claims with our fellow citizens upon our
considerate feeling and conduct towards them.
The relations of individuals are, then, tending to be regulated, on the
one hand, by contractual justice; on the other hand, by the moral obligation
felt by each individual, an obligation not enforced by any exercise of the
power of the State, but supported only by public opinion. The end we set
before ourselves is no longer the welfare of the State, to be attained at any
cost to individual liberty; it is rather an ideal of justice for every person, to
which the welfare of the State must be, if necessary, subordinated. In short,
instead of maintaining universal intolerance, we have made great strides
towards universal tolerance.
All this represents a profound change of social organisation, a great
advance in social evolution. That it is intimately bound up with the
progressiveness of a people is shown by the fact that the degree to which
the change has proceeded among the various nations runs parallel with their
progress in all the essentials of civilisation. The change seems, indeed, to be
one of the principal conditions of the progress of the nations of Western
Europe and, we may add, of the American nation, by which it has been
carried further than by any other. How, then, does it make for progress? We
may answer this question by considering how the social system which has
given place to this new kind of social organisation—namely, the caste
system—renders progress difficult or impossible.
Where the caste system is highly developed and rigidly maintained, as
among the Hindus of India, its conservative unprogressive tendency is
obvious enough. Each man is born a member of some one of many castes,
and he can never hope to pass from one caste to another and higher caste.
That fact alone removes at once the two greatest spurs to effort, the two
most powerful motives that urge on the members of our modern societies to
the fullest development and exercise of all their faculties; namely, the desire
to rise in the social scale and to place one’s children at a more advantageous
starting point in the battle of life, and the fear of falling back in the social
scale, of sinking to a lower level, with the consequent sacrifice of all the
social consideration and other advantages which one’s position at any given
social level brings with it. Under the Hindu caste system, the poor Brahmin
who has no possessions, perhaps not even a rag to cover his nakedness, is
sure of the social consideration which his birth gives him, both for himself
and his children. He can look disdainfully upon the rich man and the prince
of lower caste; and public opinion approves and supports him. This perhaps
is the most important way in which the caste system prevents progress. But
there are others almost equally serious.
The occupations open to the members of each caste are rigidly limited.
The members of one caste must be priests only, of another soldiers only, of
another scavengers, of another potters, and so on. Now, if it were true that,
when dexterities or mental powers generally are specially developed by use,
the improvements of faculty resulting from this long practice and use were
transmitted in any degree from generation to generation, we should expect
the caste system to result, after many generations, in so many distinct
breeds of men of highly specialised and perfected powers of the kinds used
in the pursuit of each of the caste occupations. And this might make for
progress. Each man would be employed in the occupation for which he was
best suited. But, as we have seen, it is probable that use-inheritance does
not occur; and there seems to be no evidence that differentiation and
hereditary specialisation of faculties of this sort result from the caste
system147. In each caste men continue to be born of the most diverse
powers suited for the most diverse occupations; and one effect of the caste
system is that the best powers of any man will in the great majority of cases
be prevented from finding their most effective outlet. That involves a great
waste of faculty, which makes strongly for stagnation. We shall realize the
importance of this influence, if we reflect on the great achievements, in the
most diverse fields, of men who under our modern system have risen from
some humble station and occupation, to which under the caste system they
would have been rigidly confined.
Again, within each caste custom rules the lives of the members with
much greater force than it can exert in a large and complex society in the
absence of the caste system. For each caste has its own tradition and
customary code, which is necessarily narrow because of the uniformity of
the conditions of life of those who obey it; hence tradition and custom have
a narrow and well-defined field of operation; and the narrower the field of
its application, the more rigidly will custom control action.
The caste system is thus one which permits of great differentiation and
specialisation of pursuits, without any weakening of the conservative forces
of society. It is for that reason presumably that the social organisation of all
early civilisations tended to this form. It was the most easily attained form
which combined diversity with stability sufficiently to permit of the
formation of a large society or nation; and it was one which made for
military efficiency. It formed, therefore, a natural stage of social evolution.
In so far as the caste system still survives, it owes its survival to the
continuance of the need of the State for military efficiency. And we see how
its maintenance is still only rendered possible by its alliance with a State
religion and its system of religious sanctions. In Russia, for example, the
caste system was thus maintained by the alliance of the military power with
the religious system. While we see how in modern Germany the attempt to
maintain the caste system and the supremacy of the State over the rights and
liberties of individuals is breaking down, as the religious sanctions are
losing their hold upon the people. Social democracy, secularism, and the
demand for liberty go hand in hand148.
It is clear, then, that the caste system tends to produce a stable society
and to prevent progress; and that, in proportion as it gives way to liberty
and equality of all men, both legal and customary, and to the recognition of
the rights of individuals as against the State, progress must be favoured.
In yet another way (perhaps more important than any other) the
abolition of caste may favour development. In an earlier chapter I pointed
out how every step in the development of the intellectual or the moral
tradition of a people is initiated by some person of exceptional intellectual
or moral power. I pointed out also how the existence of a hierarchy of social
classes which are not exclusive castes, together with the operation of the
social ladder by means of which individuals and families are enabled to
climb up and down the social scale, tend to the segregation of ability in the
classes of the upper part of the scale. They tend, in short, to produce classes
capable of producing in each generation a relatively large number of
persons of more than average capacities. Or, in other words, they lead to the
concentration and mutual enrichment of the strains of exceptional capacity;
they concentrate the best capacities of the people in a relatively small
number of individuals of the favoured classes. And abilities so concentrated
and raised in a certain proportion of individuals to a higher power will be
more favourable in every way to the growth of the national mind than the
same sum of abilities more evenly diffused throughout the population. At
present it is impossible to say how far this segregation of abilities has gone,
and what part it has played in forwarding the mental development of any
nation. But that it has played some part, perhaps a very important one in
some instances, can hardly be doubted149.
In Europe the feudal system served to tide over the period of transition
from the ancient social organisation founded on caste and the supremacy of
the politico-religious State to the modern system, the transition from the
system founded on status and regulated by custom to the system founded
upon equality and liberty and regulated by contract. For the feudal system,
although still more or less a caste system, was nevertheless founded to some
extent on contract. The tenure of land involved a contract to perform
services in return; and such contract was the essence of the feudal system.
But it was not until the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when the
feudal system was finally broken up and the Reformation initiated the age
of religious tolerance, that the modern system substantially replaced the
ancient system, and the age of rapid progress set in.
In proportion as the change was achieved, the powers of all men were
set free in an unfettered competition such as had never before been possible.
Independence of thought and action, free discussion of all principles, and
the recognition of the relativity of all truths, succeeded to unquestioning
subservience to ancient formulas and customs. Each man became
comparatively free to follow his natural bent, to develop his best powers to
the utmost, and to secure by the exercise of those powers the maximum of
social consideration and of well-being, unfettered by arbitrary restrictions,
civil or ecclesiastical. I think we may fairly say that the modern pragmatic
or humanistic movement in philosophy, in the midst of which we are living,
represents the final stage of this emancipation of man from the bonds which
he has created for himself.
We have seen, then, that the modern system of social organisation does
not make for the racial progress of a whole people, but probably, up to the
present time, for race-deterioration; nevertheless, it certainly makes for
progress of the intellectual and moral traditions of peoples; and we can now
see in what way it makes for progress. The improvement of racial qualities
by natural selection of the innately superior individuals has been brought to
an end; the mortal conflict of societies has also practically been abolished
as a factor of race progress, as also of collective or social progress. These
have been replaced by a new form of struggle for existence and of selection
—namely, the rivalry and competition of ideas and of the institutions in
which ideas become embodied, and the selection for survival of those ideas
and institutions which are found, under the tests of practice and experience,
most accordant with the truth and, therefore, best adapted to promote the
welfare of societies and of their members150.
And this process of survival of the fittest and elimination of the unfit
among ideas and institutions takes place not only within nations, but has
also international scope. The members of each nation no longer, as of old,
regard all foreigners as their natural enemies, no longer despise their
institutions and reject their ideas with scorn. They are ready to learn from
others, to let the ideas current among other peoples enter into competition
with native-born ideas; and so the number and variety of competing
elements increases and the intensity of the competition waxes ever keener.
Every idea that constitutes an important advance in our intellectual outlook
or in our practical command over nature rapidly finds acceptance
throughout the civilised world and displaces some less true idea, some less
appropriate institution, some less effective mode of action.
Two great conditions, making for continued improvement of the moral
and intellectual traditions, characterise, then, Western civilisation. First,
within each nation there is going on the process of emancipation of all
human faculties, so that they enter into the freest possible competition with
one another on a footing of equality; this process, although now far
advanced in all the leading nations, is still being carried further, and the
whole trend of modern legislation is to confirm the change and hasten it to
its completion151. Secondly, there is a circle of peoples whose ideas are
thrown into the arena of rivalry, to suffer extinction or to gain universal
acceptance. This circle also is constantly widening by the inclusion of
peoples hitherto outside it; and each new admission, as of Japan in recent
years, is a new stimulus to the further evolution of the collective mind of
each nation concerned. Both these conditions depend upon improved social
organisation.
How then has this great change of social organisation been effected? To
put this question is to approach an immense subject, the history of liberty
and toleration. I can only make one or two brief remarks. It has been
suggested by many authors, notably by Kidd in his volume on Western
Civilisation, that we owe this great change to the Christian religion. It is
pointed out that the Christian religion, unlike most earlier religions, was
from the first not a national or State religion but a universal religion, and
that its adoption has weakened the tyranny of the State by breaking up its
alliance with religion. Further, it is a religion which, by its doctrine of the
immortality of the souls of all men, has tended to give dignity and value to
each individual life, quite independently of personal status. Again, by its
teaching of universal charity, it has to some extent softened and moralised
the relations of men and of societies. But, that the replacement of a national
religion by a universal religion which teaches the equality of all believers
does not suffice to secure continued collective evolution is shown by the
instances of Bhuddism and Mohammedanism. Both of these are of this
character, yet both have failed to render continuously progressive the
societies that have accepted them.
That the spread of the Christian religion does not in itself suffice to
account for the evolution from the ancient to the modern type of social
organisation is shown also by the fact that it had held undisputed sway
among the peoples of Western Europe for more than a thousand years
before social evolution made any considerable advance. Throughout that
period, religion constantly called in the civil and military power of the State
to enforce the acceptance of its dogmas. And that its teachings did not
suffice to produce religious or civil tolerance is shown by the fierce and
incessant persecutions of heretics and the many religious wars that fill the
history of medieval Europe.
The religious tolerance and liberty of the modern era are rather features
of a wider phenomenon, the general increase of tolerance and liberty, and
they must be ascribed to the same causes as this wider fact. They imply a
great evolution of the moral tradition, the most important and striking
feature of which is the expansion of the sphere in which the sympathetic
feelings find application. There is no reason to suppose that the feelings and
emotions underlying the sympathetic and considerate treatment of others
have changed in character in the historic period. For long ages men have
felt such sympathy and given considerate and just treatment to those who
have been nearest to them; at first to the members of their own immediate
family; later to the fellow-members of their own small society; and then, as
societies expanded into complex caste societies, to the members of their
own caste; later, as castes were broken down, to all their fellow citizens;
and still later in some degree to all men.
It is this progressive extension of the sphere of imaginative sympathy
which, more than anything else, has broken down all the social barriers that
confined the energies of men and has set free their various faculties in that
competition of ever increasing severity which is the principal cause
underlying the modern progress of peoples. It is this which has destroyed
nearly all the old bonds that fettered and limited men’s activities in religion,
in science, in politics, in art, in commerce, in manufacture, and has brought
men in all these spheres into that intense, because free and equal,
competition, which produces an ever accelerating progress. It is this which
has produced the almost universal acceptance of the entirely and most
characteristically modern principle of ‘one man one vote,’ a principle so
hard to justify on any ground of expediency, from any considerations of the
stability and welfare of the State. It is this also which has led to so greatly
increased intercourse between peoples.
It is sometimes contended that the realisation of the principles of
equality and justice for all men has been secured only by the strife of the
social classes, by the success of the lower classes in forcing a series of
concessions from the ruling classes. This is a very imperfect and partial
view of the process. If the ruling classes had consistently sought to maintain
their power and exclusive privileges, and to maintain all the rest of society
in a state of servitude or serfdom, there is little doubt that they could have
done so. But their position has been weakened from within by the extension
of their sympathies. Consider the great series of legislative changes which,
during the nineteenth century, transformed the social organisation of this
country, especially the factory laws, the franchise extension laws, and the
laws for the abolition of slavery. These were for the most part of the nature
of a voluntary abdication of power on the part of the classes in possession.
Consider the topics which chiefly engross the attention of our legislators
and are the centre of political and social discussion. They are the providing
of a better and freer education for the children of the working classes, who
of themselves would probably never have thought of such a thing; the
providing of free meals for school children; the providing of work and food
for the unemployed; temperance laws, land settlement, and emigration, the
eight-hours day, housing of the working classes, free trade and cheap food,
old age pensions; all measures for raising the standard of life of the
labouring classes and securing them against the tyranny of capital.
In respect of our relations to the lower peoples the same proposition
holds good. It would be easy for the European nations to exterminate the
black people of Africa, and to possess themselves of all their lands152. But
public opinion will not now allow this; it insists upon our moral obligation
towards such peoples, that we are bound to try to help them to survive and
to raise themselves to our level of culture.
The extension of the sphere of application of imaginative sympathy has
then been a factor of prime importance in producing the social evolution
which underlies modern progress.
The factors that have brought about this extension have been many and
complex, and it is perhaps a hopeless task to attempt to enumerate them and
to apportion to each its share of influence. Undoubtedly, it has been
produced largely by the influence of a relatively small number of
enlightened leaders of opinion, such men as Wilberforce, Stuart Mill,
Shaftesbury, John Locke, Rousseau, and Voltaire—men whose original
intellectual powers enabled them to criticise and reject the settled principles
of their time. It was a work of liberation from custom and traditional
prejudice effected by the spirit of inquiry, which questioned the validity of
the old narrow conceptions of the relations of men and peoples, the old
narrow prejudices of caste and nation, and discovered their fallacies to the
world; discovered, for example, that men of a religious persuasion slightly
different from one’s own are not necessarily wicked, nor those of a different
nationality necessarily despicable and possessed of no ideas worthy of
admiration and adoption.
But the ground was prepared for the reception of the teachings of such
men by the conflicts of men who desired nothing of tolerance and equality
and liberty. This is best illustrated by the history of religious toleration. As I
said before, religion is essentially conservative and intolerant of heresies.
The first effect on religion of that revival and liberation of the spirit of
inquiry which we call the Renascence, was to produce not religious
toleration, but rather a bitter conflict of mutually intolerant sects. And
religious toleration was eventually achieved largely by the realisation of the
necessity of compromise among these warring and constantly multiplying
sects; it was found impossible to weed out heresy by persecution. Yet who
can doubt that the Church, if it believed that it saw its way to secure the
universal acceptance of its doctrines by means of persecution, would long
hesitate to return to its ancient practices? The coming of religious toleration
was due to the application of the spirit of inquiry to religious systems; these
inquiries produced irreconcilable sects, whose strife prepared the way for
compromise and toleration.
The strife of parties and sects was itself part of a still wider process; and
this process must be recognised as the most important single condition of
that widening of the sphere of imaginative sympathy which has been the
root cause of the improvement of social organisation, of the general
increase of liberty, and thus of the progress of the modern nations. This
wider process is the general increase of human intercourse, both within
nations and between them. Only so long as men know little of one another,
can they continue to regard one another with entire hostility or cold
indifference. The knowledge and understanding brought by personal
intercourse is necessary to sympathy; but as soon as, and in proportion as,
such knowledge is acquired, the innate social tendencies common to all
men are brought into play. As soon as man understands that his fellow man
suffers the same pains and joys as himself, longs for the same goods, fears
the same evils, throbs with the same emotions and desires, then he shares
with him in some degree these feelings, in virtue of that fundamental law of
all social beings, the law of primitive sympathy; then also pity and
sympathetic sorrow and tender regard are awakened in his breast; then his
fellow man is no longer the object of his cold or hostile glances, as a certain
rival and probable enemy, but is seen to be a fellow toiler and sufferer
whom he is willing to succour, a fellow creature whose joys and sorrows
alike he cannot but share in some degree.
Increasing freedom of intercourse throughout the civilised world, and
beyond its boundaries also, has been the most characteristic feature of the
age of progress, and in it we may recognise the most fundamental condition
of that progress. Science and mechanical invention have been the means by
which this greater freedom of intercourse has been brought about. First and
most important perhaps was the invention of printing, the consequent
spread of the habit of reading, and the wide diffusion of the written word.
Second only to this was the improvement of the art of navigation, which
brought the remotest peoples of the world within the ken of Europe and
greatly promoted the intercourse of the European peoples, as well as the
circulation of persons and news within each nation; for the development of
commerce over seas implies a corresponding development of commerce
within the national boundaries. Then came the use of steam in locomotion
on sea and land, the press and the telegraph; and, with the advent of these,
intercourse within and without became really free and abundant; mutual
knowledge and understanding between men and nations grew rapidly, and
the age of progress was assured.
The progressive character of the modern nations has been due, then, to
the actions and reactions between the spirit of inquiry and the improvement
of forms of social organisation; each step in the one respect has reacted
upon the other, stimulating further change in the same direction. And the
medium through which they have chiefly thus worked upon one another has
been the increase of intercourse between men and nations. The spirit of
inquiry has urged men on to explore their fellow men and to study foreign
nations, and it has provided the means for so doing; the greater mutual
knowledge and sympathy thus brought into being have in turn brought
greater liberty to the spirit of inquiry, freeing it from the rigid bonds of
custom and conservative tradition and enabling it to render human
intercourse yet more free and abundant.
In this way we reconcile and synthesize the rival theories of the causes
of progress, the view that sees in the spirit of inquiry the sole agent of
progress and that which attributes it wholly to the improvement of morals
and of social organisation. The great commandment, “Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself,” pointed the way of all progress; but great and
beautiful as it was, it could not immediately avail to break the bonds of the
human spirit, the bonds of ignorance and fear; only gradually through
increase of knowledge could man learn that all men are his neighbours, and
that not only the foreigner just beyond the frontier, but also the naked
savage, chipping his stone axe or weaving his rude basket for the reception
of his neighbour’s head, is a man of like passions with himself, with equal
claims upon justice and freedom and all that makes the humanity of man.
It only remains to point out the part in human life of a new factor of
progress which promises to eclipse all others in importance. The main
theme of my earlier work153 was that only through increase of knowledge
of others is each man’s knowledge of himself slowly built up and enriched,
until it renders him capable of enlightened self-direction. So the main theme
of this book is the development of the group mind, the increase of its self-
knowledge and of its power of self-direction through increase of knowledge
of other human societies.
The age of progress through which the world has recently passed was an
age of progress due to increase of human intercourse and consequent
increasing understanding by each nation of other nations and peoples. This
better knowledge of other peoples is now reacting upon the self-knowledge
of each nation, rapidly enriching it. Each of the great nations is beginning to
understand itself, and to take thought for the morrow in the light of this self-
knowledge; and this increase of national self-knowledge, this enrichment of
national self-consciousness, is the great new factor which alone can secure
the further progress of mankind. We saw in an earlier chapter that a nation
is essentially the realization of an idea, the idea of a nation, that only in so
far as the idea of the nation exists and operates in the minds of the members
of the nation, controlling their conduct and directing it to actions having
reference to the nation as a whole, does a nation come into and continue in
existence. The self-consciousness of nations is therefore not a new factor in
their life. But their self-consciousness is now becoming reflective and
immensely richer in content; so much so that it promises to operate virtually
as a new factor of tremendous efficiency.
We may illustrate the influence of this new factor by reverting again to
the analogy between the mind of the individual and the mind of the nation
which we developed at some length in an earlier chapter. In the developing
individual, as in the evolving animal series, the development of self-
consciousness is the condition of the development of true volition. Before
self-consciousness and a self-regarding sentiment are developed, conduct is
determined by feelings and impulses or by ideas and the desires they
arouse, either some one desire rising alone to consciousness and issuing at
once in action, or through a conflict of impulses and desires, some one of
which eventually predominates over the others and determines action; but
action issuing from such a conflict of impulses and desires is not true
volition. Action is truly volitional only when the ideal of the self in relation
to the idea of the end to be achieved by each of the conflicting tendencies
determines the issue of the conflict.
In the mental life of nations, all those conflicts of ideas, of parties, of
principles and of systems, in which each strives to predominate over and
displace others, and by natural selection of which (the death of the many
less fit, the survival of the few better or more fit) the progress of recent
centuries has been chiefly due; all these conflicts have been more or less
blind conflicts, in which the idea of the whole nation, in relation to the end
to be achieved by each of the conflicting tendencies, has generally played
but a small part and a part that often has not made strongly for progress.
National actions were in the main impulsive and instinctive actions, like
those of young children or the higher animals. And for this reason—that
nations had too little true self-knowledge, and had not developed a true and
rich ideal of national life—the self-consciousness of nations was too poor in
content to serve as the guide of actions making for progress.
In the individual man, it is the growing richness and accuracy of self-
knowledge which alone enables him to direct his actions effectively to
secure his own welfare and to improve his character and powers. Just so in
nations the rapid growth of their self-knowledge and the enrichment of their
ideals of national life which characterise the present time must render their
self-consciousness a far more efficient guide of all national deliberation and
action.
The self-knowledge of the individual grows chiefly, as we have seen,
through intercourse with his fellows; his idea of himself develops in fulness
and accuracy in the light of his knowledge of other selves, and this
knowledge in turn develops in the light of his increasing knowledge of
himself. Just so the self-knowledge of nations is now growing rapidly
through the intercourse of each nation with others, an intercourse far freer,
more multiplex, than ever before in the history of the world; a result largely
of the improved means of communication which we owe to science and the
spirit of inquiry.
Perhaps the most striking illustration of the operation of this new factor
is the rapid spread in recent years of parliamentary institutions. The
parliamentary system of national organisation was worked out in these
islands by long centuries of more or less blind conflict of ideas and parties
and institutions; and now other nations in rapid succession have observed
and admired the system and have deliberately and self-consciously adopted
it; and still the process goes on, as recently in Russia.
Japan offers a striking illustration of the way in which the new factor
operates. An intelligent people in which the national sentiment was strong,
but in which national self-knowledge was rudimentary because of the
isolation of the nation, was suddenly brought into contact with other
peoples; through observation of them, it learnt its own deficiencies and set
about deliberately to remedy them in the light of its new knowledge; and in
doing so has reorganised itself from top to bottom.
In England also national self-knowledge is beginning rapidly to increase
in accuracy and extent. We have begun to compare ourselves at all points
with other nations, and are no longer content with the good old creed, that
everything British is best. We are learning in this way our weaknesses; and
the knowledge is becoming a main cause of accelerated progress. The best
illustration is, perhaps, the present stir over educational questions, which is
directly due to the increase of national self-knowledge resulting from the
observation of other nations.
But in the future our national self-consciousness will be enriched and
fitted for the guidance of the national will in a still more effective manner
than by the knowledge of our weaknesses being forced upon us by the
nations who are our rivals in the world. In many directions—by the
historians, the biologists, the anthropologists, the statisticians—data are
being gathered for a science of society whose sure indications will enable
us deliberately to guide the further evolution of the nation towards the
highest ideal of a nation that we can conceive. In this way, it may be hoped,
the modern nations will be able to avoid that danger which has destroyed
the great nations of the past, and which has been the dark cloud shadowing
the brilliance of the age of progress that resulted from increasing human
intercourse and mutual understanding. In this way the free play of the spirit
of inquiry, which in all earlier ages has been highly dangerous to the
stability of nations and which, while it was the sole cause of progress,
nevertheless destroyed many of the nations whom it impelled upon that
path, will make for a greatly accelerated progress; and, at the same time, it
will enable us to secure, by deliberate voluntary control, the bases of
society, which in all previous ages have rested solely upon custom, instinct,
and the religious sanctions.
Not by any voluntary surrender of the reason, not by any subjugation of
the intellect to the dominion of obscure transcendental ideas, such as is
preached by Benjamin Kidd, Chatterton-Hill154 and others who have
realized the disintegrating effects of intellect on earlier societies, but by a
more strenuous use of our intellectual faculties, and by a growth of
knowledge, especially a knowledge of the laws of human societies, will the
stability and further evolution of nations be maintained.
The nations whose progress will rest upon this basis will be in a position
very different from that of the older societies to which the emancipation of
the intellect was fatal. They fell for lack of knowledge of natural laws, as
soon as the progress of intellectual inquiry had weakened their instinctive
and customary bases. The modern nations may reasonably hope that they
are within sight of knowledge which will enable them to avoid these
dangers and to continue their progress during an indefinitely long period.
They may even hope to progress, not only in respect of the intellectual and
moral tradition, but also in respect of racial qualities; for a better knowledge
of the factors at work and of the laws of heredity will enable them to put an
end to the influences now making for race deterioration and to replace them
by others of the opposite tendency.
Such national progress will be truly teleological; it will be a progress
whose direction will be determined by the desire of an ideal end present to
the consciousness of all and striven after by the collective deliberation and
volition of the nation.
Thus the group spirit, rising above the level of a narrow patriotism that
regards with hostility all its rivals, recognising that only through the further
development of the collective life of nations can man rise to higher levels
than he has yet known, becomes the supreme agent of human progress.
Footnotes:
1. History of European Thought in the 19th Century.
2. Political Thought in England from Bacon to Halifax, Home University Library, p. 49.
3. Essay on “The Nature of Democracy” in Popular Government, London 1885.
4. Psychology, the Study of Behaviour, Home University Library, London, 1912.
5. Community, by R. M. Maciver, London, 1917.
6. In Body and Mind, London, 1911.
7. Op. cit. p. 76.
8. Op. cit. p. 77.
9. Op. cit. p. 90.
10. E. Barker, Political Thought in England from Herbert Spencer to the present day, Home
University Library, London, 1915.
11. Op. cit. p. 11.
12. Op. cit. pp. 62-64.
13. Op. cit. p. 74. I consider Mr Barker’s brief statement of the nature of the group mind entirely
acceptable, and it has given me great pleasure to find myself in such close harmony with it. It
will perhaps give further weight to the fact of our agreement, if I add that the whole of this
book, including the rest of this introductory chapter, was written before I took up Mr Barker’s
brilliant little volume.
14. Op. cit. p. 175.
15. This principle of primitive sympathy or simple direct induction or contagion of emotion was
formulated in Chapter IV of my Social Psychology.
16. It was my good fortune to witness the almost instantaneous spread of anger through a crowd of
five thousand warlike savages in the heart of Borneo. Representatives of all the tribes of a large
district of Sarawak had been brought together by the resident magistrate for the purpose of
strengthening friendly relations and cementing peace between the various tribes. All went
smoothly, and the chiefs surrounded by their followers were gathered together in a large hall,
rudely constructed of timber, to make public protestations of friendship. An air of peace and
good-will pervaded the assembly, until a small piece of wood fell from the roof upon the head of
one of the leading chiefs, making a slight wound from which the blood trickled. Only the
immediate neighbours of this chief observed the accident or could perceive its effect;
nevertheless in the space of a few seconds a wave of angry emotion swept over the whole
assembly, and a general and bloody fight would have at once commenced, but that the Resident
had insisted upon all weapons being left in the boats on the river 200 yards away. The great
majority of the crowd rushed headlong to fetch their weapons from their boats, while the few
who remained on the ground danced in fury or rushed to and fro gesticulating wildly. Happily
the boats were widely scattered along the banks of the river, so that it was possible for the
Resident, by means of persuasion, threats, and a show of armed force, to prevent the hostile
parties coming together again with their weapons in hand.
17. The Souls of Black Folk, by W. E. B. Du Bois, London, 1905.
18. The Crowd, p. 11.
19. In a recent work (What is Instinct? by Bingham Newland) the author, who shows an intimate
knowledge of the life of wild animals, seems to postulate some such direct telepathic rapport
between animals of the same species.
20. See The Dissociation of a Personality, by Dr Morton Prince; Double Personality, by A. Binet;
The Psychology of Suggestion, by Boris Sidis; L’automatism psychologique, by Pierre Janet; and
the descriptions and discussions of William James in his Principles of Psychology.
21. Philosophy of the Unconscious.
22. Die Psychophysik.
23. Psychologie des idées forces.
24. Les Sociétés animales, Paris, 1877.
25. Bau und Leben des Socialen Körpers.
26. Medicinische Psychologie.
27. I have argued that the great increase of knowledge of the functions and structure of the nervous
system attained by recent research does but provide for the argument a surer basis of empirical
data; and I have contended that some at least of the cases of disintegration of personality are
more easily reconcilable with this view, than with the contrary doctrine which regards the
individual consciousness as the collective consciousness of the brain-cells. See my Body and
Mind, a book I found myself compelled to write in order to arrive at a reasoned judgment on this
difficult problem, which obtrudes itself at the outset of the study of group life.
28. Social Psychology, Chapter IX.
29. See especially A. Stoll’s Suggestion und Hypnotismus in der Völkerpsychologie, where the
events of the French revolution have been treated in some detail from this point of view.
30. Hon. Maurice Baring in an article in the Morning Post of April 21, 1906.
31. Social Psychology, Chapter IX.
32. Op. cit. Chapter VII.
33. One great difference between the professional army, such as that of England, and the citizen
armies of Europe, consists in the fact that the special sentiment for the army is stronger in the
former; the more general patriotic sentiment, in the rank and file of the latter; though in the
regular officers of the continental army the sentiment for the army itself is no doubt usually the
stronger.
34. Cp. The Pagan Tribes of Borneo, by Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, London, 1912.
35. From Religion to Philosophy, p. 77.
36. Op. cit. p. 82.
37. Cf. The Pagan Tribes of Borneo, by Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, London, 1912.
38. Mr Cornford’s book might in fact be entitled with greater propriety From Philosophy to
Religion.
39. 1 Oct. 1914.
40. Les Fonctions mentales dans les Sociétés inférieures, Alcan, Paris, 1910.
41. At this point I would refer the reader to the discussion of the self-regarding sentiment (Chapter
VII) in my Social Psychology.
42. For a brief history of the nation-state the reader may be referred to Prof. Ramsay Muir’s
Nationalism and Internationalism, London, 1917. He rightly describes ‘nationalism’ as one of
the most powerful factors in modern history. It is, I think, obviously true that we may go further
and say that it is the most powerful factor in modern history.
43. Op. cit. p. 38.
44. Op. cit. p. 54.
45. Op. cit. p. 51.
46. Chapter II. On the question of the definition of the terms ‘mind’ and ‘character’ I would refer the
reader to my Psychology, The Study of Behaviour, Home University Library.
47. Prof. Hans Driesch’s conception of ‘super-individual entelechy’ seems to be of this order,
arrived at by the same line of reasoning. See Science and Philosophy of the Organism, Gifford
Lectures, 1907.
48. Psychological Laws of the Evolution of Peoples.
49. As examples of the best work as yet accomplished in this immense and fascinating field, I would
refer the reader to the books of M. Alfred Fouillée one of the most clear-sighted, judicious, and
readable of modern philosophers, especially his Psychologie des peuples européens, his
Psychologie du peuple français, and his Science Sociale Contemporaine.
50. Psychologie du peuple français, p. 4. Paris 1903.
51. Social Psychology, p. 330.
52. Les inégalités des races humaines.
53. This fantastic doctrine has found its fullest expression in Chamberlain’s work The Foundations
of the Nineteenth Century.
54. Other prominent exponents of this view are Mr J. M. Robertson in his book The Germans and in
his Introduction to English Politics, and M. J. Finot in his Race Prejudice.
55. I here use this word in the large, loose and convenient sense in which it is used by M. Tarde in
his Lois de l’imitation. I have examined the nature of imitative processes more closely in my
Social Psychology.
56. Meredith Townsend regards this as one of the leading qualities of the peoples of India. See
Europe and Asia, London, 1901.
57. Cp. Ripley’s Races of Europe and Prof. H. J. Fleure’s Human Geography in Western Europe,
London, 1919.
58. Cf. The Black Republic, by Sir Spencer St John and Where Black rules White, by H. Hesketh
Prichard.
59. M. le Bon and more than one Indian civil servant in conversation.
60. By G. Lowes Dickinson, Hibbert Journal, Jan. 1911.
61. In the Fortnightly Review, Jan. 1910, and in his Social Environment and Moral Progress,
London, 1913.
62. Physics and Politics.
63. Cp. Ripley, op. cit. and Fleure, op. cit.
64. This was written in 1910, and now in 1919 the dissolution which was so obviously impending is
an accomplished fact.
65. The great myth of the racial unity and superiority of the German people, which we have noticed
above, has been cultivated and propagated, with elaborate disregard for fact by the German State
and its henchmen in the universities and elsewhere, in a deliberate effort to remedy by art the
lack of natural boundaries and of true national homogeneity.
66. In his Works of Man Mr March Philips shews clearly the influence of the Egyptian landscape
upon the arts of sculpture and architecture.
67. Cf. Sir S. Dill’s The Roman Empire from Nero to Augustus, London, 1905.
68. Since these lines were written a new mode of rapid locomotion, namely the aerial, which has
resulted from the invention and rapid development of the internal combustion engine, threatens
to eclipse all others in its effects upon the organisation of the world.
69. This state of affairs has no doubt been considerably altered during the great war; the political
education of Germany, a painful but salutary process, is progressing rapidly.
70. Cf. N. Angell, The Great Illusion.
71. Incipient nations have appeared where the Bantu stock has produced occasionally great warrior
chiefs such as Chaka and Cetewayo.
72. Psychological Laws of the Evolution of Peoples.
73. I do not propose to examine in this book the much discussed question—Are the leaders of a
nation to be regarded as produced by the nation according to the general laws of biology and
psychology, or as given to them by some supernatural process? This question belongs to a
branch of Social Psychology which is not included in the volume.
74. Psychologie du peuple français, p. 13.
75. Ramsay Muir, op. cit. and J. Holland Rose, The Development of the European Nations. London,
1905.
76. J. Holland Rose, op. cit.
77. I suggest that international emulation in this sphere may prove to be an effective, probably the
only effective, substitute for war.
78. Bau und Leben des socialen Körpers.
79. Decadence.
80. Cf. A. Smith’s Village Life in China. The author insists on the lack of public spirit, of the idea of
action pro bono publico.
81. 1906.
82. In his Theory of the State.
83. By Schaffle, op. cit., and all the school of German ‘idealism’.
84. The substance of this chapter was contained in a paper entitled ‘The Will of the People,’ read
before the Sociological Society and published in the Sociological Review, 1912.
85. Philosophical Theory of the State and Article in International Journal of Ethics, 1907.
86. Cf. H. Rose, The Development of the European Nations and Ramsay Muir, Nationalism and
Internationalism.
87. The Russo-Japanese War, Vol. II, p. 25.
88. La Science Sociale contemporaine, p. 115.
89. Social Psychology, Chapters V-IX. Dr Bosanquet’s failure (as it seems to me) to achieve a
satisfactory account of the social will is the inevitable consequence of the inadequacy of his
conception of individual volition. This is set out in his Psychology of the Moral Self, where he
shews himself to be an uncompromising adherent of the intellectualist tradition. He totally
ignores the existence and organisation of the conative side of the mind. His notion of volition is
based upon the now discredited theory of ideo-motor action.
90. This was written before the war with Germany.
91. Emulation in the administration of backward peoples offers perhaps the greatest possibilities as
‘a moral equivalent for war.’
92. Cp. Principal L. P. Jacks on the Japanese in his Alchemy of Thought.
93. W. L. George, English Review, May, 1915, “The Price of Nationality.” “Anger, indeed, is the
soul of what is called the national will. To call it a will is perhaps too much, it is an instinct and
mainly an instinct to hate.... Love of country is mainly hatred of other countries.”
94. Cf. Gilbert Murray, Collection of Addresses on The War given at Bedford College, 1915.
95. Incidentally he holds up my Social Psychology as a dreadful example of such an attempt and a
woeful evidence of the parlous state of present-day culture in England. Such dislike of any
attempt to understand that which we hold sacred is intelligible enough in the vulgar, for whom
all analysis is destructive of the values they unreasoningly cherish. But it may be hoped that
men of letters who set out to defend patriotism will learn to rise above this attitude, just as the
more enlightened leaders of religion are learning to welcome psychological inquiry in their
domain.
96. In these respects the Church alone can enter into serious rivalry as an object of loyalty.
97. As Dean Inge has remarked—“If they love not those whom they have seen, how shall they love
those whom they have not seen?”
98. Cp. Fielding Hall, The Soul of a People.
99. This, as President Lowell clearly shows in his Public Opinion and Popular Government, is
carried to an extreme in America and lies at the root of many administrative evils.
100. President Lowell (op. cit.) has clearly shown other benefits resulting from the party system; he
shows especially how the party is needed to prepare a program and select candidates, if the
popular vote is to give expression to the dominant opinion of the people.
101. Cp. his Civilisation and Progress.
102. On the nature and development of the moral sentiments in the individual mind, see my Social
Psychology, Chapter VIII.
103. Op. cit. p. 210.
104. In this connexion I would refer the reader to The New State by M. P. Follett (London, 1918), an
interesting book in which the true nature and function of collective deliberation is forcibly
expounded.
105. Cf. W. R. Patterson, The Nemesis of Nations, London, 1906.
106. Social Evolution, Principle of Western Civilisation, and The Science of Power.
107. Essai d’une Psychologie politique du Peuple Anglais, Paris, 1903.
108. Op. cit. p. 20.
109. History of Civilisation, p. 137.
110. In this connexion it must be remembered that in Hindu society the man of proved and
acknowledged holiness is permitted and encouraged to procreate a large number of children.
111. Europe and Asia.
112. Op. cit.
113. Guizot asserted that, even when new ideas and institutions have originated elsewhere, it has
usually been only by their adoption in France that they have been spread through Europe (A
History of Civilization in Europe).
114. I cite these passages after M. Boutmy, op. cit. p. 168.
115. The most frank, perhaps somewhat exaggerated, expression of the difference is The Superiority
of the Anglo-Saxon, by Ed. Demolins.
116. History of Civilisation in England, Vol. II, p. 114.
117. Comment la route crée le type social, Paris, Didot et Cie.
118. Histoire de la Formation particulariste, Paris.
119. The reality of selective effect of migration is shown by the stature of American immigrants;
those from Scotland are said to be two inches taller than the average Scotchman; and De
Lapouge shows (Les Sélections Sociales, Paris, 1896, p. 367) that a superiority of stature almost
as marked, may be inferred for the French and German immigrants of America from the
statistics of the armies of the Civil War.
120. A. Reibmayer (Inzucht u. Vermischung beim Menschen, Leipzig, 1897) insists upon the
importance of isolation and consequent inbreeding for the formation of superior strains and
subraces. He points out that the geographical barriers of Europe have favoured in this way the
production of distinctive national types. Like Stewart Chamberlain, Flinders Petrie, and others,
he regards the dark ages of Europe as a period of chaos directly due to the overcoming of these
geographical barriers and the consequent prevalence of crossbreeding on a large scale.
121. White Capital and coloured Labour.
122. Aristotle says “want of men was the ruin of Sparta.” Fathers of three sons were exempted from
military service, and of four sons from all State burdens.
123. Several writers have pointed out the importance of these facts and at least one professional
historian has insisted strongly upon them, namely O. Seeck in his Geschichte des Untergangs
der antiken Welt, Berlin, 1910, vol. 1.
124. On this topic cp. Dr Archdall Reid’s The Present Evolution of Man and his Principles of
Heredity, in which books the effects of selection by disease and by alcohol are vividly set out.
125. Op. cit.
126. O. Ammon, Gesellschaftsordnung und ihre natürlichen Grundlagen, Jena, 1900.
127. De Lapouge, Les Sélections Sociales; cf. also W. Alexis, Abhandlungen zur Theorie der
Bevölkerungs-und Moralstatistik, Jena, 1903, and W. Schallmayer’s Vererbung und Auslese in
ihrer soziologischen und politischen Bedeutung, Jena, 1910.
128. Ammon’s Law.
129. Pointed out by Francis Galton and Fouillée.
130. On the other hand it tends (partly no doubt by deliberate design) to spread itself by insisting
upon the duty of procreation. This effect is said to be very considerable in French Canada and
only to be partially counteracted by a very high rate of infantile mortality.
131. The Nineteenth Century for April, 1906.
132. In National Life and Character, a pessimistic though intellectually stimulating book.
133. Provident Societies, by Sidney Webb, and The London Population, by D. Heron.
134. It must be recognised also that in Great Britain emigration has, during the last three centuries,
tended in all probability in the same direction as the various forms of social selection—namely,
to the deterioration of the home population; for in all ages it is the bold and enterprising persons
who seek new homes in far countries, leaving the weakly, the timid, the dull, and the defective
behind in the mother country. Even the convicts that we exported at one time to our colonies
were probably persons of more than average capacity, though some of them may have been
innately defective in moral disposition.
135. Études sur la sélection chez l’homme. Paris, 1904.
136. England and the English.
137. Notably by Prof. Flinders Petrie in his Revolutions of Civilisation.
138. Op. cit. p. 407.
139. De Laponge does not stand alone in this opinion. Many biologists and leaders of thought have
expressed it hardly less strongly, though not all of them have attached so much importance to
the influence of the towns. It has been expressed in general terms by Dr and Mrs Whetham (in
the Hibbert Journal for Oct. 1911), by Dean Inge in a number of forcible articles, by Mr W.
Bateson in his ‘Herbert Spencer Lecture’ for 1912, and by other writers in a number of articles
in the Eugenics Review and other journals.
140. This conclusion may perhaps be said to be now generally accepted by those who have given
any thought to the matter. A. R. Wallace argued strongly in this sense; the late Benjamin Kidd
set out the evidence impressively in his Social Evolution, Chapter IX; and it is implied by all the
many writers who, as we have noted, agree in regarding the processes of selection in the
civilised nations as in the main reversed or detrimental.
141. I refer the reader to my Social Psychology.
142. In this connection I may again refer to The Pagan Tribes of Borneo, by C. Hose and W.
McDougall.
143. It has been translated into nine languages and was reprinted ten times in the first year after its
publication.
144. Shortly before his death Mr Kidd published (in the year 1918) his Science of Power. In this
book he showed a complete change of face on the question of the importance of innate qualities.
He denied all importance to changes of innate qualities, whether for better or worse, because, as
he maintained, “the social heredity transmitted through social culture is infinitely more
important to a people than any heredity inborn in the individuals thereof” (p. 273); and he made
in this book a violent and scornful attack upon the late Francis Galton and upon all who follow
him in believing that the decay or improvement of the racial qualities of a people are of
importance for its prosperity and development, and who, therefore, approve of Galton’s effort to
found a science of Eugenics. Kidd did not anywhere in his last book acknowledge that he had
made this very great change of principle, which completely undermines the whole argument of
his Social Evolution, but complacently suggested that, as Newton and Darwin are regarded as
the fathers of modern physical and biological science respectively, so in the future Kidd will be
regarded as having founded anew in his Social Evolution the science of society. On reading the
Science of Power after having written this chapter, I was amazed at this assumption on behalf of
a book whose most fundamental doctrine the author had himself renounced, and I turned again
to the earlier work to verify my brief summary of its argument. I confess that it is not easy to
make sure of what the author was driving at. But I find that Kidd, in discussing the influence of
religious systems, wrote (on p. 307) “Natural selection seems, in short, to be steadily evolving in
the race that type of character upon which these forces act most readily and efficiently; that is to
say, it is evolving religious character in the first instance, and intellectual character only as a
secondary product in association with it.” On the following page I find—“The race would, in
fact, appear to be growing more and more religious,” and “a preponderating element in the type
of character which the evolutionary forces at work in human society are slowly developing,
would appear to be the sense of reverence.” And there are many other passages which, in spite
of the habitual lack of precision of Kidd’s language, can only be interpreted to mean that the
improvement of moral or religious character, on which he so strongly insists as a feature of
recent centuries, involves and depends upon improvement of innate qualities in the mass of the
people.
145. Otto Seeck (op. cit. vol. 1. p. 270) writes—“The equipment of the legionaries remained
unchanged from Augustus to Diocletian: no improvements of tactics, no new munitions of war
were brought into use during more than three hundred years. The Roman saw his enemies
becoming ever more terrible, his own army ever less efficient; for now this, now that, Province
was laid waste and all were threatened. It was, therefore, to the most urgent interest of every
citizen that this state of affairs should be remedied; the most cultured circles were familiar with
the needs of the army, for all the higher officers came from the class of Senators and nobles.
Nevertheless, there appeared not a single invention, which might have assured to the Roman
soldiers their erstwhile superiority! Books indeed were written upon tactics, strategy and
fortification, but their authors almost without exception were content to expound in a formal
manner what their more capable forefathers had taught; in this literature the expression of any
new idea was carefully avoided.... As in the military sphere, so also was it in all others. Neither
in agriculture, nor in handicrafts, nor in the practice of statecraft, did a new idea of any
importance appear since the first century after Christ. Literature and art also moved only in
sterile imitation, which became always more poverty-stricken and technically feebler.”
146. Cf. La Cité Antique of F. de Coulanges.
147. A fact which provides another argument against use-inheritance.
148. This was written before the Great War but needs, I think, no modification.
149. Francis Galton and his disciples have produced much evidence to show that the educated class
of Englishmen includes a very much larger proportion of strains of high ability than the rest of
the people, it having been formed by the long continued operation of the social ladder. There is
no reason to doubt the truth of this conclusion.
150. Prof. S. Alexander, in his Moral Order and Progress, was perhaps the first to draw attention to
this form of the struggle for existence.
151. This last sentence perhaps is only partially true. A rigid system of State Socialism would
involve a retrogression in this respect.
152. As the Spaniards well-nigh exterminated in the name of the Church the civilisation and the
nations of Mexico and Peru.
153. Introduction to Social Psychology.
154. Heredity and Selection in Sociology, London, 1907; an interesting work similar in tendency to
Kidd’s Social Evolution.