Source: data/Trading_Books/042_Encyclopedia Of Chart Patterns, 2nd Edition.pdf

--- PAGE 1/1035 ---

--- PAGE 2/1035 ---
Encyclopedia 
of 
Chart Patterns
SECOND EDITION
Thomas N. Bulkowski
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

--- PAGE 3/1035 ---

--- PAGE 4/1035 ---
Encyclopedia
of 
Chart Patterns

--- PAGE 5/1035 ---
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Aus-
tralia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print
and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional and per-
sonal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by rein-
venting systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice trader,
professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will provide the advice
and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

--- PAGE 6/1035 ---
Encyclopedia 
of 
Chart Patterns
SECOND EDITION
Thomas N. Bulkowski
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

--- PAGE 7/1035 ---
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Copyright © 2005 by Thomas N. Bulkowski. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States 
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the Web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States 800-762-2974, outside the United States at 317-
572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our Web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Bulkowski, Thomas N., 1957–
Encyclopedia of chart patterns / Thomas N. Bulkowski.—2nd ed.
p. cm. — (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN-13 978-0-471-66826-8
ISBN-10 0-471-66826-5 (cloth)
1. Stocks—Charts, diagrams, etc. 2. Commodity futures—Charts, diagrams, etc. 
3. Investment analysis. I. Title: Chart patterns. II. Title. III. Series.
HG4638.B85 2005
332.63′222—dc22

Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

--- PAGE 8/1035 ---
To my parents, who continued to love me even after my homemade 
rocket set the lawn on fire, and to my four-legged best friend, 
Rusty, who saved my life; it grieves me that I couldn’t save yours.

--- PAGE 9/1035 ---

--- PAGE 10/1035 ---
vii
Preface to the 
Second Edition
On March 24, 2000, the financial world changed. No, that was not the date this
book first hit the store shelves, but the beginning of a bear market that lasted
21⁄2 years. Finally, I had bear market data to use for finding chart patterns!
After spending nearly 5 years recovering from the work needed to com-
plete the first edition, I decided to undertake an update. I changed the editor-
ial content of the book in small ways, but made substantial improvements in
others. Here is the list of the important changes:
• Bull and bear market statistics for complete coverage.
• Expanded statistics, all in a similar format:
Results Snapshot, at the start of each chapter shows the most
important numbers and surprises.
General statistics, including the average rise or decline, busted
pattern performance, and benchmark performance.
Failure rates, a list of ten breakpoints to show how often a pattern
fails.
Breakout and postbreakout statistics, showing performance
over the yearly price range, pullback rates, and performance after a
gap.
Frequency distribution of days to the ultimate high or low,
showing when the trend is likely to end.
Size statistics, describing how performance varies for pattern
height, width, and combinations of both.
Volume statistics, including volume trend, a new concept I call
volume shapes, and breakout day volume.
For best performance, a list of trading tips and where to find
them in each chapter.

--- PAGE 11/1035 ---
• More chart patterns. I added 14 new chart patterns.
• Event patterns. I added 9 new types of patterns, which I call event pat-
terns. These include earnings surprises, drug approvals, store sales, and
stock upgrades and downgrades.
• More samples. I found over 38,500 chart pattern samples, more than
double the 15,000 used in the first edition, making many of the statis-
tics rock solid.
• Keyed table entries. Each table entry appears in bold at the start of its
corresponding text discussion for easy locating.
• Glossary and methodology. Instead of peppering the text with repeated
explanations, a new chapter explains how I arrived at each table entry.
Thanks to the thousands who purchased the first edition. I am confident
that this second edition will help you become a more knowledgeable and suc-
cessful trader.
THOMAS N. BULKOWSKI
January 2005
viii
Preface to the Second Edition

--- PAGE 12/1035 ---
ix
Preface to the 
First Edition
When I was a little tyke I decided the easiest way to riches was to play the stock
market. It was, after all, a level playing field, a negative-sum game with some-
body winning and somebody losing. (Hint: The winner is always the broker.)
All one had to do to win was pick stocks that went up and avoid stocks that
went down. Easy.
I kept this in mind when I graduated from Syracuse University with an
engineering degree and showed up early for my first professional job. Each
morning I cracked open the newspaper and plotted my stock picks on a piece
of graph paper taped to the wall. Bob, my office mate, used the same newspa-
per to select his stocks. I chose my selections after exhausting fundamental
research, but Bob simply closed his eyes, twirled his hand around, and plunged
his finger into the newspaper. When he opened his eyes and removed his fin-
ger, he announced another pick.
After several months of tracking both our selections, I made a startling
discovery: I was getting creamed. Bob’s random selections were beating the tar
out of my carefully researched choices. I also discovered something else: I was
learning a lot by paper trading.
With the hesitancy and distrust inherited from my parents, I studied two
dozen firms before making my final selection and first purchase: I opened a
money market account. The timing was excellent; I was earning over 17% on
my cash. At first glance, the return might imply a very risky investment but it
was not. The prime rate was, after all, at 21%.
Flush with success, I gathered my courage and opened a brokerage
account and began investing the few pennies I saved. Again, the timing was
excellent as I caught the beginning of a major bull market. I bought a stock at
a split-adjusted price of 88 cents and watched it go to $30 and change.
Lest you think that everything was easy, consider what happened. My
stock portfolio was growing by leaps and bounds, but my professional career
was about to take a turn for the worse. After switching careers more often than

--- PAGE 13/1035 ---
I sometimes like to admit, I landed a job with a company I could finally call
home—a job that would last a lifetime, or so I hoped. Almost 6 months after
my 10-year anniversary with the company, I received a letter from the chair-
man. He congratulated me on my decade with the company and looked for-
ward to even more success for me in the coming years.
Six weeks later I was laid off.
I took stock of the situation and decided that, at the age of 36, I had
enough. Newspapers term guys like me The Missing Million. We are the ones
who, for whatever reason, leave their jobs and decide not to go back into the
workforce. We retire. Everyone, and I mean everyone (with the notable excep-
tion of my cousin Mary Ann—bless her heart), thinks we are nuts. They are
right, of course!
For the longest time, I have been fascinated with technical analysis of
stocks. In the early years, I considered the little squiggles to be nothing short
of voodoo. Still, I was curious as to why the major brokerage houses were hir-
ing technical analysts in droves. But I did not dare take my eye off the funda-
mentals simply because I did not know anything about the technicals. Then I
discovered Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities magazine. During my
lunch hour, I would take the elevator down to the library and read back issues.
Although I saw chart patterns in the stocks I bought, I never really attached
much significance to them. As some of my selections went sour, I began to view
chart patterns with more respect. The fundamentals always looked good, but
the technicals were signaling a trend change just as I was about to pull the trig-
ger. The stocks I bought either lost money outright or I sold them too soon
and cut my profits short.
Perhaps this has happened to you. You do fundamental research on a stock
and then buy it, only to watch it go nowhere for a year or more. Even worse,
once you get in, the stock tumbles. Had you looked at the chart the answer was
always there. Prices pierced a trend line, a head-and-shoulders top appeared
out of nowhere, the relative strength index signaled an overbought situation. In
short, any number of technical indicators were screaming that a buy now
would cost you your shirt. But you never saw the signs.
You are not alone; I did the same thing for years. I eventually got so frus-
trated with the performance of my stock selections that I decided to do my own
research on technical analysis. I went to the library and read the same thing in
many books: A head-and-shoulders formation works most of the time. What
does that mean? Does it mean they are successful 51% of the time or 90% of
the time? No one had the answer. I was not willing to risk my hard-earned dol-
lars on simple bromides. As an engineer I wanted hard, cold facts, not fuzzy
platitudes. So, I wrote this book.
At the back of the book is an Index of Chart Patterns. If you suspect your
stock is making a chart pattern but do not know what to call it, the Index of
x
Preface to the First Edition

--- PAGE 14/1035 ---
Chart Patterns is the first place to look. Page numbers beside each pattern
direct you to the associated chapter.
The chapters are arranged alphabetically in two sections; chart patterns
and event patterns. Within each chapter, you are first greeted with a “Results
Snapshot” of the major findings followed by a short discussion. Then, a
“Tour” invites you to explore the chart pattern. “Identification Guidelines,” in
both table form and in-depth discussion, make selecting and verifying your
choices easier.
No work would be complete without an exploration of the mistakes, and
the “Focus on Failures” section dissects the cause of failures. The all-important
“Statistics” section follows. How do you trade a chart pattern? That is what the
“Trading Tactics” and “Sample Trade” sections explore. The “For Best Per-
formance” section includes a list of tips and observations on how to select bet-
ter performing patterns.
If you have ever worked on a car or done some woodworking, then you
will recognize the importance of selecting the right tool for the job. You would
not want to use a flat-head screwdriver when a Phillips works better. Both do
the job but they are hardly interchangeable. Sometimes it is not a screwdriver
you should be using, but a chisel. Selecting the proper tools and knowing how
to use them is half the battle. This book is a lot like that, helping to sort the
wheat from the chaff. Sometimes a chart pattern is frightening enough that you
will want to take profits. At other times, the best trade that you can make is
none at all.
I cannot give you the experience needed to make money in the stock mar-
ket using chart patterns. I can only give you the tools and say, “Go to work on
paper first.” That is the first step in developing a trading style that works for
you, one you are comfortable with, one that improves as you do. If you review
your paper trades, you will understand why a stop-loss order is more than a
tool for the professionals. You will improve your ability to predict support and
resistance levels that will, in turn, allow you to tighten your stops and get out
near the top, cut your losses short, and let your profits run. You will under-
stand why the statistics in this book are useful for comparison purposes, but
your trading results may fall short. You may discover that your girlfriend loves
diamonds, but as a chart pattern, they are a lousy investment. One word says it
all. Experience.
Good luck.
THOMAS N. BULKOWSKI
December 1999
Preface to the First Edition
xi

--- PAGE 15/1035 ---

--- PAGE 16/1035 ---
xiii
Acknowledgments
Perhaps several times in your life, something occurs that alters its direction.
That happened to me several years ago when I brashly submitted my first arti-
cle to Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities. Much to my surprise and
delight, the editor at the time, Thom Hartle, published the work. That single
event sent me spinning off in a new direction, another career.
Nearly a dozen articles later, I called Thom and chatted with him about
an idea for a book. He steered me to Pamela van Giessen, now editorial direc-
tor for John Wiley & Sons, Inc., publisher of this book. A single e-mail of my
idea to her put a new set of wheels in motion. Simple words cannot express my
thanks to these two outstanding individuals.
This is a great book made better by the tireless efforts of Bernice Pettinato
of Beehive Production Services. She did more than shepherd a 2,000 page man-
uscript through production. She read it and edited it without dying of boredom
while making astute suggestions. Simply, she’s the best. Thanks, Bernice.
T. N. B.

--- PAGE 17/1035 ---

--- PAGE 18/1035 ---
xv
Contents
Introduction

PART ONE
Chart Patterns


Broadening Bottoms


Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending


Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending


Broadening Tops


Broadening Wedges, Ascending


Broadening Wedges, Descending


Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms


Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops


Cup with Handle


Cup with Handle, Inverted


Diamond Bottoms


Diamond Tops


Double Bottoms, Adam & Adam


Double Bottoms, Adam & Eve


Double Bottoms, Eve & Adam


Double Bottoms, Eve & Eve


Double Tops, Adam & Adam


Double Tops, Adam & Eve

--- PAGE 19/1035 ---

Double Tops, Eve & Adam


Double Tops, Eve & Eve


Flags


Flags, High and Tight


Gaps


Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms


Head-and-Shoulders Bottoms, Complex


Head-and-Shoulders Tops


Head-and-Shoulders Tops, Complex


Horn Bottoms


Horn Tops


Island Reversals


Islands, Long


Measured Move Down


Measured Move Up


Pennants


Pipe Bottoms


Pipe Tops


Rectangle Bottoms


Rectangle Tops


Rounding Bottoms


Rounding Tops


Scallops, Ascending


Scallops, Ascending and Inverted


Scallops, Descending


Scallops, Descending and Inverted


Three Falling Peaks


Three Rising Valleys


Triangles, Ascending


Triangles, Descending

xvi
Contents

--- PAGE 20/1035 ---

Triangles, Symmetrical


Triple Bottoms


Triple Tops


Wedges, Falling


Wedges, Rising

PART TWO
Event Patterns


Dead-Cat Bounce


Dead-Cat Bounce, Inverted


Earnings Surprise, Bad


Earnings Surprise, Good


FDA Drug Approvals


Flag, Earnings


Same-Store Sales, Bad


Same-Store Sales, Good


Stock Downgrades


Stock Upgrades

Statistics Summary

Glossary and Methodology

Index of Chart and Event Patterns

Index

Contents
xvii

--- PAGE 21/1035 ---

--- PAGE 22/1035 ---
Encyclopedia
of 
Chart Patterns

--- PAGE 23/1035 ---

--- PAGE 24/1035 ---

Introduction
Jim is struggling.
He is the owner of JCB Superstores and his competitor across town is
beating him up; there is blood all over Jim’s ledger. He decides it is time to take
off the gloves: JCB goes public. He uses the money from the initial public
offering to buy his competitor and add a few more stores around town.
With a growing sales base, Jim’s clout allows him to negotiate lower
prices for the office supplies he is retailing. He passes on part of the savings to
his customers, while watching his margins widen, and plows the profits back
into building more stores.
Jim calls his friend, Tom, and tells him of his plans to expand the opera-
tion statewide. They chat for a while and exchange business tactics on how best
to manage the expansion. When Tom gets off the phone, he decides to con-
duct his own research on JCB. He visits several stores and sees the same thing:
packed parking lots, people bustling around with full shopping carts, and lines
at the checkout counters. He questions a few customers to get a sense of the
demographics. At a few stores, he even chats with suppliers as they unload their
wares. Back at the office, he does a thorough analysis of the financials and
looks at the competition. Everything checks out so he orders his trading part-
ners to buy the stock at no higher than 10.
When news of the expansion plan hits the wires, the Street panics. It is,
after all, a soft economy and expanding willy-nilly when a recession looms is
daft, maybe even criminal, according to the pundits. The stock drops below 10
and Tom’s crew makes its move. They buy as much as they can without rais-
ing suspicion. The stock rises anyway. It goes back up to 11, then 12, and
rounds over at 13 before heading back down.

--- PAGE 25/1035 ---
Several months go by and the economic outlook is as bleak as ever. The
stock eases down to 9. After Tom checks in with Jim for the latest public news,
Tom’s team buys more. It is an easy score because investors are willing to
dump the stock, especially as year-end tax selling approaches.
Six weeks later the company releases the sales numbers for JCB; they are
better than expected. The stock rises 15% in minutes and closes at 10.75. And that
is just for starters. Six months later, it’s clear the economy was never in danger of
entering a recession and everyone sees boom times ahead. The stock hits 20.
Years go by, the stock splits a few times, and the holiday season looms.
Tom interviews a handful of customers leaving JCB Superstores and discovers
that they are all complaining about the same thing: The advertised goods are
not on the shelves. Tom investigates further and discovers a massive distribu-
tion problem, right at the height of the selling season. JCB has overextended
itself; the infrastructure is simply not there to support the addition of one new
store each week.
Tom realizes it is time to sell. He tells his trading department to dump
the stock immediately but for no less than 28.25. They liquidate about a third
of their large holdings before driving the stock down below the minimum.
Since it is the holidays, everyone seems to be in a buying mood. Novice
investors jump in at what they consider a bargain price. The major brokerage
houses climb aboard and tout the stock, but Tom knows better. When the
stock recovers to its old high, his trading partners sell the remainder of their
holdings. The stock tops out and rounds over. During the next month and a
half, the stock drifts down, slowly, casually. There does not appear to be a rush
for the exits—just a slow trickle as the smart money quietly folds up shop.
Then news of poor holiday sales leaks out. There is a rumor about distri-
bution problems, merchandising mistakes, and cash flow problems. Brokerage
firms that only weeks before were touting the stock now advise their clients to
sell. The stock plummets 39% overnight.
One or two analysts say the stock is oversold; it is a bargain and investors
should add to their positions. Many bottom fishers follow their brokers’ rec-
ommendation and buy the stock. Big mistake. The buying enthusiasm pushes
the price up briefly before a new round of selling takes hold. Each day the stock
drops a bit lower, nibbling away like waves washing against a castle of sand. In
2 months’ time, the stock is down another 30%.
The following quarter JCB Superstores announces that earnings will
likely come in well below consensus estimates. The stock drops another 15%.
The company is trying to correct the distribution problem, but it is not some-
thing easily fixed. It decides to stop expanding and to concentrate on the prof-
itability of its existing store base.
Two years later, Tom pulls up the stock chart. The dog has been flat for
so long it looks as if its heartbeat has stopped. He calls Jim and chats about the
outlook for JCB Superstores. Jim gushes enthusiastically about a new retailing
concept called the Internet. He is excited about the opportunity to sell office

Introduction

--- PAGE 26/1035 ---
supplies online without the need for bricks and mortar. There is some risk
because the online community is in its infancy, but Jim predicts it will expand
quickly. Tom is impressed, so he starts doing his homework and is soon buy-
ing the stock again.
Investment Footprints
If you picture in your mind the price action of JCB Superstores, you may rec-
ognize three chart patterns: a double bottom, a double top, and a dead-cat
bounce. To knowledgeable investors, chart patterns are not squiggles on a
price chart; they are the footprints of the smart money. The footprints are all
they need to follow as they line their pockets with greater and greater riches.
To others, such as Tom, it takes hard work and pavement pounding before
they dare take a position in a stock. They are the ones making the footprints.
They are the smart money that is setting the rules of the game—a game any-
one can play. It is called investing.
Whether you choose to use technical analysis or fundamental analysis in
your trading decisions, it pays to know what the market is thinking. It pays to
look for the footprints. Those footprints may well steer you away from a cliff
and get you out of a stock just in time. The feet that make those footprints are
the same ones that will kick you in the pants, waking you up to a promising
investment opportunity.
Let me tell you how I followed one trail of footprints. I sold my holdings
in Alaska Air because I thought the stock was going down. Here is my note-
book entry: “9/6/2001. I put a stop at 31.50 this morning and it hit. The stock
has breeched a support level and with weakness in the economy and Septem-
ber/October upon us, it’s time to leave with a small loss [2.5%]. I should have
bought at the breakout price [of an Eve & Adam double bottom]. The relative
strength index peaked twice and now is headed down, suggesting a sale, and the
commodity channel index says sell, too.”
I sold the airline two trading days before the terrorist attacks of 9/11.
Four days after trading resumed, the stock bottomed at 17.70, nearly half the
price at what I sold. The footprints did not lie; they led away from a cliff.
This book gives you the tools to spot the footprints, where they predict
the stock is heading, how far it will travel, and how reliable the trail you are fol-
lowing really is. The tools will not make you rich; tools rarely do. But they are
instruments to greater wealth. Use them wisely.
The Database
For this book, I used several databases in which to search for chart patterns. The
main database consists of 500 stocks, each with durations of 5 years beginning
The Database

--- PAGE 27/1035 ---
from mid-1991. I included the 30 Dow Jones industrials and familiar names
with varying market capitalizations. Stocks included in the database needed 
a heartbeat (that is, they were not unduly flat over the 5-year period) and 
did not have consistently large intraday price swings (too thinly traded 
or volatile).
I usually removed stocks that went below $1.00, assuming bankruptcy
was right around the corner. Most of the names in the database are popular
American companies that trade on the NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq. The numer-
ous illustrations accompanying each chapter give a representative sample of the
stocks involved.
To capture the bear market of 2000–2002 and expand on the bull mar-
ket since 1996, I included two additional databases. The first uses about 200
stocks that I follow daily. The other contains about 300 stocks that I no longer
follow but that have historical data of limited duration (some issues no 
longer trade).
For rare chart patterns, I use all three databases and search from 1991 to
the most recent date available. For plentiful patterns, I use already found pat-
terns and add those appearing during the bear market. Thus, the number of
stocks I use to find patterns and the amount of historical price quotes varies.
In the first edition of this book, I used a combination of computerized
algorithms and manual searching to find chart patterns. The current edition
includes the 15,000 patterns from the first edition and others found manually
since then, for a total of more than 38,500 patterns.
Stock Performance from 1991 to 2004
Before reading about the various chart patterns in this book, it is wise to review
the performance of the stock market during the period. Figure I.1 shows a
monthly price chart of the Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index. Beginning in
mid-1991, you can see that the market moved up at a leisurely pace, pausing
during much of 1994, and then resuming the climb at a steeper angle in 1995.
The index stumbled in August 1998 and made lower lows for 2 more months
before continuing upward, peaking in March 2000, and signaling an end to the
bull market. The move capped a rise of 418% from the start of the period.
After that, the downhill bear run began, reaching a low in October 2002, for a
decline measuring 51%. The index bounced once but made a higher low in
March 2003, signaling a trend change. Thus, the October low marked the end
of the bear market.
What does all this mean? The bear market measures from March 24,
2000, to October 10, 2002—about 2.5 years long. For data collection pur-
poses, the bull market is everything else, about 11 years long. That covers the
period I used to search for chart patterns in this edition.

Introduction

--- PAGE 28/1035 ---
Investing Using Chart Formations
I could give a dentist’s drill to any person walking by, but that doesn’t mean I
would let that person near my teeth. This book is just like that. It gives you the
tools to invest successfully. It suggests which chart patterns work best and which
ones to avoid. Whether you can make money using them is entirely up to you.
I call this book an encyclopedia because that is how I use it. Whenever I
see a chart pattern forming in a stock I own, or am thinking of buying, I read
the applicable chapter. The information refreshes my memory about identifi-
cation quirks, performance, and any tips on how I can get in sooner or more
profitably. Then I search for similar patterns in the same stock (using different
time scales), and if that does not work, I search for similar patterns in stocks in
the same industry. I look at them closely to determine if their secrets are
applicable to the current situation. I try to learn from their mistakes.
Developing an Investment Style
The question I am asked most often is, how do I develop an investment style? It is
usually not asked like that. Most take a more direct approach: How do I make
money trading stocks? When first asked this question, I stumbled over the
answer. I think it is like showing four people the color blue and asking them to
Developing an Investment Style

Higher
Low























S & P 500 Index
Bear Market













Figure I.1
Standard & Poor’s 500 stock index from 1991 to 2004.

--- PAGE 29/1035 ---
describe it. One person is color blind so you automatically throw out whatever
he says. One says it is solid blue. Another says it is not blue at all but green,
while the third says it looks like a combination: blue-green. To each individ-
ual, blue looks like blue—just do not try to compare answers.
Developing a trading style is a lot like that. It is an individual endeavor
that has a lot in common with experience. I cannot give you experience; I can
only suggest ways to acquire your own.
If you read a chapter on a bullish chart pattern and buy the first stock
showing the pattern in a bull market, you will probably be successful. The first
trade nearly always works for the novice, maybe even the second or third one,
too. Eventually, though, someone is going to pull the rug out from under you
(who knows, maybe it occurs on the first trade). You will make an investment in
a chart pattern and the trade will go bad. Maybe you will stumble across a herd
of bad trades and get flattened. You might question your sanity, you might
question God, but one thing is for certain: Your trading style is not working.
Most people buy stocks like they buy fruit. They look at it, perhaps sniff
it, and plunk down their money. We are not talking about $1.59 here. We are
talking about thousands of dollars for part ownership in a company.
If you have ever been a board member, you know what I am talking about.
You have a fiduciary responsibility to the people who elected or appointed you
to that position. Not only should you study the material handed to you by the
staff, but you have to get out in the field and kick the tires. Do not assume that
what the staff says is always correct or represents the best solution. Question
everything but learn in the process and try to be helpful without being a pest
(I always seem to fall into the pest category). As a shareholder—an owner of the
company—should it be any different?
Once, I considered buying a position in a company showing an upward
breakout from a symmetrical triangle. My computer program told me the com-
pany is a member of the machinery industry and further research revealed that
it makes refractory products. I continued doing research on the company until
the problem gnawing at me finally sank in. I did not have the slightest idea
what a refractory product was. Despite my search for an answer, I was not get-
ting the sort of warm fuzzies I usually get when researching a possible invest-
ment. So, I passed it over. I am trading it on paper, sure, but not in real life.
Call it the Peter Lynch Syndrome: Do not invest in anything you cannot
understand or explain in a paragraph. Good advice.
Of course, if you blindly invest in chart squiggles and it works for you,
who am I to tell you you are doing it wrong? The fact is, you are not. If you
consistently make money at it, then you have developed an investment style
that fits your personality. Good for you!
My investment style, as you might have guessed, combines fundamental
analysis, technical analysis, emotional analysis, and money management. Just
because I rely on technical analysis does not mean I do not look at the price-
to-earnings, price-to-sales, and other more esoteric ratios. Then there is the

Introduction

--- PAGE 30/1035 ---
emotional element. After going for months without making a single trade, sud-
denly a profitable opportunity appears and I will take advantage of it. Three
days later, I will want to trade again. Why? Am I trading just because it feels
good to be finally back in the thick of things? Am I trading just because the sin-
gle woman living nearby does not know I exist, and I am acting out my frus-
trations or trying to impress her with the size of my wallet? That is where
paper trading comes in handy. I can experiment on new techniques without
getting burned. If I do the simulation accurately enough, my subconscious will
not know the difference, and I will learn a lot in the process.
Once I come to terms with any emotional issues, I look at money man-
agement. How much can I realistically expect to make, and how much can I
lose? What is the proper lot size to take? When should I add to my position?
How long will it take for the stock to reach my target and should I invest in a
less promising but quicker candidate?
Investing using chart formations is an exercise in probability. If you play
the numbers long enough, you will win out. Sure, some of your investments
will fail, and you must learn to cut your losses before they get out of hand. But
the winners should serve you well, providing you let them ride. Just do not
make the mistake of watching a stock double or triple only to reverse course
and drop back to where it started. Or worse.
Day Traders, Position Traders, Buy-and-Hold Investors
As I was writing this book, I kept asking myself what is the time horizon for chart
patterns? Are they best for day traders, position traders, or buy-and-hold
investors? The answer I kept coming up with is: Yes! Chart formations can be
profitable for day traders—those people who are in and out of a trade during a
single day. Many day traders have trading styles that depend on chart forma-
tions, support, and resistance. They concentrate on reliable formations that
quickly fulfill their measure rule predictions.
For position traders, those who hold the trade longer than a day but not
forever, chart patterns offer convenient entry and exit signals. I put myself in
this category. If the trade goes bad, I am out quickly. If it is profitable, I see no
need to cut my profits short. When the gains plateau, or if the stock has moved
about all it is going to, I consider moving on. Like the day trader, I try to keep
cash employed by buying formations that promise reliable returns and reach
the ultimate high quickly.
For the long-term investor, chart patterns also signal good entry and exit
points. I remember buying an oil services company knowing that the invest-
ment would not make a significant return for 2 or 3 years. (I was wrong: It dou-
bled in 3 weeks) I believe that in 3 years’ time, the stock will be in the 30s, a
sixfold increase from its low. It probably will not qualify as a ten-bagger, but it
is not small change either. In the short term, the road is going to be rocky, and
Day Traders, Position Traders, Buy-and-Hold Investors

--- PAGE 31/1035 ---
I have added to my position as the stock has come down. Since I am in it for the
long term, I have an outstanding order to buy more shares. If this stock goes
nowhere, then my analysis of the market trend was wrong, and I will have
learned a valuable lesson.
The Sample Trade
Most of the sample trades included in the chapters of this book are fictitious.
Each sample trade uses techniques I wanted to illustrate, incorporating ficti-
tious people in sometimes unusual circumstances. Call it poetic license, but I
hope they give you some ideas on how to increase your profits or to minimize
your losses.
Statistics: “I Don’t Believe the Numbers”
A high, tight flag has an average rise of 69% in a bull market. Question: If you
trade this pattern often enough in a bull market, will you make an average of
69%? Answer: No. Why not? Well, you may be like a friend of mine who has
traded stocks a dozen times but made money only once (a few hundred bucks).
But here is another reason: The 69% average rise represents 253 perfect trades.
A perfect trade is one in which you buy at the breakout price and sell at the ulti-
mate high—the highest high before prices decline by at least 20%. Not only
are the trades perfect, but also commissions are not included. Your return may
be lower . . . or higher. However, I used the same spreadsheet formulas from
pattern to pattern, so you can compare performance in most cases (the excep-
tions: flags, measured moves, and pennants) without worrying about whether
you believe the numbers.
“If I reproduce your tests, will I get similar results?” Yes. A person in
India I know is pulling 30%, 40%, and more out of the market on a consistent
basis. He would claim my statistics are too conservative! A hedge fund manager
reports that my numbers for the dead-cat bounce are dead solid perfect.
Another says that while she was able to reproduce my dead-cat bounce num-
bers, she was having trouble reproducing others. If you do not follow the
methods I used, your results will vary. Guaranteed. So, this edition includes a
Glossary and Methodology chapter to explain how I measured each result.
The method I used opened a door to a new world. In this world, you will
find that a month after a breakout in a bear market, price often shows strength.
You will discover that when pullbacks occur, performance suffers. You will find
that failure rates start low but increase rapidly. Volume shapes, price gaps, pat-
tern size, and a dozen other performance clues help some patterns but not oth-
ers. Findings like these are what make this book unique. The numbers tell a
story of fact that I share with you within the following pages.

Introduction

--- PAGE 32/1035 ---
PART ONE
Chart Patterns

--- PAGE 33/1035 ---

--- PAGE 34/1035 ---


Broadening Bottoms
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Price trend is downward leading to the formation.
Megaphone appearance with higher highs and
lower lows that widen over time. Breakout is
upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish reversal
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
17 out of 23
12 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
10%
9%
Average rise
27%
21%
Change after trend ends
–34%
–35%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Throwbacks
41%
44%
Percentage meeting price 
target
59%
53%
Surprising findings
Throwbacks hurt performance. Tall patterns
perform better than short ones; narrow ones
perform better than wide ones. Patterns with
falling volume and a random shape outperform.
See also
Broadening Tops

--- PAGE 35/1035 ---
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Same, but breakout is downward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
17 out of 21
18 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
16%
9%
Average decline
15%
18%
Change after trend ends
52%
46%
Volume trend
Upward
Flat
Pullbacks
42%
56%
Percentage meeting price 
target
44%
31%
Surprising findings
Performs better when the breakout is near the
yearly low. Tall patterns perform better than short
ones. Patterns both tall and narrow outperform.
Patterns with a rising volume trend and random
shape do well.
See also
Broadening Tops
Broadening bottoms (BBs) are middle-of-the-road performers, sporting a 9%
break-even failure rate except in bull markets when double digits prevail (a
poor showing). The average rise or decline is also below that posted by other
chart pattern types.
Surprises are many and a few appear in the snapshot. I discuss them in
more detail later.
Tour
You may be wondering what differentiates a broadening bottom from a broad-
ening top. A broadening bottom has a price trend leading down to the start of
the formation; a broadening top has prices trending up. This differentiation is
an arbitrary designation I made to separate the two formation types. I ignore
brief dips or rises a few days before the pattern as Figure 1.1 shows.
Some maintain that a broadening bottom does not exist. They simply
lump every broadening pattern into the broadening top category. I decided to
separate the two on the chance that their behavior differs.
Figure 1.1 is an example of a broadening bottom. This particular one is
called a five-point reversal because there are five alternating touches, two

Broadening Bottoms

--- PAGE 36/1035 ---
minor lows and three minor highs. A five-point reversal is also rare: I located
only 5 in the 77 broadening bottoms I examined. The price trend begins mov-
ing down in late August and reaches a low 2 days before the formation begins.
Yes, prices do move up for several days, leading to the first touch of the top
trend line, but I still consider the overall price trend to be moving down to 
the formation. Price overshooting or undershooting the formation start is
common.
This particular chart pattern shows a partial decline. Prices move down
from 26 to 24.50, then reverse course and shoot out the top. The stock reached
a high of 38.50 just over a year later.
Identification Guidelines
Table 1.1 lists the identification guidelines for broadening bottoms.
Price trend. As mentioned earlier, a declining price trend precedes a
broadening bottom. Even if prices rise just before the formation begins, ignore
it. It is still a bottom. This arbitrary designation also makes intuitive sense: A
bottom should appear at the end of a downtrend, not when prices are climbing
to the moon.
Identification Guidelines

– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18
Aug 94
Sep
Oct
Nov
Jan 95
Mar
Dec
Feb
Apr
May
Jun
Partial Decline
Banc One Corp. (Bank, NYSE, ONE)





Figure 1.1
A broadening bottom formation, specifically a five-point reversal, so
called because of the two minor lows (the even numbers) and three minor highs
(the odd numbers).

--- PAGE 37/1035 ---
Shape. The shape of the formation is distinct. It reminds me of chaos
theory where small disturbances oscillate back and forth, then grow un-
bounded, wreaking havoc. In the stock market, price reaches a new high then
crosses over and makes a new low, creating the broadening pattern. When you
draw a trend line across the minor highs and another connecting the minor
lows, the formation looks like a megaphone.
Trend lines. The two trend lines drawn across the minor highs and lows
are important. The top trend line should slope up; the bottom one should
slope down. The diverging trend lines distinguish the broadening bottom from
other types of formations, such as the right-angled broadening formation
(which has one horizontal trend line) or the broadening wedge (both trend
lines slope in the same direction). So it is important that each trend line has a
slope that is opposite the other.
Touches. A broadening bottom needs at least two minor highs and two
minor lows to be a valid formation. Anything fewer means you are incorrectly
identifying the formation. What is a minor high or low? A minor high is when
prices trend up, then drop back down, leaving a clearly defined peak. A minor
low is just the same thing flipped upside down: Prices move lower, then head
back up leaving a clearly defined valley. Figure 1.1 shows five minor highs or
lows, labeled by numbers. The odd numbers tag the minor highs and the even
numbers are the minor lows. Let me stress that the minor highs and lows need
not be alternating, as in Figure 1.1. Just as long as you can count at least two
peaks and two valleys—wherever they may appear—that is fine.
Volume. There is nothing magical in the volume trend. I performed lin-
ear regression from the start of each formation to the end point (not the break-
out point that is usually a month beyond the end of the formation) and found
that volume rises about 57% of the time.

Broadening Bottoms
Table 1.1
Identification Characteristics of Broadening Bottoms
Characteristic
Discussion
Price trend
The short-term price trend should be downward leading to the
formation.
Shape
Megaphone shape with higher highs and lower lows.
Trend lines
Prices follow two trend lines: The top one slopes up and the bottom
one slopes down.
Touches
Should have at least two minor highs and two minor lows, but not
necessarily alternating touches.
Volume
The overall trend is usually upward, sometimes with a U shape.
Breakout
A breakout occurs when price closes above the formation’s high
(upward breakout) or below the pattern’s low (downward breakout).
See text for details. The breakout can occur in either direction and
prices may move horizontally for several months before staging a
definitive breakout.

--- PAGE 38/1035 ---
If you look closely at broadening bottoms, you will find that volume some-
times follows price. In Figure 1.1, the price decline between peak 1 and trough
2 shows a receding volume trend. When prices head up from point 2 to point 3,
so does volume. If you were to place a thin wooden plank between the volume
peaks in late November and late January, it would bow downward in a U shape.
A U-shaped volume pattern occurs slightly more often than other shapes.
Breakout. The breakout point is difficult to identify in a broadening for-
mation as it develops. I look for the place where price pierces the up or down
trend line or makes an extended move. If price pierces the trend line, then the
penetration point becomes the breakout point. If prices move up and follow
along the top trend line without piercing it, then I backtrack to the prior minor
high and draw a horizontal line forward in time until prices cross it. When that
happens, that is the breakout point.
Let me give you an example. Consider the broadening bottom shown in
Figure 1.2. The price trend over the preceding month leading to the formation
is downward. The two trend lines outline a widening price pattern as you
would expect from a broadening formation. There are more than two minor
highs and two minor lows pictured, meeting another criterion mentioned 
in Table 1.1.
Where is the breakout? This formation is particularly easy. If you extend
the top trend line upward, you find that prices rise well above the line, signal-
ing an upward breakout. Then it is just a matter of backtracking to the highest
minor high and drawing a horizontal line to determine the actual breakout
price. Point A marks the highest high in the formation.
Identification Guidelines

Standard Microsystems Corp. (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, SMSC)
Aug
Jul 95
Sep
Oct
Nov
Jan 96
Mar
Dec
Feb
Apr
May
Breakout 
Point
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
A
Figure 1.2
A breakout from the broadening bottom occurs when prices rise
above the highest high in the formation, shown as point A.

--- PAGE 39/1035 ---
Focus on Failures
Figure 1.3 shows a broadening bottom failure. Prices head down and appear to
suffer a small dead-cat bounce lasting from April to August. I do not recom-
mend taking a position in any stock that shows a dead-cat bounce regardless of
how attractive the formation looks. Obey this recommendation for 6 months
to a year while the stock recovers and management gets its house in order (or
solves the cause of whatever is ailing the stock).
In the 3 weeks before the formation appeared, prices were heading higher
in reaction to the dead-cat bounce. In June they moved horizontally from the
formation top for over a month before easing down. During this time, prices
rose above the high of the formation (see point A).
A breakout occurs when price closes beyond the formation high or low.
Point A is not an upward breakout because the close is at 33.88, well below the
formation high of 34.25. Two days later, price peaks above the high, but the
close is also below the formation high.
However, look what happens when prices begin sinking in mid-July.
They drop below the formation and close even lower. The price needs to drop

Broadening Bottoms
American Brands, Inc. (Tobacco, NYSE, AMB)
Aug 
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Feb93
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Breakout 
Point
Possible Dead-Cat Bounce Begins
– 38
– 37
– 36
– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
A
Figure 1.3
This broadening bottom forms as part of the recovery process from a
dead-cat bounce. When price closes below the formation low, a downward break-
out occurs. Point A shows where prices move above the high but do not close
higher. The formation is a failure because prices do not move down by more than
5% below the breakout point before reversing.

--- PAGE 40/1035 ---
below 30.38. At its lowest point, it closes at 29.88. That is just fifty cents below
the low, but it is enough to signal a downward breakout. Within a week of
moving below the formation low, prices shoot to 33 and continue up using a
slower trajectory.
Figure 1.3 represents what I call a 5% failure. Prices break out lower but
fail to continue moving in the breakout direction by more than 5% before
heading back up. The reverse is also true for upward 5% failures: Prices move
up by less than 5% before turning around and tumbling.
Statistics
Table 1.2 shows general statistics for the broadening bottom chart pattern.
Number of formations. I found 237 patterns in 500 stocks using data
from mid 1991 to 2004.
Reversal or continuation. You can see that more patterns act as rever-
sals than continuations. By definition, a bottom pattern has prices entering
from the top and exiting any way it darn well pleases.
In a bull market, reversals outperform continuations, but in a bear mar-
ket, the situation reverses: continuations outperform reversals.
Average rise or decline. Notice how upward breakout performance
improves in a bull market and downward breakout performance is better in a
bear market. Think of it as a rising tide that lifts all boats. This is an example
of how trading with the prevailing market trend will improve your results.
Statistics

Table 1.2
General Statistics
Bull 
Bear 
Bull 
Bear 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Number of formations




Reversal (R), continuation (C)
92 R
34 R
79 C
32 C
RC performance
23% R, 
21% R, 
–11% Ra, 
–9% Ra, 
13% Ca
16% Ca
–15% C
–19% Ca
Average rise or decline
27%
21%
–15%
–18%
Rises or declines over 45%
18 or 20%
5 or 15%
1 or 1%
2 or 6%
Change after trend ends
–34%
–35%
51%
46%
Busted pattern performance
51%a
28%a
–26%a
–43%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
14%
–3%
1%
–11%
Days to ultimate high or low




Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 41/1035 ---
Rises or declines over 45%. Outstanding performance is rare for BBs.
The best showing comes from upward breakouts in a bull market, with 20% of
the patterns climbing more than 45%. That may sound like a lot, but other
patterns do much better. Thus, do not expect a large move. Downward break-
outs almost never fare well in this category.
Change after trend ends. In a bull market, once prices reach the ulti-
mate low after a downward breakout, prices rise an average of 51%. Even in a
bear market, the climb measures 46%. Thus, if you can determine when the
downtrend ends, buy the stock and surf the rising tide.
Busted pattern performance. Few patterns bust, so the performance
numbers are not solid. Still, they show how much better a busted pattern does
than one that works. If you see prices move less than 5% after the breakout and
then return to the pattern, consider trading the new direction, but only if it
breaks out the other side.
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Compare the change in the index with
the average rise or decline. Large moves in the index associate with large moves
in the stock. For best performance, trade with the market trend (bull markets,
upward breakouts and bear markets, downward breakouts).
Days to ultimate high or low. It takes between a month to 4 months to
reach the ultimate high or low. The numbers say that the move in a bear mar-
ket takes less time than in a bull market. Thus, the decline after a BB in a bear
market must be at a steeper slope than is the rise in a bull market.
Table 1.3 shows failure rates for BBs. The 5% break-even failure rate is
lowest in a bear market (9%). The failure rates climb quickly as the maximum
price rise or decline changes. For the 10% failure rate benchmark, BBs fail
between two and three times more often than at the 5% rate. Over half the pat-

Broadening Bottoms
Table 1.3
Failure Rates
Maximum 
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Price Rise
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market,
or Decline 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
(%)
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
5 (breakeven)
9 or 10%
3 or 9%
13 or 16%
3 or 9%

23 or 25%
10 or 29%
27 or 34%
8 or 25%

33 or 36%
14 or 41%
46 or 58%
18 or 56%

43 or 47%
19 or 56%
52 or 66%
19 or 59%

54 or 59%
20 or 59%
63 or 80%
24 or 75%

63 or 68%
24 or 71%
70 or 89%
26 or 81%

70 or 76%
26 or 76%
73 or 92%
27 or 84%

74 or 80%
32 or 94%
78 or 99%
30 or 94%

84 or 91%
33 or 97%
79 or 100%
32 or 100%
Over 75
92 or 100%
34 or 100%
79 or 100%
32 or 100%

--- PAGE 42/1035 ---

Table 1.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Formation end to breakout
30 days
23 days
39 days
23 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring 
near the 12-month low
(L), center (C), or high (H)
L20%, C44%, H36%
L41%, C38%, H21%
L71%, C27%, H1%
L78%, C19%, H3%
Percentage rise/decline for each 
12-month lookback period
L28%a, C24%, H30%
L19%a, C26%a, H15%a
L17%, C12%a, H8%a
L20%a, C13%a, H21%a
Throwbacks/pullbacks
41%
44%
42%
56%
Average time to throwback/ 
pullback ends
13 days
10 days
12 days
11 days
Average rise/decline for patterns 
with throwback/pullback
25%
15%a
–12%
–19%a
Average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwback/pullback
28%
25%a
–17%
–18%a
Performance with breakout gap
23%a
30%a
–15%a
–22%a
Performance without breakout gap
28%
20%
–15%
–18%a
Average gap size
$0.74
$0.34
$2.17
$0.92
Partial rise, downward breakout
N/A
N/A
28/42 or 67%
11/17 or 65%
Partial decline, upward breakout
43/54 or 80%
11/17 or 65%
N/A
N/A
Partial rise performance
N/A
N/A
–10%
–22%
Partial decline performance
29%
20%a
N/A
N/A
Intraformation partial rise failure
4/92 or 4%
2/34 or 6%
8/79 or 10%
4/32 or 13%
Intraformation partial decline failure
6/92 or 7%
1/34 or 3%
5/79 or 6%
2/32 or 6%
Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means not applicable.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 43/1035 ---
terns with downward breakouts fail to drop more than 15%. For upward
breakouts, patterns cross the halfway mark between rises of 15% and 25%.
These results suggest that you should not depend on a large rise or large
decline after a BB. Scanning down each row, we also see that BBs in bull markets
with upward breakouts have the lowest failure rates. Those are the ones to buy.
Another way to use Table 1.3 is to assess how likely it is that your trade
will fail. If you have a cost of trading of 5% and you want to make 20%, how
many patterns in a bull market with upward breakouts will fail to rise at least
25% (5 + 20)? Answer: 59%. Just 41% of the patterns will meet your profit
margins. Since the majority will fail, your winners must do quite well to com-
pensate for the losses.
Table 1.4 shows statistics related to BB performance after the breakout.
Formation end to breakout. There is a delay between price touching
the trend line the final time and closing above it. This delay averages between
3 weeks and 5 weeks. It takes longer to break out in a bull market than a bear
market because the decline in a bear market is often steeper.
Yearly position. Most of the breakouts occur near the yearly low. This
makes sense for downward breakouts, especially those in bear markets. The
only exception is in bull markets. They show 44% of the breakouts occurring
in the middle of the yearly price range.
Yearly position, performance. In most entries, the sample counts are
few, making the results unreliable. Those BBs with breakouts following the
market trend (bull market, up breakout and bear market, down breakout) do
best when the breakout is near the yearly high.
Throwbacks and pullbacks. The throwback/pullback rate hovers
around 43% except for BBs in a bear market with a downward breakout. They
pullback 56% of the time. Still, the rates are too low to use in forming a reli-
able trading strategy.
The average time for the stock to return to the breakout price is less than
2 weeks. In most cases, when a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suf-
fers. Look for overhead resistance to an upward move or underlying support to
a downward breakout before investing. If the congestion zone is nearby (less
than 5% away), prices will likely push through, but overhead resistance will
retard momentum and performance will suffer.
Gaps. Gaps help performance in a bear market, but the result may change
with additional samples. In a bull market, breakout day gaps either hurt per-
formance or have no influence.
Partial rises and declines. The next four lines of Table 1.4 concern how
often a partial rise or decline occurs and if they do occur, how the pattern per-
forms. A partial decline correctly predicts an upward breakout 80% of the time
in a bull market. The other variations are less successful, being right about
two-thirds of the time. Figure 1.1 shows a good example of a partial decline
and Figure 1.4 shows a partial rise. See the Glossary and Methodology chap-
ter for more information.

Broadening Bottoms

--- PAGE 44/1035 ---
Performance improves when the breakout duration agrees with the gen-
eral market (upward breakouts, bull market or downward breakouts, bear mar-
ket) and a partial rise or decline occurs. For countertrend trades, performance
suffers after a partial rise or decline.
Intraformation partial rises and declines. Intraformation partial rises
and declines appear as small loops hanging from the trend lines. They are par-
tial rises or declines that failed to breakout: Prices made another crossing of the
broadening pattern. Intraformation partial rises or declines occur 13% or less
of the time.
Table 1.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate high or
low. Using numbers, it tells how soon your chart pattern will likely top or bot-
tom out. For example, in a bear market with a downward breakout, over half
(53%, or 25 + 28) bottom out within 2 weeks. At the other end of the table,
almost half the patterns (45%) in a bull market take longer than 2 months (over
70 days) to reach the ultimate high.
Notice the slight blip in the numbers around days 35 and 42. Bear mar-
kets with upward breakouts and bull markets with downward breakouts show
more trend changes during that period. Thus, 5 to 6 weeks after the breakout,
look for a trend change.
Table 1.6 shows size-related statistics. The results suffer from low sample
counts, so keep that in mind.
Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. Before you trade a
BB, compute its height and divide the difference by the breakout price. If the
result is above the median listed in the table, you have a tall pattern. It may not
outperform, but it places the probability on your side.
Width. Wide patterns usually perform better than narrow ones. I used
the median length as the separator between narrow and wide.
Statistics

Table 1.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High or Low
Days:










>70
Bear market, 
up breakout
29%
6%
12%
6%
9%
3%
3%
9%
6%
0%
18%
Bull market, 
up breakout
14%
13%
5%
3%
2%
5%
3%
1%
3%
4%
45%
Bear market, 
down 
breakout
25%
28%
19%
6%
3%
0%
3%
3%
0%
0%
13%
Bull market, 
down 
breakout
24%
15%
9%
4%
5%
10%
5%
8%
1%
1%
18%

--- PAGE 45/1035 ---
Average formation length. The average width is between 1 and 2
months long.
Height and width combinations. Tall and narrow patterns outperform
the other combinations. You will want to avoid short and wide patterns. They
perform worst.
Table 1.7 shows volume-related statistics for broadening bottoms. The
sample counts are few in this table, so the conclusions you reach may change
with a larger sample size.
Volume trend. Up breakouts do better when the volume trend is falling,
and downward breakouts do better with a rising volume trend.
Volume shapes. In all cases, a random volume shape—neither U- nor
dome-shaped—performed better than the other shapes. A random shape
includes flat, rising (trending up), and falling (trending down) volume trends.
Breakout volume. Patterns in bear markets perform better after a heavy
volume breakout. The other two columns either show no difference or show
light volume breakouts outperforming.

Broadening Bottoms
Table 1.6
Size Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market,
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakouta
Tall pattern performance
27%
28%
–17%
–24%
Short pattern performance
26%
16%
–13%
–12%
Median height as a percentage
15.13%
18.06%
17.50%
20.06%
of breakout price
Narrow pattern performance
31%
22%
–15%
–19%
Wide pattern performance
22%
19%
–15%
–18%
Median length
45 days
31 days
49 days
35 days
Average formation length
55 days
35 days
55 days
52 days
Short and narrow performance
30%
16%
–14%
–13%
Short and wide performance
19%a
15%
–11%a
–9%
Tall and wide performance
24%
24%
–16%a
–23%
Tall and narrow performance
36%a
30%
–19%a
–24%
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 46/1035 ---
Trading Tactics
Table 1.8 shows trading tactics for broadening bottoms.
Measure rule. The first tactic is to determine how much money you are
likely to make in a trade. The measure rule helps with the prediction. Subtract
the highest high from the lowest low in the formation to give you the forma-
tion height. Then add the value to the highest high to get the target price for
upward breakouts and subtract the height from the lowest low for downward
breakouts.
In a bull market, this method correctly predicts an upward breakout tar-
get 59% of the time. The worst showing is from BBs in a bear market with a
downward breakout. The prediction is correct just 31% of the time. I consider
values above 80% to be reliable, so this prediction method is dismal.
Figure 1.4 makes the computation clear. Point A shows the highest high
in the chart pattern at 14.13. The lowest low is point B at 12. The formation
height is the difference between the two or 2.13. Add the value to the high to
arrive at the upward price target. This turns out to be 16.26. I compute the
Trading Tactics

Table 1.7
Volume Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market,
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakouta
Rising volume trend 
performance
25%
16%
–17%
–19%
Falling volume trend 
performance
29%
27%
–12%
–18%
U-shaped volume pattern 
performance
29%
18%
–15%
–18%
Dome-shaped volume pattern 
performance
21%
22%
–14%a
–18%
Neither U-shaped nor dome-
shaped volume pattern 
performance
32%
26%
–16%a
–20%
Heavy breakout volume 
performance
26%
25%
–15%
–19%
Light breakout volume 
performance
28%a
12%
–15%a
–15%
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 47/1035 ---

Broadening Bottoms
Table 1.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
Compute the difference between the highest high and the
lowest low in the formation. Add or subtract this value from the
most recent minor high or low, respectively. The result is the
target price for upward and downward breakouts.
Go long at the low
Once recognizing a broadening formation, buy after the stock
makes its turn at the lower trend line.
Long stop
Place a stop-loss order 0.15 below the minor low to protect
against a trend reversal.
Go short at the high
Sell short after prices start heading down from the top trend
line.
Short stop
Place a stop 0.15 above the minor high to protect against an
adverse breakout. Cover the short when price turns at the
bottom trend line and starts moving up. For a downward
breakout, cover as it nears the target price or any support level.
Move stops
Raise or lower the stop to the next closest minor low or high
once prices make a new high (for long trades) or low (for short
sales).
Other
If a broadening bottom shows a partial decline or rise, trade
accordingly (on a partial decline, go long; on a partial rise,
short the stock).
Acuson Corp (Medical Supplies, NYSE, ACN)
Jan 93
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
– 8
Support 
Level
Partial Rise 
Then Downward 
Breakout
Stock Shorted
Short Covered
Downward 
Price 
Target

C
A


B
Figure 1.4
A broadening bottom with five alternating touches. Expect a down-
ward breakout because a partial rise appears.

--- PAGE 48/1035 ---
downward target by subtracting the height from the lowest low (that is, 12 –
2.13 or 9.87). You can see in Figure 1.4 that the price never quite reaches the
downward price target.
Go long at the low. Once you have uncovered a broadening bottom,
with two minor highs and two minor lows, you can think about trading it.
When the price bounces off the lower trend line, buy the stock. Sell when
prices turn down. The downturn may occur as a partial rise partway across the
formation, or prices may cross completely to the other side, touch the top
trend line, and head down. Remember, the formation may stage an upward
breakout, so do not sell too soon and cut your profits short.
Long stop. In a rising price trend, place a stop-loss order 0.15 below the
minor low. Should the stock reverse and head down, you will be taken out with
a small loss. As the stock rises to the opposite side of the formation, move your
stop upward to 0.15 below the prior minor low. The minor low may act as a
resistance point, so you will be giving the stock every opportunity to bounce off
the resistance level before being cashed out.
Go short at the high. The trading tactic for downward breakouts is the
same. When prices touch the top trend line and begin moving down, short 
the stock.
Short stop. Place a stop-loss order 0.15 above the highest high in the for-
mation, then pray that prices decline.
Move stop. If luck is on your side and the stock heads down, move your
stop lower. Use the prior minor high—place the stop 0.15 above it.
Other. If the stock makes a partial rise or decline, consider acting on it.
This is a reliable breakout signal. Take advantage of it but make sure you place
a stop-loss order in case the trade goes bad.
Once prices break out and leave the broadening pattern, consider selling
if the price nears the target. There is no guarantee that the price will hit or
exceed the target, so be ready to complete the trade, especially if there is a
resistance level between the current price and the target. The stock may reach
the resistance point and turn around.
Sample Trade
Susan likes to think of herself as the brains in the family. While her husband is
suffering in foul weather as a carpenter, she is hammering away at her keyboard,
a slave to her computer masters. She is an active position trader who is not
afraid to short a stock, given good profit potential and an especially weak fun-
damental or technical situation. It is a stressful life, but making money often is.
When she spotted the broadening bottom shown in Figure 1.4, she began
her analysis. The stock reached a high of 37.38 in early November 1991 
and has been heading down ever since. Now, with the stock trading at 14, she
Sample Trade

--- PAGE 49/1035 ---
wondered how much downside remained. She drew the two trend-line bound-
aries and counted the number of alternating touches (in Figure 1.4, three are
labeled as numbers and Point A is the fourth alternating touch).
Since most broadening formations tend to break out after four alternat-
ing touches and since the price was near the top of the formation heading
down, she guessed that the stock would break out downward on the next cross-
ing. So she sold the stock short and received a fill at 13.88. It was a gamble,
sure, but one she was comfortable making. In any case, she immediately placed
a stop at 14.25, or slightly above the high at point A.
Susan was overjoyed to see the stock plummet 2 days later and race across
to the other side of the formation, touching the bottom trend line at point B.
Usually, her trades are not that easy. She decided to protect her profit and low-
ered the stop to the nearest minor high, shown as point C, at 13.75 or 0.15
above the high. Then she waited.
The stock bounced off the lower trend line instead of busting through as
she hoped. She decided to be patient and see what the stock did next. With her
stop-loss order in place at the break-even price, she felt protected and com-
fortable in letting the trade ride.
The stock bounced off the 12 support level and did a partial rise before
meeting resistance and heading back down. Two days after cresting, she made
the determination that on the next touch, the stock would pierce the lower
trend line and continue down. She doubled her stake by selling more stock
short at 12.75. She was wrong. The stock continued down 1 more day before
moving up again. Susan adjusted her stop-loss order to include the additional
shares, but kept it at the same price level (13.75). Again she waited. The stock
slowly climbed and reached a minor high of 13.13 before heading down again.
This time the decline was strong enough to punch through the support zone
at the lower trend line.
When the stock descended below point B, Susan lowered her stop-loss
order to 0.15 above that point or 12.15. Then she looked at the measure rule
for the price target. She calculated a target of 9.88 and wondered if the stock
would really reach that price. To be safe, she decided to cash out if the stock
reached 10.15, or 0.15 above the common support price of 10 (a whole num-
ber typically shows support).
When the stock plunged to 10.38 on high volume, she wondered if she
was looking at a one-day reversal chart pattern. With those formations, it is
difficult to be sure if prices would reverse or not. She decided to hold on to her
original target.
Two days later, prices zoomed upward and her stop closed out the trade
at 12.15. She did not make much money (about 9% with a hold time of just
over a month), but she gained experience and a few pennies to put in the bank.

Broadening Bottoms

--- PAGE 50/1035 ---
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations to help you select better per-
forming broadening bottoms. Refer to the associated table for more information.
• Use the identification guidelines to correctly select a broadening bot-
tom—Table 1.1.
• Trade with the market trend. Select BBs that occur in a bull market
with an upward breakout or in a bear market with a downward break-
out—Table 1.2.
• If you see a busted pattern, trade it—Table 1.2.
• BBs in bull markets with upward breakouts have the lowest failure
rates. Avoid trading downward breakouts in a bull market—Table 1.3.
• Performance usually suffers after a throwback or pullback. Search for
overhead resistance (upward breakouts) or underlying support (down-
ward breakouts) before trading—Table 1.4.
• Use partial rises or declines to enter a trade sooner with little increase
in risk—Table 1.4.
• BBs in a bear market bottom quicker than BBs in a bull market, so
short BBs in a bear market for the quickest turnover (but the payoff will
be lower, on average)—Table 1.5.
• Watch for the price trend to change 5 to 6 weeks after the breakout—
Table 1.5.
• Select tall or narrow patterns—Table 1.6.
• BBs both tall and narrow outperform the other combinations. Avoid
short and wide ones—Table 1.6.
• Select BBs with a falling volume trend for upward breakouts. A rising
volume trend works better for downward breakouts—Table 1.7.
• Pick patterns with a random volume shape (flat, rising or falling)—
Table 1.7.
For Best Performance

--- PAGE 51/1035 ---


Broadening Formations,
Right-Angled and
Ascending
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Horizontal bottom with higher highs
following an up-sloping trend line. Breakout
is upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish reversal
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
19 out of 23
15 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
11%
11%
Average rise
29%
15%
Change after trend ends
–31%
–38%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Throwbacks
47%
43%
Percentage meeting price target
68%
43%
Surprising findings
Throwbacks and breakout day gaps hurt
performance. Tall patterns perform better
than short ones. Patterns both tall and wide
outperform. Heavy breakout volume helps
performance.

--- PAGE 52/1035 ---
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Same, but breakout is downward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
19 out of 21
14 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
20% 
8%
Average decline
15% 
22%
Change after trend ends
53% 
47%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Pullbacks
65% 
52%
Percentage meeting price target
32% 
51%
Surprising findings
A pullback hurts performance. Tall patterns
perform better than short ones. 
Before I began studying this formation, I assumed prices would climb away
from it, simply because the word ascending is in the title. However, that is not
how the formation performs. It is bearish. The word ascending refers to the
minor highs that rise over time. The base of this formation is flat but the tops
generally follow an up-sloping trend line.
Surprises for this pattern include throwbacks and pullbacks that hurt per-
formance when they occur. They interrupt price momentum. Tall patterns
perform better than short ones, and for upward breakouts, patterns both tall
and wide perform better than other combinations.
Tour
Figure 2.1 puts the formation in perspective. There are two formations shown
in the chart. The first one is somewhat ill-formed but better performing than
the second. Both formations have a base outlined by a horizontal trend line con-
necting the minor lows. The up-sloping trend line skirts the tops of the minor
highs. The result is a triangle-appearing formation with prices that broaden out,
but do not let the ascending price pattern fool you. This formation is bearish:
Prices plummet through the base of the formation most of the time.
Why do right-angled ascending broadening formations form? Consider
Figure 2.2. The rise began in mid-December 1991 on volume that was higher
than anything seen in almost 2 months. By late February, the stock had reached
a new high and was rounding over after meeting selling resistance at 14. The
stock returned to 12.25 where it found support. At that point, it paused for
Tour

--- PAGE 53/1035 ---

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending
Edwards, A. G. Inc. (Securities Brokerage, NYSE, AGE)
Dec
May
Apr 92
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Jun
Jul
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18
– 17
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
Figure 2.1
Two right-angled ascending broadening formations bounded by a
horizontal base and up-sloping trend line. Prices decline after a downward breakout.
Baker J. Inc (Shoe, NASDAQ, JBAK)
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
– 8
– 7
Partial Rise
Pullback
Figure 2.2
A pullback to the base of the formation. Pullbacks occur often in
ascending broadening formations.

--- PAGE 54/1035 ---
about 2 weeks and established the base on which a horizontal trend line
appears.
The reason for the horizontal trend line is one of perceived value. As the
stock approached the $12 level, more investors and institutional holders pur-
chased the stock. The desire to own the stock at what they believed a good
value outweighed the reluctance of sellers to part with their shares. The
demand halted the decline in the stock and eventually sent prices skyward
again. This happened in mid-April as volume spiked along with the price. The
enthusiasm caused the stock to reach a new high. Momentum was high enough
so that the next day, prices rose even further before closing lower. With the
second peak, a tentative trend line drawn along the tops of the formation
sloped upward and gave character to the broadening formation.
The stock moved rapidly back down even as volume increased. This
decline stopped before it reached the lower trend line, signaling continued
enthusiasm. Prices pushed higher and reached a new high, this one at 15.50 on
May 6. The up-sloping trend line resistance area repelled any further advance.
The stock simply did not have enough upward momentum to push through the
selling pressure at the new level.
The next day volume dried up, but there was enough momentum remain-
ing for another try at the summit. When the attempt failed, the smart money
headed back for base camp and volume receded even further. As prices col-
lapsed, other investors joined in the retreat and volume moved up. In less than
2 weeks, prices were back at the lower trend line.
Another feeble attempt at a new high floundered on unremarkable vol-
ume. The stock moved horizontally and stalled out—a partial rise that often
spells trouble for a stock. On June 4, prices dropped on high volume and
returned to the horizontal trend line. The stock paused there for just over a
week before moving down and punching through the support level at 12.25.
A pullback in a bull market is quite common for ascending broadening
formations, so it is no surprise that after a rapid 13% retreat, the stock turned
around and pulled back to the base of the formation. Although not shown in
Figure 2.2, the stock continued moving up until it began forming another
ascending broadening formation in late October with a base at 16.50.
The ascending broadening formation represents the desire of investors
and traders to own the stock at a fixed price, in this case about 12.25. Their
buying enthusiasm pushes prices higher until mounting selling pressure causes
a halt to the rise and sends the stock tumbling. With each attempt, fewer peo-
ple are left willing to sell their shares until they receive an even higher price,
so a broadening range of prices appears at the top. Eventually, the buying
enthusiasm at the base of the formation collapses and removes the support for
the stock. When that happens, the stock punches through the support level and
declines. It continues moving down until reaching a point where other
investors perceive significant value and buy the stock.
Tour

--- PAGE 55/1035 ---
Identification Guidelines
What are the characteristics of an ascending broadening formation? To answer
the question, peruse the selection guidelines outlined in Table 2.1. While con-
sidering the table, look at Figure 2.3, an ascending broadening formation on a
weekly scale. 
Shape. The overall shape of the formation looks like a megaphone with
one side horizontal.
Horizontal bottom support line. The bottom of the formation follows
a horizontal trend line, while an up-sloping trend line bounds the top side. 
Up-sloping top trend line. The top trend line touches at least two
minor highs. The horizontal trend line also shows two minor low touches as
prices descend to the trend line. The various touch points help define the
boundary of the formation.
Volume. The volume trend is usually upward and U shaped, especially in
the last third of the pattern. In Figure 2.3, you can see the U shape from Feb-
ruary 1992 to the September 1992 peak, and then rounding down again before
heading up to the peak in March 1993.
Premature breakouts. I define premature breakouts to be prices that
close outside the formation boundary but return before the formation ends.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending
Table 2.1
Identification Characteristics
Characteristic
Discussion
Shape
Looks like a megaphone with the base of the
formation horizontal and bounded on the top by
an up-sloping trend line.
Horizontal bottom support line
A horizontal, or nearly so, trend line that connects
the minor lows. Must have at least two distinct
minor lows before drawing a trend line.
Up-sloping top trend line
An up-sloping trend line bounds the expanding
price series on top. Must have at least two minor
highs to create a trend line.
Volume
Upward trend with a slight tendency to be U-
shaped.
Premature breakouts
Very rare. A close below the horizontal trend line
is most likely a genuine breakout.
Price action before breakout
Prices sometimes move horizontally for many
months before moving outside the formation high
or low.
Downward breakout
Prices drop below the horizontal trend line usually
accompanied by a surge in volume.
Support and resistance
Follows the two trend lines into the future.

--- PAGE 56/1035 ---
Premature breakouts for this formation are rare enough that they should not
be of concern.
Price action before breakout. In some ascending broadening forma-
tions, prices make higher highs and form a solid, horizontal base at the start but
then move sideways for many months. Eventually, prices rise above the for-
mation top or slide through the bottom trend line and stage a breakout. 
Downward breakout. Once a breakout occurs, a pullback sometimes
happens. Prices may continue moving up but they usually bounce off the lower
trend line and continue back down. A pullback gives investors another oppor-
tunity to short the stock or add to their short position. Before shorting, how-
ever, make sure the pullback is complete and prices are declining once again.
Support and resistance. I chose Figure 2.3 because it shows the two
common areas of support and resistance. These areas follow the trend lines.
Along the base of the formation projected into the future, the support area
repels the decline over 2 years after the formation ends. The rising trend line
tells a similar tale; it repels prices three times nearly a year later. The implica-
tions of this observation can be profound. If you own a stock and it is breaking
out to new highs, it would be nice to predict how high prices will rise. One way
to do that is to search for formations such as this one. Many times, extending
the trend lines into the future will predict areas of support and resistance.
Although the trend line did not predict the absolute high, it did suggest
when prices would stall. The resistance area turned out to be a good opportu-
nity to sell the stock.
Identification Guidelines

Parker Drilling Co. (Oilfield Svcs/Equipment, NYSE, PKD)
Minor Highs
Minor Lows
Support
Trend Line
Resistance
– 8
– 7
– 6
– 5
– 4
– 3
92 F M
M
A
A S
J J
O ND 93 F M
M
A
A S
J
J
O N D 94F M
M
A
A S
J
F M
M
A
J
J
ON D95
Figure 2.3
Support and resistance areas on a weekly time scale. They appear
along the trend-line axis and can extend far into the future, as in this case.

--- PAGE 57/1035 ---
Focus on Failures
What can we learn from a review of the failures of this formation? Figure 2.4
shows two broadening formations; the one on the left fails to descend but the
one on the right makes up for it. The figure makes one lesson clear: Always
wait for a confirmed breakout before taking a position in a stock; that is, wait
for prices to fall below the lower trend line before selling your long position or
selling short. Even though most ascending broadening formations break out
downward, the failure rate is too high to hazard an investment before knowing
the outcome. Had you sold the stock short during the first formation, your
position would not have made money for almost half a year. Look back at Fig-
ure 2.3. A short position in the stock at the lower trend line would have lost
money for years.
Selling a stock prematurely is just as bad. If you held a long position in
the stock shown in Figure 2.4 but sold it during June, you would have regret-
ted your trade until December when the footwear company slipped. Had you
waited for a downward breakout, you would have remained in the stock as it
ascended. Once the second broadening formation took shape, a sale after
prices pierced the horizontal trend line would have gotten you out at a bet-
ter price.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 95
Feb
May 94
Jul
Jun
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
– 8
– 7
– 6
– 5
– 4
Failure
to Descend
Barry (R.G.) (Shoe, NYSE, RGB)
Figure 2.4
Two broadening formations. The formation on the left fails to descend
below the lower trend line. You should wait for the breakout before investing in
ascending broadening formations.

--- PAGE 58/1035 ---
Statistics
Table 2.2 shows general statistics for this formation.
Number of formations. I found 380 patterns using data from mid-1991
to 2003 in 500 stocks, separated into breakout directions and market condi-
tions.
Reversal or continuation. Usually, the pattern acts as a reversal of the
prevailing price trend due to the overwhelming number of samples in a bull
market with a downward breakout. Patterns acting as continuations perform
better than do those acting as reversals.
Average rise or decline. As a bull market, upward breakout play, this
pattern performs poorly. Prices rise 29% after the breakout. In a bear market,
the rise is even less, 15%, as you would expect from a countertrend breakout.
Downward breakouts perform worse than the average decline posted by all
other chart pattern types.
Rises or declines over 45%. Just over a quarter (26%) of the patterns
with upward breakouts in a bull market climb over 45%. The remainder of the
combinations of market type and breakout direction show few large gains. This
finding is expected for downward breakouts, and the low sample size explains
the poor showing for upward breakouts in a bear market.
Statistics

Table 2.2
General Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout 
Number of formations




Reversal (R), 
20 R, 
10 R, 
136 R, 
39 R, 
continuation (C)
72 C
27 C
50 C
26 C
R/C performance
29% R, 
11% R, 
–14% R, 
–23% R, 
29% C
17% C
–20% C
–22% C
Average rise or decline
29%
15%
–15%
–22%
Rises or declines 
over 45%
24 or 26%
0 or 0%
6 or 3%
4 or 6%
Change after trend ends
–31%
–38%
53%
47%
Busted pattern 
performance
41%a
35%a
–25%a
–40%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 
change
14%
–4%
1%
–13%
Days to ultimate high 
or low




Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 59/1035 ---
Change after trend ends. When prices reach the ultimate high or low,
what happens next? After an upward breakout, prices tumble between 31% and
38%. For downward breakouts, prices rise between 47% and 53%. Thus, you
can make a pile of money if you correctly call the bottom and invest for the
long term.
Busted pattern performance. Few busted patterns occur, so the num-
bers are unreliable. Still, they indicate the type of move prices make after trav-
eling less than 5% after the breakout. With downward breakouts, busted
patterns should be easy to spot as they drop below the horizontal trend line and
then shoot upward.
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In a bull market, the index moved up
and in a bear market, it closed lower. The numbers emphasize the importance
of trading with the trend. Compare the move in the index with the average rise
or decline. Breakouts in the direction of the general market trend perform
better than countertrend trades.
Days to ultimate high or low. How long will your trade last? It lasts as
long as you do not close out your position. Measuring the time from the break-
out to the ultimate high or low shows that declines in a bear market are steeper
than rises in a bull market. I am not a big fan of shorting, but to keep your cap-
ital fully employed (maximizing the number of trades per year), short this pat-
tern in a bear market. Your exposure to the market will be shorter, on average,
and your returns may be almost as good as going long in a bull market.
Table 2.3 lists failure rates for the broadening pattern. With the excep-
tion of a downward breakout in a bull market, the break-even failure rates are

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending
Table 2.3
Failure Rates
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Maximum Price
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Rise or Decline
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
(%)
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout 
5 (breakeven)
10 or 11%
4 or 11%
37 or 20%
5 or 8%

21 or 23%
9 or 24%
85 or 46%
14 or 22%

30 or 33%
15 or 41%
117 or 63%
20 or 31%

40 or 43%
25 or 68%
145 or 78%
30 or 46%

47 or 51%
32 or 86%
158 or 85%
39 or 60%

53 or 58%
36 or 97%
168 or 90%
45 or 69%

60 or 65%
36 or 97%
176 or 95%
50 or 77%

71 or 77%
37 or 100%
183 or 98%
62 or 95%

83 or 90%
37 or 100%
186 or 100%
65 or 100%
Over 75
92 or 100%
37 or 100%
186 or 100%
65 or 100%

--- PAGE 60/1035 ---

Table 2.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Formation end to breakout
31 days
23 days
13 days
21 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring near
the 12-month low (L), center (C),
or high (H)
L7%, C8%, H86%
L14%, C30%, H57%
L31%, C40%, H28%
L29%, C58%, H12%
Percentage rise/decline for each 
12-month lookback period
L18%a, C18%a, H31%
L16%a, C18%a, H13%a
L21%, C15%, H10%
L23%a, C22%, H20%a
Throwbacks/pullbacks
47%
43%
65%
52%
Average time to throwback/pullback ends
10 days
10 days
11 days
10 days
Average rise/decline for patterns 
with throwback/pullback
23%
14%a
–15%
–20%
Average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwback/pullback
35%
16%a
–16%
–25%
Performance with breakout gap
28%a
10%a
–25%a
–22%a
Performance without breakout gap
29%a
16%
–13%
–22%
Average gap size
$0.77
$0.41
$0.45
$1.48
Partial rise, downward breakout
N/A
N/A
107/144 or 74%
38/48 or 79%
Partial decline, upward breakout
22/27 or 81%
18/22 or 82%
N/A
N/A
Partial rise performance
N/A
N/A
–12%
–21%
Partial decline performance
27%a
13%a
N/A
N/A
Intraformation partial rise failure
4/92 or 4%
3/37 or 8%
8/186 or 4%
7/65 or 11%
Intraformation partial decline failure
7/92 or 8%
3/37 or 8%
28/186 or 15%
4/65 or 6%
Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means not applicable.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 61/1035 ---
reasonable. However, the excluded column has the most samples, so its failure
rate is probably solid. 
Notice that the failures double or nearly triple for moves of just 10%. For
example, 8% of the broadening patterns with downward breakouts in a bear
market fail to drop more than 5%. This almost triples to 22% failing to drop
more than 10%. Over half (60%) fail to drop more than 25% after the breakout.
Comparing the columns, we see that the bull market, up breakout column
shows the lowest failure rates. This makes sense because it is also the best per-
former (it has the highest average rise, as per Table 2.2).
Table 2.4 shows breakout- and postbreakout-related statistics. 
Formation end to breakout. It takes between 2 and 4 weeks for prices
to close outside the trend-line boundary. This observation suggests that prices
often bounce off the trend line, curl around, and then take their time making
their way back to pierce the boundary.
Yearly position. Most of the breakouts occur near the yearly high for
upward breakouts, and in the middle of the yearly price range for downward
breakouts. 
Yearly position, performance. Mapping the performance over the
yearly price ranges, we find that upward breakouts occurring near the yearly
high in a bull market perform well. Downward breakouts do well when the
breakout is near the yearly low. 
Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about half
the time, and it takes the stock about 10 days to return to the breakout price.
When they occur, performance suffers, as Table 2.4 shows.
Gaps. For patterns with upward breakouts, gaps hurt performance, but
the low sample count may be the reason. For downward breakouts, gaps either
help performance or cause no pain. Notice the large gap size in a bear market
after a downward breakout.
Partial rises and declines. A partial rise or decline is an accurate gauge
of an impending breakout. Consult the Glossary on how to recognize them.
Using a partial rise or decline, you can get into the stock at a better price than
if you wait for the breakout.
Does a partial rise or decline interfere with momentum? Yes. If you com-
pare the average rise or decline from Table 2.2 with the partial rise or decline
performance in Table 2.4, you will find that performance suffers after a partial
rise or decline. However, using the feature to enter a trade earlier than the
breakout will tend to help performance.
Intraformation partial rises and declines. How often does a partial rise
or decline fail to predict an immediate breakout? Answer: between 4% and
15% of the time, depending on the market conditions and breakout directions.
Table 2.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate high or
low. We have seen that the decline in a bear market is usually swift. Almost half
of downward breakouts reach the ultimate low in less than 2 weeks. Upward
breakouts take more time to reach the ultimate high, sometimes much longer.
In a bull market, 48% are still searching for the top after 70 days.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending

--- PAGE 62/1035 ---
What does all this mean? In a bull market and with a pattern having an
upward breakout, be patient. For other combinations of market conditions and
breakout directions, watch your stock closely for fatigue. Use the measure rule
to estimate a target price and consider selling if prices near the target. Remem-
ber, you never go broke taking a profit (just be sure to keep those losses in
check).
Also, watch for weakness a month after the breakout. During that time,
prices tend to reverse. Table 2.5 shows this movement during days 42 (bull
market, up breakout) and 42 to 49 (bull market, down breakout).
Table 2.6 shows size-related statistics. 
Height. In all cases, broadening patterns that are taller than the median
height performed better than did their shorter counterparts.
Width. Wide patterns performed better than narrow ones for breakouts
that agree with the prevailing market trend (upward breakout, bull market or
downward breakout, bear market). Countertrend trades show either no differ-
ence or narrow patterns that perform slightly better. I used the median length
as the divider between narrow and wide.
Average formation length. The average pattern length from the first
minor high/low trend-line touch to the last averages between 2 and 2.5 months.
Height and width combinations. Tall and wide patterns outperform all
other combinations. Avoid short and wide ones for the best performance.
Table 2.7 shows volume-related statistics. 
Volume trend. Some analysts suggest that low volume before the break-
out implies a powerful situation. In a bull market, that appears to be the case
with this chart pattern. Bear markets show the reverse, with patterns having a
rising volume trend performing better than do those with a falling trend. 
Volume shapes. Most of the broadening patterns do well when a dome-
shaped volume pattern appears. The one exception is a bull market with a
downward breakout; they perform better with U-shaped volume.
Breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume helped the pattern perform
in all cases except downward breakouts in a bear market. There, patterns with
light breakout volume showed better performance.
Statistics

Table 2.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High or Low
Days:










>70
Bear market, 
up breakout
16%
11%
16%
11%
8%
5%
3%
5%
3%
3%
19%
Bull market, 
up breakout
22%
5%
3%
1%
2%
8%
4%
4%
0%
2%
48%
Bear market, 
down breakout
31%
14%
11%
6%
3%
2%
2%
0%
0%
5%
28%
Bull market, 
down breakout
34%
13%
8%
4%
3%
5%
5%
2%
3%
1%
22%

--- PAGE 63/1035 ---

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending
Table 2.7
Volume Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakout 
Rising volume trend 
performance
27%
16%
–13%
–23%
Falling volume trend 
performance
31%
14%
–18%
–21%a
U-shaped volume pattern 
performance
28%
16%
–19%
–22%a
Dome-shaped volume pattern 
performance
32%
16%
–14%
–23%a
Neither U-shaped nor dome-
shaped volume pattern 
performance
26%a
12%
–8%a
–19%a
Heavy breakout volume 
performance
30%a
15%
–17%
–22%
Light breakout volume 
performance
22%a
14%
–11%
–26%
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.
Table 2.6
Size Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakout 
Tall pattern performance
36%
16%
–16%
–23%
Short pattern performance
23%
14%
–15%
–22%
Median height as a percentage 
13.24%
14.77%
14.70%
17.22%
of breakout price
Narrow pattern performance
27%
15%
–16%
–21%
Wide pattern performance
31%
15%
–15%
–24%
Median length
59 days
49 days
64 days
56 days
Average formation length
79 days
58 days
78 days
65 days
Short and narrow performance
25%
15%
–16%
–22%a
Short and wide performance
19%a
14%
–10%a
–23%a
Tall and wide performance
38%
16%
–17%
–25%a
Tall and narrow performance
32%a
15%
–14%a
–19%a
Notes: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 64/1035 ---
Trading Tactics
Table 2.8 lists trading tactics.
Measure rule. The measure rule predicts a target price. Compute the
height, the difference between the highest high and the horizontal trend line
in the formation. For upward breakouts, add the height to the highest high in
the pattern. For downward breakouts, subtract this value from the value of the
horizontal trend line. The result is the target price. The target should serve as
the minimum price move to expect, but with ascending broadening formations,
prices usually miss the target. Bull market accuracy ranges from 68% (up break-
outs) to 32% (down breakouts). Bear markets targets are correct 43% (up
breakouts) and 51% (down breakouts) of the time.
For a more conservative approach, try calculating the formation height and
dividing by 2, and then applying the difference to the pattern’s high or low price.
Figure 2.5 makes the measure rule clear. The height of the formation is
the difference between the highest high (34.13) and the trend-line price
(29.25), or 4.88. Subtract the result from the trend-line price, giving a target
price of 24.37. The nearer target in the figure uses half the formation height,
or 2.44, to give a price target of 26.81. 
Partial rise or decline. A partial rise or decline can be difficult to trade
because prices often pause partway across the chart pattern on their way to the
opposite side. This pause looks like a partial rise or decline. Wait before buy-
ing to be sure that prices are unlikely to continue in the original direction. Try
buying when prices close beyond the halfway point between the minor
low/high and the trend line. 
For example, if the top trend line is at 20 and prices have declined from
there to 14 then started back up in what you suspect is a partial decline, buy
when the price closes above 17 (that is half the distance between 20 and 14). You
might use Fibonacci retracements of 38%, 50%, or 62% as buying locations. If
prices turn at those retracement levels, then consider opening a position.
Trading Tactics

Table 2.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
Compute the formation height from highest high to the
horizontal trend line. For upward breakouts, add the height
to the highest high in the pattern. For downward breakouts,
subtract the height from the value of the horizontal trend
line. The result is the target price. More accurate targets use
a formation height divided by 2.
Partial rise or decline
Use a partial rise or decline as an entry signal.
Wait for confirmation
If you own the stock and prices close below the lower trend
line, sell.
Intraformation trade
For tall patterns, buy near the lower trend line and sell near
the top as prices curl down.

--- PAGE 65/1035 ---
Wait for confirmation. If you own a stock and it shows a broadening
pattern, get worried. Many times the breakout will be downward, so be ready
to sell. Only sell when the price closes below the horizontal trend line. Prema-
ture breakouts are rare, but they do occur. Do not be fooled; wait for a close
below the lower trend line.
Intraformation trade. If the pattern is tall enough, consider trading
between the two trend lines. Buy after prices bounce off the lower trend line
and sell after they turn down at the top. If you are lucky, the pattern will break-
out upward and you can ride prices even higher. Use progressive stops to pro-
tect your profits. When the stock climbs above the nearest minor high, raise
your stop to just below the prior minor low. That strategy should give the
stock plenty of wiggle room.
Sample Trade
Palmer is a wiry sort of guy, one who acts as if he has swallowed too much caf-
feine. I am sure you have met the type. Faced with the situation shown in Fig-
ure 2.5, he took swift, decisive action. At point A, where the stock touched the
top trend line, he quickly sold it short and received a fill at 33.38. He placed a
stop at 34 in case the trade went against him. Then he waited.
It did not take long for the stock to cross the formation and reach the hor-
izontal trend line. Unfortunately, Palmer did not use an order to automatically

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending
Aug
Sep
Oct 92
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 93
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Broadening Top
Formation
Pullback
Target Price
Target Price
– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21
A
C
B
D
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. (Retail Store, NYSE, WMT)
Figure 2.5
Ascending broadening formation. Predicted price targets using half
and full formation heights. A broadening top formation appears in late October.

--- PAGE 66/1035 ---
cover his short at 29.38 (the value of the trend line). So when prices bounced
off the low, he covered his short the following day, shown as point B, at 30.50.
Immediately, he went long and bought the stock at the same price.
Palmer placed a stop-loss order just below the horizontal trend line, at
29.25, just in case. Then he extended the top trend line but worried that the
stock might not reach it. He opted to put a target price below the old high at
point A. In less than a week, the stock reached his target and sold at 33.50
(point C). Since the stock was still showing an upward bias, he laid back for a
bit and waited for the trend to reverse. Three days later he sold the stock short
again at 33. This time, he put a sell order above the lower trend line at 29.50.
The trade went against him. It rose to 34 and oscillated up and down for nearly
3 weeks, never quite reaching his stop-loss point of 34.38. Then the stock
plunged and zipped across the formation. It hit his target price at point D, and
he covered his short.
Sensing a shift in the investment winds, he went long on the stock at the
same price but put a stop loss below the lower trend line. The following day
prices hit his stop at 29.25 and he took a small loss. For some unexplained rea-
son, Palmer walked away from the stock at this point. Perhaps it was the small
loss he incurred on his last trade, or perhaps he was just running low on caffeine.
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations for selecting patterns for bet-
ter performance. Refer to the associated table for more information. 
• Review the identification guidelines to be sure you have the pattern
correct—Table 2.1.
• Trade with the market trend: In bull markets, buy upward breakouts;
in bear markets, short downward breakouts—Table 2.2.
• Trade busted patterns or after price reaches the ultimate high or low—
Table 2.2.
• Patterns in bull markets with upward breakouts have the lowest failure
rates for moves above 15%—Table 2.3.
• In bull markets, select patterns with the upward breakout near the
yearly high. Downward breakouts should be near the yearly low,
regardless of market type—Table 2.4.
• Throwbacks and pullbacks hurt performance. Look for nearby support
or resistance to a price move—Table 2.4.
• Gaps hurt performance after upward breakouts—Table 2.4.
• Use a partial rise or decline to buy in early. They correctly signal a
breakout over 74% of the time—Table 2.4.
For Best Performance

--- PAGE 67/1035 ---
• In a bull market, let your profits ride because it takes time for prices to
rise. In a bear market, the decline is likely to be steep and short, so use
a profit target to get out—Table 2.5.
• Watch for price weakness 6 to 7 weeks after the breakout in a bull mar-
ket—Table 2.5.
• Select tall patterns—Table 2.6.
• Wide patterns perform better when the breakout direction follows the
general market trend (upward breakout, bull market and downward
breakout, bear market)—Table 2.6.
• Select patterns that are both tall and wide; avoid short and wide ones—
Table 2.6.
• In a bull market, pick patterns with a falling volume trend; in a bear
market, look for a rising volume trend—Table 2.7.
• Select patterns with dome-shaped volume except in a bull market with
downward breakouts—Table 2.7.
• Choose patterns with heavy breakout volume except for those patterns
with downward breakouts in a bear market—Table 2.7.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Ascending

--- PAGE 68/1035 ---


Broadening Formations,
Right-Angled and
Descending
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Horizontal top with lower lows following a
down-sloping trend line. Breakout is upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
23 out of 23
7 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
19%
6%
Average rise
28%
23%
Change after trend ends
–26%
–35%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Throwbacks
52%
50%
Percentage meeting price target
63%
42%
Surprising findings
Upward breakouts occur near the yearly high.
Throwbacks and breakout day gaps hurt
performance. Tall patterns perform better
than short ones. A rising volume trend and
U-shaped volume suggests better
postbreakout performance.

--- PAGE 69/1035 ---
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Same, but breakout is downward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish reversal
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
13 out of 21
4 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
14%
4%
Average decline
15%
23%
Change after trend ends
55%
55%
Volume trend
Upward
Flat
Pullbacks
51%
57%
Percentage meeting price target
44%
51%
Surprising findings
Downward breakouts occur near the yearly
low. Pullbacks hurt performance. Patterns
with dome-shaped volume and heavy
breakout volume do well.
After searching for this pattern in daily price data, I found 140 patterns with
upward breakouts and 134 with downward ones. Upward breakouts show the
pattern performing as a continuation of the uptrend twice as often as a rever-
sal. Downward breakouts show the opposite: more act as reversals. Continua-
tions perform better in bull markets, reversals in bear markets, regardless of the
breakout direction.
The bull market break-even failure rate is about three times the bear
market rate. This finding suggests the pattern is happier in a bear market.
That analysis changes for higher failure rates. In other words, this pattern per-
forms well in a bear market to begin with, but for longer trades, patterns in a
bull market show smaller failure rates.
After the breakout and after prices reach the ultimate low, the rebound is
spectacular: 55%. Thus, if you can correctly identify when the trend changes,
you can make a ton of money—even if you are late getting into the trade.
However, the right-angled and descending broadening (RADB) chart
pattern gives lackluster performance. The average rise or decline is well below
that of other chart pattern types, so trade this one carefully. 
Tour
What do descending broadening formations look like and why do they form?
Figure 3.1 is an example of the chart pattern. The characteristic flat top and
down-sloping bottom are apparent in the figure. These are the two key ingre-

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending

--- PAGE 70/1035 ---
dients. Prices at the top of the formation reach the same price level before
declining. Over time, a horizontal trend line can be drawn connecting them.
Along the bottom of the formation, the minor lows touch a down-sloping
trend line. Eventually, prices break out of the formation by either closing
above the top trend line or below the bottom one.
In Figure 3.1, the breakout is downward since prices close below the
lower trend line. I require prices to close outside the trend line so that is why the
peak on November 3 does not classify as an upward breakout. On that day,
prices close at 19, the low for the day, and below the top trend-line value of
about 19.50.
Figure 3.2 shows an example of an upward breakout. The top of the for-
mation is well formed with several minor peaks reaching the same price level.
However, three one-day touches compose the lower trend line. A trend-line
touch is a trend-line touch regardless of whether it is composed of one-day
spikes or many days of consecutive touches.
Figure 3.2 shows a broadening formation with an upward breakout pro-
viding a 10% rise in just over 2 weeks. During May 1996, the stock reached 29,
for a 25% gain. The figure also shows a throwback to the top of the formation.
This one occurs almost 4 weeks after the breakout. I consider throwbacks or
pullbacks that occur later than 30 days to be just normal price action, not due
to the throwback or pullback. This one just makes the cut at 27 days.
Tour

Applebees (Restaurant, NASDAQ, APPB)
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18
– 17
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
Jan 95
Feb
Mar
Jul 94
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Support Line
One-Day Reversal
Figure 3.1
Descending broadening formation. A horizontal trend line along the
top and a down-sloping trend line connecting the minor lows is characteristic of
this chart pattern. The extended, down-sloping trend line shows future support
and resistance zones. A one-day reversal appears on November 3 when prices
pushed above the formation top on high volume, but closed at the low for the day.

--- PAGE 71/1035 ---
Why do these chart patterns form? Look at Figure 3.3. During 1993, the
stock entered the first formation in early April and moved higher on moderate
volume until it reached about 35. There, investors selling the stock matched
buyers eager to own the security and the rise stalled. It traveled sideways until
May 10 when it moved below the prior minor low. As the stock approached the
31 level, it entered a support zone set up by the retracement in mid-March.
The decline stalled and moved sideways for several days. Due to the support
level, many investors believed that the decline was at an end and the stock
would move higher. It did. As volume climbed, the price gapped upward and
quickly soared back to the old high.
The stock ran into selling pressure from institutions and others trying to
sell blocks of shares at a fixed price. The available supply halted the advance.
Prices hung on for a few days, moved a bit lower, and paused before beginning
a rapid decline to a new minor low.
As volume climbed, the stock declined until it touched the lower trend
line, a region of support. Suspecting an oversold stock, investors bought and
forced it higher again. When the stock reached the old high, there were fewer
shares available for purchase. Apparently, those investors and institutions who
were trying to get 35 a share for their stock sold most of their shares in the pre-
ceding months. Soaking up the available supply, the stock gapped upward and
closed above the old high. An upward breakout was at hand.
The stock moved higher but soon formed another descending broaden-
ing formation. This one was compact and tight but had bearish implications.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending
Valero Energy Corp. (Petroleum (Integrated), NYSE, VLO)
Jun 95
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
– 25
– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21
– 20
– 19
Breakout
Throwback
Figure 3.2
Another descending broadening formation, but this time the break-
out is upward. Almost 4 weeks after the breakout, prices throw back to the forma-
tion before ultimately moving higher.

--- PAGE 72/1035 ---
When the stock tried to reach the top trend line but could not, the partial rise
foretold the coming decline. The stock plunged through the lower trending in
late September and continued lower.
If you look at both formations, their stories are nearly the same. There is
a supply of stock available at a fixed price. After exhausting the supply, prices
either rise above the top trend line or decline below the lower one. The deter-
mination on which way things will go is not clear. Sometimes the supply over-
whelms buyers and the stock declines, unable to recover as it pierces the lower
trend line. At other times, the supply gives out and enthusiastic buyers jump in
and push the price higher.
Identification Guidelines
Are there some guidelines that can assist in identifying descending broadening
formations? Yes, and Table 3.1 outlines them.
Shape. The shape of the formation looks like a megaphone with the top
held horizontal. Prices climb until they touch the top trend line, then reverse
direction. On the lower edge, prices decline making a series of lower lows until
they touch the lower trend line.
Identification Guidelines

Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT)
Feb 93
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Partial Rise
Support Zone
Resistance
Resistance
Line
– 41
– 40
– 39
– 38
– 37
– 36
– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
Figure 3.3
Two descending broadening formations. The first formation shows a
trend-line rebound resulting from an earlier support zone. The second formation
shows a partial rise that often precedes the ultimate breakout. Shown are two resis-
tance areas that parallel the trend lines.

--- PAGE 73/1035 ---
Horizontal top resistance line. When two minor highs achieve the
same, or nearly the same, price level, you can draw a horizontal trend line con-
necting them.
Down-sloping trend line. The same applies to the down-sloping trend
line: It requires at least two distinct touches before drawing the trend line.
There is usually ample time to recognize a broadening formation, and many
times there are more than two touches of each trend line.
Volume. Volume tends to rise over the length of the chart pattern, some-
times following the price action. The shape of the pattern looks like a dome
more often than a U-shaped pit or a random pattern.
Premature breakouts. Premature breakouts are rare, so if price closes
above the top trend line or below the bottom trend line, consider it a gen-
uine breakout.
Breakout. A breakout occurs when price closes outside (above or below)
the trend-line boundaries. The breakout can occur in any direction, but the pat-
tern acts as a reversal of the prevailing price trend slightly more often than not.
Partial rise or decline. A partial rise, as shown in Figure 3.3, or a partial
decline is often a clue to the ultimate breakout direction. When prices curl
around on a partial rise or decline and return to the trend line, they usually
break out immediately (that is, without crossing the formation again). 

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending
Table 3.1
Identification Characteristics
Characteristic
Discussion
Shape
Looks like a megaphone, tilted down, with the top of the
formation horizontal and bounded on the bottom by a
down-sloping trend line.
Horizontal top resistance 
A horizontal line of resistance joins the tops as a trend 
line
line. Must have at least two distinct touches (minor
highs) before drawing a trend line.
Down-sloping trend line
The expanding price series is bounded on the bottom by
a down-sloping trend line. Must have at least two distinct
minor lows to create a trend line.
Volume
Upward trend with a domed shape.
Premature breakouts
Very rare. A close outside the trend line is most likely a
genuine breakout.
Breakout
Prices can break out in either direction, usually
accompanied by a rise in volume that soon tapers off.
Partial rise or decline
For an established formation, when prices climb toward
the top trend line or decline toward the lower one but fail
to touch it, prices often reverse direction and break out of
the formation.
Support and resistance
Follows the two trend lines into the future but is sporadic.

--- PAGE 74/1035 ---
Support and resistance. The trend lines, when projected into the future,
can sometimes act as areas of support or resistance, depending on which side
prices are approaching (Figures 3.1, 3.3, and 3.6 show examples). Sometimes
the support or resistance level is active for months or even years at a time.
Focus on Failures
Since descending broadening formations can break out in either direction, I
show both views of failed breakouts. The first one, Figure 3.4, is characterized
by the telltale partial decline in late November. From there, the stock climbs
and eventually pierces the top trend line, as predicted. Once price closes above
the trend line, you would expect it to throw back to the formation top then
continue higher or simply move upward. In this situation, prices stall at 45 and
return to the formation proper—a classic throwback. Unfortunately, instead of
rebounding and heading higher like a typical throwback, the stock continues
down. It does more work inside the formation before shooting out the other
side in a straight-line run.
Had you purchased after the upward breakout, you would have seen the
stock decline from a purchase point of about 44.50 to a low of 36.88. Even a
stop at the lowest point of the formation would have gotten you out at 39, still
Focus on Failures

Pacific Telesis Group (Telecom. Services, NYSE, PAC)
Breakout 
Throwback
Partial Decline
– 45
– 44
– 43
– 42
– 41
– 40
– 39
– 38
– 37
– 36
– 35
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
Jul 91
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Figure 3.4
A descending broadening formation with prices that fail to continue
moving up. The partial decline suggests the ultimate breakout will be upward, but
the rise falters and prices move downward instead.

--- PAGE 75/1035 ---
a hefty decline. However, if you held onto the stock (not recommended, by the
way), it would have been rewarding. The low occurred on April 8 (not shown),
and it turned out to the be the lowest price reached during the next 2 years.
The stock hit its peak in early November 1993 at a price of nearly 60.
Figure 3.5 shows a more harrowing tale because it involves a short sale.
Investors watching the sharp 2-day decline beginning October 14, 1994, would
be tempted to short the stock the next day. Had they done so, or even waited
a few days, they would have bought near the low. From that point on, the stock
moved higher, back into the formation before ultimately soaring out the top.
If you were a novice investor and had not placed a stop on your short sale, your
loss would have taken you from a low of 24.38 to 53, where it peaked near the
end of the study.
Figure 3.5 represents a failure type I call 5% failures. That is when prices
break out in a given direction and move less than 5% before moving substan-
tially in the direction opposite the breakout. This type of failure can turn a
small profit into a large loss if stops are not used.
If there is a bright side to the situations shown in Figures 3.4 and 3.5, it is
that failures do not occur very often. The statistics follow, but for now let me
point out that 8 of every 10 formations continue moving in the direction of the
breakout, at least for a little while. The two figures should also provide a warn-

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending
Healthcare Compare (Medical Services, NASDAQ, HCCC)
Jan 95
Feb
Jul 94
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Downward 
Breakout
Broadening 
Top
– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18
– 17
Figure 3.5
A downward breakout failure. Prices decline less than 5%, turn around,
and eventually hit 42. Such failures are rare, but they do occur, so stop-loss orders
are always important. A broadening top formed in early November.

--- PAGE 76/1035 ---
ing to make sure you use stops to limit your losses. Even if you choose to hold a
mental stop in your head, be sure to pull the trigger once things begin to go bad.
Statistics
Table 3.2 shows general statistics for right-angled and descending broading
formations.
Number of formations. I searched through 500 stocks from mid-1991
to mid-1996 and from 1999 to 2003, with additional patterns found outside of
those ranges. I found 274 patterns.
Reversal or continuation. Patterns acting as reversals occur 143 times,
and 131 act as continuations of the prevailing price trend. In a bull market,
RABDs acting as continuations outperformed. In a bear market, reversals per-
formed better.
Average rise or decline. Both breakout directions perform poorly when
compared to other chart pattern types. If you insist on trading this pattern, do
so in the direction of the prevailing market trend: upward breakouts in bull
markets and downward breakouts in bear markets.
Rises or declines over 45%. Up breakouts in a bull market make a
strong showing with 25% climbing over 45%. Downward breakouts never
Statistics

Table 3.2
General Statistics
Bull 
Bear 
Bull 
Bear 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Number of formations




Reversal (R), continuation (C)
36 R, 
11 R, 
61 R, 
35 R, 
68 C
25 C
26 C
12 C
R/C performance
20% R, 
29% R, 
–13% R, 
–24% R,
32% C
21% C
–20% C
–20% C
Average rise or decline
28%
23%
–15%
–23% 
Rises or declines over 45%
26 or 25%
3 or 8%
2 or 2%
2 or 4%
Change after trend ends
–26%
–35%
55%
55%
Busted pattern performance
44%a
35%a
–26%a
–55%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
13%
–5%
2%
–15%
Days to ultimate high or low




Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 77/1035 ---
score well in this category but in the bear market, upward breakout should be
about double the 8% posted.
Change after trend ends. If you can determine when the trend ends,
trade the stock. When prices peak after an upward breakout, they drop
between 26% and 35%. For downward breakouts, after price reaches the ulti-
mate low, they climb an astounding 55%, on average. 
Busted pattern performance. The numbers tell you how awful things
can get if you hang onto a stock that makes a disappointing move. For exam-
ple, after climbing less than 5% in a bear market, two stocks tumbled an aver-
age of 55%. 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Compare the performance of the index
with the average rise and decline and you will see how the market influences
stocks. The numbers suggest you should trade with the prevailing market trend.
Days to ultimate high or low. It takes between 6 weeks and 5 months
before prices finish trending. Upward breakouts take longer, especially in a
bull market. The numbers demonstrate that the decline in a bear market 
is steeper than is the rise in a bull market, but the move does not go as far or
last as long.
Table 3.3 shows various failure rates for the different market conditions
and breakout directions. Bull market failures start out high, at 14% and 19%
and get higher as the scale on the left increases. Bear markets show a similar
trend but start from lower numbers. Bear markets have lower failure rates until
prices move more than 15%, then patterns with upward breakouts in a bull
market have fewer failures.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending
Table 3.3
Failure Rates
Maximum 
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Price Rise 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
or Decline
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
(%)
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
5 (breakeven)
20 or 19%
2 or 6%
12 or 14%
2 or 4%

31 or 30%
9 or 25%
34 or 39%
5 or 11%

39 or 38%
14 or 39%
51 or 59%
18 or 38%

49 or 47%
20 or 56%
66 or 76%
24 or 51%

56 or 54%
26 or 72%
73 or 84%
30 or 64%

66 or 63%
27 or 75%
76 or 87%
38 or 81%

74 or 71%
28 or 78%
82 or 94%
40 or 85%

79 or 76%
33 or 92%
86 or 99%
45 or 96%

90 or 87%
33 or 92%
87 or 100%
47 or 100%
Over 75
104 or 100%
36 or 100%
87 or 100%
47 or 100%

--- PAGE 78/1035 ---

Table 3.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakouta
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Formation end to breakout
25 days
34 days
45 days
22 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring 
near the 12-month low (L), 
center (C), or high (H)
L1%, C27%, H72%
L6%, C33%, H61%
L45%, C33%, H22%
L51%, C36%, H13%
Percentage rise/decline for each 
12-month lookback period
L11%a, C37%a, H27%
L26%, C24%, H22%
L14%, C16%a, H15%a
L26%a, C20%a, H24%a
Throwbacks/pullbacks
52%
50%
51%
57%
Average time to throwback/pullback 
ends
9 days
11 days
9 days
12 days
Average rise/decline for patterns 
with throwback/pullback
21%
21%
–15%
–22%a
Average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwback/pullback
36%
26%
–16%
–24%a
Performance with breakout gap
23%a
17%
–18%a
–22%a
Performance without breakout gap
29%
25%
–15%a
–23%
Average gap size
$0.26
$0.42
$0.43
$1.78
Partial rise, downward breakout
N/A
N/A
27/50 or 54%
16/20 or 80%
Partial decline, upward breakout
52/82 or 63%
25/38 or 66%
N/A
N/A
Partial rise performance
N/A
N/A
–13%a
–22%a
Partial decline performance
28%
25%
N/A
N/A
Intraformation partial rise failure
12/104 or 12%
6/36 or 17%
10/87 or 11%
4/47 or 9%
Intraformation partial decline failure
8/104 or 8%
4/36 or 11%
5/87 or 6%
3/47 or 6%
Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means not applicable.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 79/1035 ---
Just as with other chart pattern types, the failure rates climb substantially
for minor increases in the maximum price rise or decline. About half the pat-
terns will fail to move more than 20%. 
Later I discuss the measure rule, but suppose it says that prices will climb
from 10 to 13, a 30% move. How likely is that in a bull market? Table 3.3
shows the answer. Since 63% fail to climb more than 30%, it seems unlikely
that prices will reach 13. Be conservative and set a lower target.
Table 3.4 shows breakout- and postbreakout-related statistics.
Formation end to breakout. It takes between 3 and 6 weeks before
prices close outside the pattern’s trend-line boundary. Thus, if you do not
immediately recognize the broadening pattern, you should still have plenty of
time to take appropriate action. 
Yearly position. Where in the yearly price range do we find the break-
out from the broadening pattern? For upward moves, the breakout occurs most
often within a third of the yearly high. Downward moves show the reverse,
with many patterns breaking out near the yearly low.
Yearly position, performance. Which of the three price ranges per-
forms best? The results map across market conditions. Broadening patterns in
bull markets seems to perform best when the breakout is in the middle of the
yearly price range. For bear markets, those with breakouts near the yearly low
perform best. 
Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about half
the time, and it takes the stock less than 2 weeks to return to the breakout
price. When a throwback or pullback occurs, performance suffers. Look for
nearby support or resistance zones that might interfere with price movement
and cause a retrace.
Gaps. Most of the time, breakout day gaps hurt performance. The lone
exception is in a bull market with a downward breakout from an RABD. In that
case gaps help, but the samples are few.
Partial rises and declines. A partial rise or decline works best in a bear
market. They correctly predict the breakout direction between 66% and 80%
of the time. Bull markets do not fare as well, being correct between 54% and
63% of the time. Still, a partial rise or decline allows you to enter a position in
a stock before the breakout and at a better price. 
If you compare the average rise or decline from Table 3.2, you will find
that a partial rise or decline usually hurts performance. 
Intraformation partial rises and declines. Intraformation partial rises
and declines are rare, ranging between 17% for patterns with upward break-
outs in bear markets, to 6% for patterns with downward breakouts. An
intraformation partial rise or decline looks like a loop touching the trend line.
They occur once the pattern is established (at least two touches of each trend
line), but a breakout in the anticipated direction does not follow. Instead, prices
cross the pattern to the opposite trend line. Since the numbers are so low, they
should not be of concern.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending

--- PAGE 80/1035 ---
Table 3.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate high or
low. A pattern in a bull market with an upward breakout stands the best chance
of a good gain. Just 29% (20 + 9) reach the ultimate high in two weeks—the
best (lowest) of the group—but it also shows that nearly half (49%) continue
rising after 70 days. This finding suggests that the combination (bull/up) is the
best performing, and a look back at Table 3.2 confirms that expectation.
What do all the numbers mean? If you have a broadening pattern with a
downward breakout and the general market (as measured by the S&P 500
index) is bullish, scan the table to help determine how long it will take to reach
the ultimate low. There is a good chance that it will occur in the first week, as
33% reach bottom in that period. Since the numbers are additive, nearly half
(42%, or 33 + 9) bottom within 2 weeks. If prices are still tumbling after 3
weeks, then you might be in for a good run. Lower your stops to protect your
profits as the trade progresses.
Watch for trend changes a month into the trade, especially in a bear mar-
ket (11% flame out 35 days after an upward breakout).
Table 3.6 shows size-related statistics. 
Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones except in bear mar-
kets with downward breakouts. How do you use this result? Compute the pat-
tern height from the price of the top trend line to the last touch of the lower
trend line (the lowest low in the pattern). Divide the difference by the break-
out price. If the result is above the median, then you have a tall pattern; below
the median means it is a short one. Invest only in tall patterns unless you feel
confident of your assessment.
Width. Narrow patterns outperform wide ones in a bear market. In a bull
market, there is either no performance difference or wide patterns do slightly
better. I used the median length to separate narrow patterns from wide ones.
Statistics

Table 3.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High or Low
Days:










>70
Bear market, 
up breakout
19%
14%
6%
3%
11%
0%
6%
3%
0%
0%
39%
Bull market, 
up breakout
20%
9%
3%
4%
4%
2%
2%
2%
3%
2%
49%
Bear market, 
down 
breakout
17%
17%
17%
15%
9%
2%
0%
2%
6%
0%
15%
Bull market, 
down 
breakout
33%
9%
10%
3%
3%
5%
5%
6%
0%
0%
25%

--- PAGE 81/1035 ---
Average formation length. The average length measured about 2
months long.
Height and width combinations. The worst performance comes from
patterns that are both short and wide. You will want to avoid those. The best
performance hits twice on tall and wide, once on tall and narrow, and once on
short and narrow.
Table 3.7 shows volume-related statistics.
Volume trend. In three out of four cases, patterns with a rising volume
trend do better than do those with falling volume. The last case resulted 
in a tie.
Volume shapes. Patterns with upward breakouts and U-shaped volume
performed better than the other shapes. For downward breakouts, patterns
with dome-shaped volume worked best.
Breakout volume. Most of the time, heavy breakout volume associated
with better performance. Only from patterns in a bull market with upward
breakouts did light volume outperform, but the samples were few.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending
Table 3.6
Size Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakouta
Tall pattern performance
35%
25%
–18%
–21%
Short pattern performance
23%
21%
–13%
–24%
Median height as a percentage 
13.13%
19.13%
14.20%
22.18%
of breakout price
Narrow pattern performance
28%
26%
–14%
–26%
Wide pattern performance
28%
20%
–17%
–19%
Median length
63 days
63 days
55 days
47 days
Average formation length
76 days
82 days
66 days
64 days
Short and narrow 
performance
27%a
25%
–13%
–26%
Short and wide performance
18%a
14%
–13%a
–16%
Tall and wide performance
39%
24%
–20%a
–21%
Tall and narrow performance
30%a
29%
–16%a
–23%
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 82/1035 ---
Trading Tactics
Table 3.8 outlines trading tactics for descending broadening formations. 
Measure rule. Figure 3.6 illustrates the use of the measure rule. Com-
pute the formation height by first taking the difference between the highest
high (49.50) and the lowest low (43.50). Add the result (6) to the value of the
horizontal trend line to get a target price of 55.50. Prices reach this target dur-
ing mid-March 1996 as the stock climbs on its way to 60.
If the stock breaks out downward, the measure rule computation is nearly
the same. Subtract the formation height from the lowest low giving a target
price of 37.50. Be aware that upward breakouts in a bull market are more likely
to reach their targets (63%) than other combinations. Refer to the Results
Snapshot, “Percentage meeting price target” for the statistics.
Wait for confirmation. You might think that price will break out
upward in a rising price trend, but it does not a suprising percentage of the
time. Thus, you should wait for confirmation—price to close outside the
trend-line boundary—before trading the stock.
Trading Tactics

Table 3.7
Volume Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakout 
Rising volume trend 
performance
30%
24%
–16%
–23%a
Falling volume trend 
performance
26%
21%
–14%
–23%a
U-shaped volume 
pattern performance
34%
27%
–12%
–23%a
Dome-shaped volume pattern 
performance
28%
23%
–19%
–25%a
Neither U-shaped nor dome-
shaped volume pattern 
performance
14%a
13%
–13%a
–19%a
Heavy breakout volume 
performance
26%
24%
–16%
–23%
Light breakout volume 
performance
37%a
21%
–14%a
–22%a
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 83/1035 ---
Stops. Once you know the target price, you can make a profit and loss
assessment of the trade. What is the likely downward move compared with the
target price? Does the potential profit justify the risk of the trade? For Figure
3.6, there is support in the 46 to 47 area. Examining the peaks and valleys of
the prior price action determines support and resistance levels. In March 1995
(not shown in the figure), there is an area of congestion bounded by a sym-
metrical triangle with an apex at about 46. Additional resistance appears in July
and October, as shown. Together, the 46 to 47 area makes a good location for
a stop-loss order.
Let us say the stop is 45.75, just below the bottom of the support area. If
the trade happens at 50.50, which is the close the day after the upward break-
out, that gives a potential loss of less than 10%. With a target price of 55.50,
or 10% upside, the win/loss ratio is an unexciting one to one. In such a situa-
tion, you could either tighten your stop by moving it higher (and risk getting
taken out by normal price action) or look elsewhere for a more profitable trade.
Remember there is no rule that says you have to place a trade.
Intraformation trading. If the broadening pattern is tall enough, go
long after prices rebound off the lower trend line and short when they rebound
off the upper trend line. 

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending
Table 3.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
Compute the formation height by taking the difference
between the horizontal top and the lowest low in the
formation. For upward breakouts, add the result to the value
of the horizontal trend line. For downward breakouts,
subtract the value from the lowest low. The result is the
expected target price.
Wait for confirmation
It is unclear which way prices will break out, so it is best to
wait for prices to close outside the trend lines. Once they do,
expect prices to continue moving in the direction of the
breakout. Place your trades accordingly.
Stops
Once a breakout occurs, consider the opposite side of the
formation as the stop-loss point. However, in many cases you
will want something closer to your purchase price, so look for
nearer support or resistance zones. Once the stock moves
substantially, advance the stop to the break-even point or
higher.
Intraformation 
For aggressive traders, consider placing a trade as prices 
trading
reverse course at the trend line. Go long at the bottom and
short at the top, but be sure to use stops to protect against
an adverse breakout.
Partial rise
Short a stock if you see a partial rise once prices curl around
and begin heading back down in a bear market.

--- PAGE 84/1035 ---
Partial rise. The Statistics section of this chapter discusses partial rises—
80% of the time in a bear market downward breakouts follow. That is high
enough to risk a trade. If you see a partial rise occur (and it really does not mat-
ter how far up it rises, so long as it is not touching or coming too close to the
upper trend line) and it begins heading back down, short the stock. With any
luck, price will shoot out the bottom of the formation and continue lower. As
always, be sure to place a stop-loss order and lower it as prices drop.
Sample Trade
Ralph is a formation trader with a measure of experience milking chart patterns
for all they are worth. When he noticed what he thought was either a descend-
ing broadening wedge or a right-angled descending broadening formation, he
bought the stock. His order, placed at point C in Figure 3.6 (46.38), was just
after the stock bounced off the lower trend line.
He monitored it closely and watched the stock move up the very next day,
then ease lower. After a few days, Ralph saw a symmetrical triangle form and
he became worried. Those formations, he reasoned, usually follow the trend
and the trend was downward. When the stock moved below the lower triangle
trend line, Ralph sold the stock and received a fill at 46.50.
Sample Trade

Flightsafety Intl. Inc. (Aerospace/Defense, NYSE, FSI)
Close-up of 
Symmetrical 
Triangle Near 
Point C
C
A
B
C
Likely Area of Support
Support
Zone
Target Price
Stock Sold
Jan 96
Feb
Mar
Apr
Apr 95
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
– 57
– 56
– 55
– 54
– 53
– 52
– 51
– 50
– 49
– 48
– 47
– 46
– 45
– 44
– 43
– 42
– 41
– 40
Figure 3.6
An upward breakout from a descending broadening formation. To
compute the measure rule for upward breakouts, find the difference between the
high and low in the formation, denoted by points A and B. Add the result to point
A to get the target price. It took almost 7 months for prices to exceed the target.
A small symmetrical triangle appears at point C.

--- PAGE 85/1035 ---
When he erased the lines from his computer screen and looked at the fresh
price chart, he knew he had made the right decision because a partial rise, such as
where the triangle formed, usually portends an immediate downward breakout.
Sure enough, the following day prices dropped even further, tagging the
broadening formation trend line again. Then they rebounded. In the coming
days, he watched as prices surprisingly zipped across the formation and
touched the top trend line. Ralph took a small loss after factoring in commis-
sions. Did he sell too soon or was he just being cautious, and what lessons did
he learn? Spend some time searching for the answers in your own trades and
you will rapidly become a better investor.
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations for selecting broadening 
patterns for improved performance. Refer to the associated table for more
information.
• Use the identification guidelines to select a pattern—Table 3.1.
• Select patterns that follow the trend: upward breakouts in a bull mar-
ket, downward breakouts in a bear market—Table 3.2.
• If you can determine when the trend changes, buy after the stock bot-
toms and hang on as price rises an average of 55%—Table 3.2.
• Failure rates are lowest for patterns with small moves in a bear market
with downward breakouts. Patterns in a bull market with upward
breakouts do better for price runs longer than 15%—Table 3.3.
• In a bull market, select patterns with breakouts in the middle of the
yearly price range. In a bear market, select those with breakouts near
the yearly low—Table 3.4.
• Throwbacks and pullbacks hurt performance. Pick patterns with little
overhead resistance or underlying support—Table 3.4.
• Breakout day gaps hurt performance—Table 3.4.
• A partial rise correctly predicts the downward breakout direction 80%
of the time in a bear market—Table 3.4.
• Watch for a trend change a month after an upward breakout in a bear
market—Table 3.5.
• Select tall patterns—Table 3.6.
• Pick narrow patterns in a bear market—Table 3.6.
• Choose patterns with a rising volume trend—Table 3.7.
• Patterns with a U-shaped volume pattern do well after an upward
breakout. Select patterns with dome-shaped volume and downward
breakouts—Table 3.7.

Broadening Formations, Right-Angled and Descending

--- PAGE 86/1035 ---


Broadening Tops
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Price trend is upward leading to the formation.
Megaphone appearance with higher highs and
lower lows that widen over time. Breakout is
upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
19 out of 23
13 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
15%
11%
Average rise
29%
24%
Change after trend ends
–33%
–33%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Throwbacks
54%
53%
Percentage meeting price target
62%
61%
Surprising findings
The best performers have breakouts near the
yearly low. Performance improves without a
breakout day gap. A partial decline correctly
signals an upward breakout over 70% of the
time. Light breakout volume helps performance.
Synonyms
Expanding triangle, orthodox broadening top,
and five-point reversal
See also
Broadening Bottoms

--- PAGE 87/1035 ---
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Same, but breakout is downward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish reversal
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
18 out of 21
11 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
18% 
3%
Average decline
15% 
20%
Change after trend ends
53% 
49%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Pullbacks
48%
62%
Percentage meeting price target
37% 
32%
Surprising findings
Most perform best when the breakout is near
the yearly low. A pullback hurts performance.
Tall patterns perform better than short ones.
Patterns with U-shaped volume perform best.
Synonyms
Same as for upward breakouts
See also
Same as for upward breakouts
Broadening tops, not surprisingly, act a lot like broadening bottoms. What
separates a top from a bottom is the price trend leading to the chart pattern.
For tops, the price trend is upward; for broadening bottoms, it is downward.
This is an arbitrary distinction I made just to see if the two formations act dif-
ferently. In answer to the question you have probably posed right now: The
two formations have slightly different performance.
A brief review of the Results Snapshot shows that the break-even failure
rate starts out at a high 11% to 18% unless this is a bear market with a down-
ward breakout. In that case, the failure rate is just 3%. At best, broadening tops
have gains averaging 29%, well below the average rise of 36% for all bullish
chart pattern types. Downward breakouts perform just as bad by falling short
of the 18% to 24% average decline for all chart pattern types.
Tour
Broadening formations come in a variety of styles and names. There are the
broadening tops and bottoms, right-angled ascending and descending, expand-
ing triangle, orthodox broadening top, and five-point reversal. The last three—
expanding triangle, orthodox broadening top, and five-point reversal—are

Broadening Tops

--- PAGE 88/1035 ---
synonyms of the broadening top formation, with the last two being based on
five turning points.
For a tour of the formation, look at Figure 4.1. The stock began an uphill
run in December 1994 and paused for about 2 months in May and June. Then
it continued its climb and reached a high in mid-September at a price of 53.75.
Holders of the stock, witnessing the long run, decided to sell their shares, and
the stock headed lower. On September 25, 1995, volume spiked upward and
halted the decline. Investors, seeing a 40% retrace of their gains from the June
level, apparently thought the decline overdone and purchased the stock, send-
ing prices higher.
Prices peaked at a higher level, 54.50, on October 19. Many diligent
investors probably suspected that a double top was forming and promptly sold
their holdings to maximize their gains, sending the price tumbling. Prices con-
firmed the double top when they fell below the confirmation point, or the
lowest low between the two peaks, at 48.75.
Volume picked up and the struggle between supply and demand
reasserted itself. The decline stalled as traders willing to buy the stock over-
whelmed the reluctance to sell. The stock turned around and headed higher.
By this time, chart followers could draw the two trend lines—one across the
twin peaks and another below the two valleys—giving birth to the broadening
Tour

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 96
Feb
Mar
Apr
Jul
Jun 95
ODR
Volume
Double Top
Confirmation Point
One-Day Reversal
Double Top
– 59
– 58
– 57
– 56
– 55
– 54
– 53
– 52
– 51
– 50
– 49
– 48
– 47
– 46
– 45
– 44
– 43
– 42
– 41
– 40
Beneficial Corp. (Financial Services, NYSE, BNL)
Figure 4.1
A double top changed into a broadening formation. The one-day
reversal appeared as the third peak after an unsustainably quick price rise. The
broadening top formation marked a struggle between eager buyers and reluctant
sellers at the lows and the quick-to-take-profit momentum players at the peaks.

--- PAGE 89/1035 ---
top formation. Astute traders jumped on the bandwagon at this point and pur-
chased the stock. They wanted to play the anticipated rise as the formation
broadened out. The stock cooperated and moved higher, reaching the top
trend line once again at a new high of 55.50.
The steepness of the ascent in the latter stages was unsustainable. The
peak looked like a one-day reversal, with a close near the low of the day and a
tall daily price swing. However, volume was unconvincing. It was higher that
day than during the prior week, but it certainly was not of the caliber of the late
November spike. In any case, the stock tumbled and soon reached a new low of
43.50, stopping right at the down-sloping trend line. Once the stock began
moving higher, the momentum players jumped on board and volume increased
along with the price. Buying enthusiasm and rising momentum pushed the
stock higher, climbing through the top trend line. An upward breakout occurred.
Throughout the various peaks and troughs of this formation, there was a
struggle between buyers and sellers. Near the lows, the buyers believed the
stock was oversold and they eagerly bought it. At the top, they quickly sold
their shares and pocketed handsome profits. This selling, of course, sent the
stock back down.
Some investors, seeing the stock decline below their purchase price and
still believing that the stock had value, bought more. That behavior also helped
turn the stock around at the lows and probably explained their heightened
nervousness at the tops. They wanted to keep their gains this time, instead of
watching them evaporate should the stock decline again. 
The formation in Figure 4.1 also makes evident that identifying the ulti-
mate breakout is exceedingly difficult. It appears that each new high or new
low may be the final breakout. Only when prices move in the opposite direc-
tion is it clear that prices will not break out. We explore ways to profit from
this behavior in the Trading Tactics section.
Identification Guidelines
Table 4.1 shows the identification guidelines for the broadening top formation. 
Price trend. The first criterion is the price trend leading to the forma-
tion. This price trend is what differentiates a broadening top from a broaden-
ing bottom. For a broadening top, the price trend should be leading up to the
formation, not down as in its bottom counterparts. This is just an arbitrary des-
ignation I have chosen to distinguish the two formations.
Shape and trend lines. Trend lines drawn across the peaks and valleys
resemble a megaphone. Higher highs and lower lows make the formation obvi-
ous to those versed in spotting chart patterns. The slope of the trend lines is
what distinguishes this formation from some others. The top trend line must
slope up and the bottom one must slope down. When one of the two trend

Broadening Tops

--- PAGE 90/1035 ---
lines is horizontal or nearly so, the formation classifies as a right-angled
ascending or descending broadening formation. When the two trend lines
slope in the same direction, the formation is a broadening wedge.
Touches.There should be at least two minor highs and two minor lows
before the chart pattern becomes a broadening top. Figure 4.1 shows three minor
highs touching the top trend line and four minor lows either nearing or touching
the bottom trend line. The minor highs and minor lows need not alternate as
prices crisscross the formation.
Volume. Linear regression on the volume trend shows it trending up.
Many times, the volume pattern mimics the price pattern: rising and falling
along with price. However, my research shows that a U-shaped volume pattern
occurs most often.
Breakout. A breakout happens when prices move outside the trend-line
boundaries or follow a trend line for an extended time. In Figure 4.1, if you extend
the top trend line upward, it will intersect prices at about 58. Prices push through
this level and move higher. When a breakout occurs, I consider the actual break-
out price to be the value of the highest peak in the formation. In Figure 4.1, for
example, the breakout price is 55.50, or the high at the early December peak.
For an example of how to apply the various guidelines, consider the
broadening top shown in Figure 4.2. At first glance, it looks like a large mega-
phone with price trends that generally follow two sloping trend lines. The top
trend line slopes upward and the bottom one slopes downward, each intersect-
ing the minor highs or lows at least twice. Prices, over time, form higher highs
and lower lows until they break out of the formation, generally moving beyond
the line of trend before retracing.
Identification Guidelines

Table 4.1
Identification Characteristics
Characteristic
Discussion
Price trend
The intermediate-term price trend leading to the formation
should be up.
Shape
Megaphone shape with higher highs and lower lows. Five-point
reversals have three peaks and two troughs.
Trend lines
Prices are bounded by two trend lines: The top one slopes up and
the bottom slopes down.
Touches
Should have at least two minor highs and two minor lows, but
not necessarily alternating touches.
Volume
Trends upward, often with a U-shape.
Breakout
The breakout can occur in either direction and, in several cases,
prices move horizontally for several months before staging a
definitive breakout.

--- PAGE 91/1035 ---

Broadening Tops
Aug 91 Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun






– 55
– 54
– 53
– 52
– 51
– 50
– 49
– 48
– 47
– 46
– 45
– 44
– 43
– 42
– 41
– 40
– 39
ASA Ltd (Investment Co. (Domestic), NYSE, ASA)
Figure 4.2
The broadening top has higher highs and lower lows as the price
action widens over time.





Jan 96
Feb
Mar
Apr
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jul
Jun 95
False Breakout
Prices Fail to Attain
Top Trend Line
– 39
– 38
– 37
– 36
– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
Albertsons Inc. (Grocery, NYSE, ABS)
Figure 4.3
A weak example of a five-point reversal or orthodox broadening top.
It has three minor highs and two minor lows composing the five turning points.

--- PAGE 92/1035 ---
The volume pattern generally rises as prices move up and recedes as prices
move down. Figure 4.2 shows this quite clearly. During the rise in mid-November,
for example, volume jumped upward as prices peaked, then just as quickly
receded as prices declined. Figure 4.3 shows a U-shaped volume trend. Volume
is higher in September and December, and lower in the intervening months.
Orthodox broadening tops and five-point reversals describe the same type
of formation. They are simply broadening tops that have three minor highs
and two minor lows. Figure 4.3, for example, falls into this category. Other
than the name, I found no substantial difference between broadening tops and
orthodox broadening tops or five-point reversals.
Some analysts say five-point reversals are bearish indicators; that the for-
mation predicts a downward breakout. My statistics, admittedly on only 30 for-
mations, suggest this is untrue. Sixteen break out upward and the others break
out downward. The sample size is too small to make a definitive statement.
Focus on Failures
What does a failure look like? Look at Figures 4.3 and 4.4, two examples of
broadening patterns that fail to continue in the expected direction. Figure 4.3
shows a sharp downward thrust that pierces the trend line on high volume. Since
Focus on Failures

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 94
Feb
Mar 93
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Breakout
Point
– 51
– 50
– 49
– 48
– 47
– 46
– 45
– 44
– 43
– 42
– 41
– 40
– 39
– 38
– 37
– 36
Arco Chemical Co. (Chemical (Basic), NYSE, RCM)
Figure 4.4
Prices in this broadening top moved horizontally for 6 months before
staging an upward breakout. This horizontal movement is a common occurrence
with broadening tops.

--- PAGE 93/1035 ---
this is clearly outside the lower trend line, and coupled with the failure of prices
to attain the upper trend line, a downward breakout is at hand. But the downward
movement stalls on very high volume, turns around, and moves higher. This is
an example of a 5% failure; that is, prices break out then move less than 5% in
the direction of the breakout before heading substantially in the other direction. 
Contrast the behavior shown in Figure 4.3 with that shown in Figure 4.4.
I include this chart because I have noticed that a large number of broadening
formations act this way. Instead of making a clear up or down thrust that
pierces the trend line, prices move horizontally for months before finally mov-
ing above or below the formation highs or lows.
In the case of Figure 4.4, prices decline below the low in early July and
halt. They climb for a bit then recede again and reach a new low in early
August. Another recovery sees prices rise no higher than 44 for about half a
year before finally staging an upward breakout.
Statistics
Table 4.2 shows general statistics for this chart pattern.
Number of formations. I found 493 broadening tops in data from mid-
1991 to mid-1996 and from 1999 to 2003 in 500 stocks. 

Broadening Tops
Table 4.2
General Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout 
Number of formations




Reversal (R), continuation (C)
183 C
62 C
182 R
66 R
R/C performance
24% Ra, 
N/A R, 
15% R, 
20% R, 
29% C
24% C
16% Ca
N/A C
Average rise or decline
29%
24%
–15%
–20%
Rises or declines over 45%
43 or 23%
11 or 18%
4 or 2%
5 or 8%
Change after trend ends
–33%
–33%
53%
49%
Busted pattern performance
40%a
42%a
–33%a
–27%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
11%
–4%
1%
–14%
Days to ultimate high or low




Note: Minus sign means decline. N/A means no avilable samples.
a Fewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 94/1035 ---
Reversal or continuation. The pattern splits almost evenly between act-
ing as reversals of the prevailing price trend and as continuations. By defini-
tion, since we are dealing with a top, an upward breakout is a continuation and
a downward breakout means a reversal.
When statistics are available, continuations perform better than reversals,
but the small sample size might change results.
Average rise or decline. The pattern is a poor performer. Both upward
and downward breakouts fall short of the average rise or decline for all chart
pattern types.
Rises or declines over 45%. Almost a quarter (23%) of the broadening
patterns in a bull market with upward breakouts climb over 45%. That is
respectable. Downward breakouts never fare well in this category.
Change after trend ends. After prices reach the ultimate high, they
tumble by about 33%. Since that decline is above the average rise, you give
back all of your gains and more if you do not sell in a timely manner. Down-
ward breakouts do substantially better by rising about 50% after the breakout.
Of course, if you shorted the stock and it dropped 20% and then soared by
50%, you would be kicking yourself for not closing out your position. Trade
this one carefully.
Busted pattern performance. If a pattern busts, consider trading it in
the new direction. Due to the low sample counts, do not expect to achieve the
results shown in the table.
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Notice how the general market helped
or hindered prices. The numbers, when compared to the average rise or
decline, suggest you trade with the market trend (bull market, upward break-
outs and bear market, downward breakouts).
Days to ultimate high or low. The time it takes price to rise to the ulti-
mate high or sink to the ultimate low varies from 116 days to 29. The decline
in a bear market must be steeper than is the rise in a bull market, but prices do
not move as far.
Table 4.3 shows failure rates for broadening tops. Bear markets with
downward breakouts have the lowest failure rates, 3%, but the edge over bull
markets with up breakouts does not last long. For moves of 15% and higher,
the bull market, up breakout combination shows the lowest failure rate. 
Notice how the failure rate increases as the maximum price rise or decline
changes. For bear markets with downward breakouts, just 3% fail to decline
more than 5%, but 23% fail to decline more than 10%, almost eight times as
many as the 3% rate. This nearly doubles again, to 45%, for patterns that fail
to decline more than 15%.
Table 4.4 shows breakout- and postbreakout-related statistics for broad-
ening tops.
Formation end to breakout. It takes about a month before prices close
outside the trend-line boundary in a breakout. Thus, even though you may be
Statistics

--- PAGE 95/1035 ---
late spotting a broadening top, you may still have time to trade it. Bull markets
take about a week longer to break out than bear markets.
Yearly position. Where does the breakout from a broadening top occur
most often in the yearly price range? As you might guess, upward breakouts
appear near the yearly high, but downward breakouts occur in the middle 
of the range. 
Yearly position, performance. The best performing patterns have
breakouts near the yearly low, but many have low sample counts. 
Throwbacks and pullbacks. A throwback or pullback occurs about half
the time, and it takes fewer than 2 weeks for the stock to return to the break-
out price. When a throwback or pullback occurs, it hurts performance ex-
cept in countertrend breakouts (bear market, up breakout and bull market,
down breakout). 
Gaps. When a gap occurs during an upward breakout, performance suf-
fers. Downward breakouts show minimal performance difference. However,
notice how large the gaps are for downward breakouts.
Partial rises and declines. Using a partial rise or decline to enter a trade
before the breakout is a reliable trading technique. You get in at a better price,
and it accurately predicts the breakout direction. The best showing is when a
partial decline occurs in a bear market. An upward breakout follows 79% of the
time. Table 4.4 shows the other combinations and results.
Intraformation partial rises and declines. How often does a partial rise
or decline occur that does not lead to an immediate breakout? The rate ranges

Broadening Tops
Table 4.3
Failure Rates
Maximum 
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Price Rise
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market,
or Decline 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
(%)
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
5 (breakeven)
28 or 15%
7 or 11%
32 or 18%
2 or 3%

53 or 29%
14 or 23%
74 or 41%
15 or 23%

73 or 40%
24 or 39%
103 or 57%
30 or 45%

89 or 49%
36 or 58%
133 or 73%
45 or 68%

98 or 54%
42 or 68%
149 or 82%
50 or 76%

109 or 60%
44 or 71%
158 or 87%
54 or 82%

120 or 66%
44 or 71%
167 or 92%
57 or 86%

145 or 79%
54 or 87%
179 or 98%
62 or 94%

161 or 88%
57 or 92%
182 or 100%
65 or 98%
Over 75
183 or 100%
62 or 100%
182 or 100%
66 or 100%

--- PAGE 96/1035 ---

Table 4.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Formation end to breakout
33 days
28 days
34 days
26 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring 
near the 12-month low (L), 
center (C), or high (H)
L3%, C9%, H88%
L5%, C26%, H69%
L19%, C48%, H33%
L29%, C49%, H22%
Percentage rise/decline for each 
12-month lookback period
L36%a, C19%a, H29%
L34%a, C27%a, H23%
L18%, C16%, H12%
L23%a, C22%, H15%a
Throwbacks/pullbacks
54%
53%
48%
62%
Average time to throwback/pullback 
ends
11 days
11 days
9 days
11 days
Average rise/decline for patterns 
with throwback/pullback
24%
25%
–15%
–18%
Average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwback/pullback
34%
24%a
–15%
–25%a
Performance with breakout gap
26%
16%a
–15%a
–21%a
Performance without breakout gap
29%
26%
–15%
–20%a
Average gap size
$0.44
$0.39
$0.78
$1.00
Partial rise, downward breakout
N/A
N|A
110/181 or 61%
44/59 or 75%
Partial decline, upward breakout
63/88 or 72%
31/39 or 79%
N/A
N/A
Partial rise performance
N/A
N/A
–16%
–19%
Partial decline performance
29%
21% 
N/A
N/A
Intraformation partial rise failure
17/183 or 9%
6/62 or 10%
14/182 or 8%
3/66 or 5%
Intraformation partial decline failure
15/183 or 8%
4/62 or 6%
14/182 Or 8%
13/66 or 20%
Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means not applicable. 
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 97/1035 ---

Broadening Tops
from 5% to 20%. These are the information partial rises and declines. They look
like loops touching a trend line, and they occur after the pattern is established. 
Table 4.5 shows a frequency distribution of days to the ultimate high or
low. For example, in a bull market with an upward breakout, almost half (48%)
take longer than 70 days to reach the ultimate high. About a quarter (27%, or
22 + 5) top out in fewer than 2 weeks. This observation suggests that in a bull
market, you should be patient. 
In a bear market with a downward breakout, 30% reach bottom in the
first week. Half (48%) bottom in 2 weeks. Just 11% are still searching for the
ultimate low after 70 days. Thus, be prepared to take profits quickly. 
Scan across the rows for upward blips in the numbers. They usually occur
about a month after the breakout and signal a possible trend change. Bear mar-
kets are especially prone to this behavior (4 to 6 weeks after the breakout,
according to Table 4.5).
Table 4.6 shows statistics related to size. 
Height. In most cases, tall patterns do better than do their short coun-
terparts. The one exception is in a bear market with an upward breakout. 
To use this information, measure the pattern’s height from the highest
high to the lowest low. Divide the difference by the breakout price (for upward
breakouts, it is the highest high in the pattern; for downward breakout, use the
lowest low). Then compare the result with the median shown in Table 4.6. A
result higher than the median means you have a tall pattern; lower means a
shorter pattern. For best results, select tall broadening tops and avoid short ones.
Width. Sometimes wide patterns outperform (bull market, up breakout
and bear market, down breakout), and sometimes narrow ones do better (bear
market, up breakout). I used the median length as the separator between wide
and narrow.
Table 4.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High or Low
Days:










>70
Bear market, 
up breakout
18%
10%
5%
8%
8%
3%
2%
2%
0%
5%
40%
Bull market, 
up breakout
22%
5%
5%
2%
6%
3%
3%
3%
2%
2%
48%
Bear market, 
down 
breakout
30%
18%
12%
9%
5%
8%
5%
2%
2%
0%
11%
Bull market, 
down 
breakout
34%
8%
5%
4%
5%
4%
5%
4%
2%
3%
26%

--- PAGE 98/1035 ---
Statistics

Average formation length. The average pattern width ranges from 49
days to 65 days, or about 2 months long. If you compare the average length
with the average rise or decline from Table 4.2, you see that the highest aver-
age length (bull market, up breakout) is also the best performer. For downward
breakouts, the widest pattern (bear market, downward breakout) is also the best
performer.
Height and width combinations. Table 4.6 shows the performance
results after combining the characteristics of height and width. Due to the low
sample counts, the results are inconsistent.
Table 4.7 shows volume-related statistics. 
Volume trend. Patterns in bull markets do better with a falling volume
trend. Bear market patterns excel with a rising volume trend.
Volume shapes. Most of the time, patterns with U-shaped volume per-
form well. The exception is for patterns with upward breakouts in a bull mar-
ket. They perform better with dome-shaped volume.
Breakout volume. In all cases, light breakout volume either has no effect
or helps performance.
Table 4.6
Size Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout 
Tall pattern performance
39%
21%
–17%
–21%
Short pattern performance
22%
28%
–13%
–19%
Median height as a percentage 
14.66%
16.53%
15.95%
21.72%
of breakout price
Narrow pattern performance
27%
28%
–15%
–20%
Wide pattern performance
31%
21%
–15%
–21%
Median length
52 days
40 days
49 days
38 days
Average formation length
65 days
49 days
56 days
61 days
Short and narrow performance
21%
35%a
–15%
–19%a
Short and wide performance
23%
18%a
–10%a
–19%a
Tall and wide performance
36%
23%a
–17%
–22%a
Tall and narrow performance
45%
19%a
–15%a
–20%a
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer Less than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 99/1035 ---

Broadening Tops
Trading Tactics
Table 4.8 outlines trading tactics for broadening top formations. 
Measure rule. The first thing to consider about trading tactics is the
measure rule. The measure rule predicts the price to which the stock will
move. For many formations, one simply computes the height of the formation
and adds the result to the breakout price. Broadening formations are not much
different. Consider Figure 4.5. The height of the formation is the difference
between the highest high (12.13) and the lowest low (10), or 2.13. For upward
breakouts, add the height to the highest high in the chart pattern giving a min-
imum price move of 14.26, as shown in the figure.
How do you make use of the measure rules? Imagine that you are con-
sidering purchasing the stock. Since it is never clear which way a broadening
formation will ultimately break out, it is difficult to pick a good long-term
entry point. The easiest way to invest using the formation is to buy just after
the stock turns at the bottom trend line.
Go long at the low. Since a broadening formation requires two points
along the top trend line and two along the bottom before the formation appears,
point A in Figure 4.5 shows one likely investment location. Before placing the
Table 4.7
Volume Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout 
Rising volume trend 
performance
27%
27%
–14%
–21%
Falling volume trend 
performance
32%
18%a
–16%
–17%a
U-shaped volume 
pattern performance
25%
32%
–17%
–22%
Dome-shaped volume pattern 
performance
34%
20%a
–15%
–19%a
Neither U-shaped nor dome-
shaped volume pattern 
performance
25%
16%a
–9%
–13%a
Heavy breakout volume 
performance
28%
24%
–15%
–19%
Light breakout volume 
performance
32%
25%a
–15%
–24%a
Note: Minus sign means decline. 
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 100/1035 ---
Trading Tactics

Table 4.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
Compute the height between the highest high and the
lowest low in the formation. Add or subtract the height from
the highest high or lowest low, respectively. The results are
the target prices for upward and downward breakouts.
Go long at the low
Once a broadening top appears, buy after the stock makes its
turn at the low.
Long stop
Place a stop-loss order 0.15 below the minor low. Should the
stock reverse course, you will be protected.
Go short at the high
Sell short after prices start heading down at the top.
Short stop
Place a stop 0.15 above the minor high to protect against an
adverse breakout. Cover the short when it turns at the bottom
trend line and starts moving up. For a downward breakout,
cover as it nears the target price or any support level.
Partial decline
Go long if a broadening top shows a partial decline. Consider
adding to your position once it makes an upward breakout.
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
Jul 91
Stop-Loss Point
Flag Formation
Target Price
B
A
Double Top
– 17
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
– 8
– 7
Esterline Technologies (Precision Instrument, NYSE, ESL)
Figure 4.5
Use the measure rule to compute the target price. First, compute the
formation height from the highest high to the lowest low then add or subtract the
height from the highest high or lowest low, respectively. Depending on the break-
out direction, the result is the expected target price.

--- PAGE 101/1035 ---

Broadening Tops
buy order, compute the target price using the measure rule. The target price
will help you determine if the potential gain is worth the risk. In the example
shown in Figure 4.5, the purchase price is about 10.38 and the target price is
14.25, a 37% move. The stop loss should be 9.85, for a potential loss of 5%,
which gives a reward-to-risk ratio of 7 to 1, more than enough to risk a trade.
On an upward breakout, prices reach the target about 60% of the time.
Thus, do not depend on prices reaching the target.
Long stop. Buy the stock as soon after it touches the lower trend line and
moves higher. Place a stop-loss order 0.15 below the lowest low (0.15 below
point A). Should prices drop, your position will likely be sold before a large 
loss occurs.
If the stock fails to break out upward, perhaps you can join the ride to the
upper trend line. Buy when prices turn upward at the lower trend line, then be
ready to sell once prices reach the old high. Prices may pause for a bit before
moving higher and tagging the top trend line or they may reverse at this point.
Make sure your stops have been raised to protect your profits.
What about the measure rule for downward breakouts? Again, the for-
mation height is 2.13. Subtract 2.13 from the lowest low (10) to arrive at the
target price of 7.87. If prices break out downward, they should reach 7.87.
However, the reliability of the target price for downward breakouts is just 35%
—not very reassuring.
Short tips. For short positions in broadening tops, open the short after
the price touches point B and begins heading down. Place a stop 0.15 above the
highest high (12.28 in this case) to limit your losses. Lower your stop to the
next minor high or apex of the broadening top (either 11.88 or 11.13 in this
case) once the stock nears point A. Sometimes the stock will not make it down
to the trend line before beginning to move up. At other times, there is a
lengthy pause before prices turn around or continue down. A lower stop-loss
point helps you achieve at least some measure of profit.
Partial decline. The last trading tactic is to look out for partial rises or
declines, which occur when prices begin to cross the formation but do not
come close to the opposite side. Instead, prices reverse course and break out
soon after. When you see a partial rise or decline, place a trade once the stock
reverses course. If a breakout happens, then consider adding to your position.
Sample Trade
Sandra has always taken a liking to the stock market but never had enough
money to jump into the game. Still, she paper traded stocks just to get a feel for
the markets and dreamed of one day trading for real. Then her parents died in
a tragic car accident with a drunk driver.
The year that followed was tough for Sandra because she was close to
them and missed them dearly. She bought a dog to help fill the void in her life,

--- PAGE 102/1035 ---
For Best Performance

but it was not the same. Fortunately, her parents had insurance and a few sav-
ings, all of which she inherited. After paying taxes to the government, she sud-
denly realized there was no need to continue working. “Why wait till I’m older
when my health might be gone or I might die young like my parents?” She
retired at 29.
Sandra knew that if she cut her expenses to the bone she could live off the
savings. She paid off the mortgage, the car loan, and the credit card balances,
and she stopped going out to eat in restaurants. Her lifestyle changed to
accommodate the limited income, but one thing she would not compromise:
her paper trading.
After opening a brokerage account, she waited for the perfect trade and
finally found it; the one shown in Figure 4.5. She saw the broadening top for-
mation early enough to buy into the stock before the breakout. Two days after
the stock reached point A, she placed her order and received a fill at 10.50.
Immediately, she placed a stop 0.15 below the lowest low, or 9.85 for a poten-
tial loss of 6%.
Sandra applied the measure rule and was looking at a target of 14.25. If
everything worked as expected, that would give her a return of over 35%. After
she placed the trade, she sat back and waited but kept an eye on the price
action. When prices paused at the high of the formation, she wondered if the
trend was going to reverse. She considered taking her profits and running but
decided against it. After a few days, she recognized a flag formation and hoped
that it represented a half-staff move (the flag being a halfway point in the
upward move). If that were true, she could expect a climb to 13.25 (that is the
distance from the top of the flag (12.13) to the start of the move at 10 projected
upward using the lowest low in the flag at 11.13).
A few days later, the stock not only fulfilled the measure rule for the flag
formation, but for the broadening top as well. Did Sandra sell? No. Since the
stock was moving up, she decided to let her profits ride. However, she did raise
her stop to 11.85, or 0.15 below the formation high. She viewed this point as a
support zone and hoped that should the stock retreat to that level, it would
rebound before taking her out.
In mid-February, just after the second peak around 17 appeared, she rec-
ognized a double top formation. She moved her stop to 0.15 below the confir-
mation point, or 14.25. About 2 weeks after raising her stop, her position sold
when the stock plunged from the prior close at 15.63 to 12.13. After commis-
sions, she made 33% in less than 4 months.
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations to help select broadening
tops that perform better after the breakout. Consult the associated table for
more information.

--- PAGE 103/1035 ---
• Review the identification guidelines for correct selection—Table 4.1
• Select patterns in line with the market trend (bull market, upward
breakout or bear market, downward breakout). They show the best
performance—Table 4.2.
• Bear markets decline at a steeper slope than bull markets rise, but the
move is not as far—Table 4.2.
• Select patterns in a bull market with upward breakouts for the lowest
failure rates—Table 4.3.
• Pick patterns with breakouts near the yearly low—Table 4.4.
• A partial rise or decline correctly predicts the breakout direction most
of the time—Table 4.4.
• Half the bear market patterns with down breakouts reach the ultimate
low in about 2 weeks. Be prepared to take profits quickly—Table 4.5.
• In a bear market, expect a trend change 4 to 6 weeks after the break-
out—Table 4.5.
• Select tall patterns—Table 4.6.
• Pick bull market patterns with a falling volume trend and bear market
patterns with a rising volume trend—Table 4.7.
• Most patterns do best with U-shaped volume—Table 4.7.

Broadening Tops

--- PAGE 104/1035 ---


Broadening Wedges,
Ascending
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Prices follow two up-sloping trend lines that
broaden out. Breakout is upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
6 out of 23
10 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
2%
0%
Average rise
38%
18%
Change after trend ends
–31%
–30%
Volume trend
Upward
Flat
Throwbacks
50%
70%
Percentage meeting price target
69%
60%
Surprising findings
Throwbacks hurt performance. Patterns with
heavy breakout volume perform better.
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Same, but breakout is downward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish reversal

--- PAGE 105/1035 ---
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
14 out of 21
20 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
11%
14%
Average decline
17% 
21%
Change after trend ends
49%
37%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Pullbacks
57%
52%
Percentage meeting price target
58%
86%
Surprising findings
Pullbacks hurt performance but breakout day
gaps help. A partial rise predicts a downward
breakout. Narrow patterns perform better
than wide ones. Heavy breakout volume
propels price farther.
The Results Snapshot shows statistics for the ascending broadening wedge
(ABW). Since the pattern is so rare in a bear market, many of the remarks in
this chapter concern bull markets only. The break-even failure rate is probably
higher than the 2% shown in a bull market due to the low sample count. For
downward breakouts, the break-even failure rate is probably accurate at 11%.
The 38% average rise is above the 36% rise for other bullish chart patterns. 
If you can tell when the trend changes, you can make a lot of money after
a downward breakout. For example, after the stock reaches the ultimate low,
prices rise an average of 49%. Thus, even if you miss the turn, there are still
profits waiting if you trade the pattern properly.
ABWs have a few surprises, most of which we have seen before. A partial
rise comes at the end of the pattern, and it accurately predicts a downward
breakout about 75% of the time. More about that and the other surprises in the
Statistics section.
Tour
What does an ascending broadening wedge look like? Consider the chart pat-
tern in Figure 5.1. The first thing you notice is the two sloping trend lines; the
top one has a slightly steeper slope than the bottom one. Together, the two
trend lines spread out over time but both slope upward. Once prices pierce the
bottom trend line, they drop rapidly. The chart looks like a pie-shaped wedge
that slopes uphill. That is why it is called an ascending broadening wedge. The
price action alternates and is contained by two nonparallel trend lines. 
Figure 5.2 shows a better example of a broadening wedge, with two up-
sloping trend lines where the slope of the top trend line is much steeper than
the bottom one.

Broadening Wedges, Ascending

--- PAGE 106/1035 ---
Tour

Air Express Intl. Corp. (Air Transport, NASDAQ, AEIC)
Jan 93
Feb
Mar
Apr
Jul 92
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
– 20
– 19
– 18
– 17
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
Figure 5.1
An ascending broadening wedge. Two up-sloping trend lines contain
prices that broaden over time.
Barrick Gold (Gold/Silver Mining, NYSE, ABX)
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
– 11
– 10
– 9
Partial Rise
Failed Partial Rise
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Sep 91
Oct
Nov
Dec
Pullback
Figure 5.2
An ascending broadening wedge. The broadening feature is clear in
this chart. The partial rise and failure to touch the upper trend line is a signal of an
impending trend change.

--- PAGE 107/1035 ---
Figures 5.1 and 5.2 both show a similar situation. The formation appears
at the end of a rising price trend and signals a reversal. Although a reversal is
not always the case, nor is the formation required to be at the end of a rising
price trend, both situations occur more often than not.
Figure 5.2 also shows an interesting pattern that is key in identifying the
start of a new price trend: the partial rise. After touching the lower trend line,
prices again move up but fail to touch the higher trend line. As prices descend,
they pierce the lower trend line and continue moving down. The chart also
shows a similar situation that occurs earlier in the price pattern, around the
start of the new year: That rising price trend fails to touch the upper trend line.
Prices return to the lower trend line, then rebound and zoom up again to
touch the higher trend line. The partial rise fails to predict a change in trend.
We explore partial rises later.
Why does a broadening wedge form? Pretend for a moment that you are
the head of an investment conglomerate that has big bucks to spend and wants
to buy shares in another company. When the price is low, you instruct your
trading department to begin buying. The sudden buying demand forces the
price to climb even though the trading department spreads its orders over sev-
eral days and through several brokers. The trading department tries to keep its
buying quiet, but the word gets out that you are in the market. The momen-
tum players jump on your coattails and ride the stock upward by buying too.
This sends the stock higher than you expected, so your trading department
stops buying for the moment.
Value investors, sensing an overbought situation developing, are willing
to sell their shares at the higher price. Soon the stock is moving down again.
But before it can reach its old low, the buy-the-dip crowd jumps in and halts
the decline. Your trading department, seeing a higher low form, jumps back in
and buys while the price is still reasonable. Some new value investors also
decide the stock is worthy of a flyer and add to the buying pressure. The com-
pany itself gets into the act and buys shares authorized by the board of direc-
tors as a share-buyback program announced long ago. The buyback program
is nearing the expiration date and the company feels it is the right time to buy
to complete their promise to shareholders.
The stock makes a new high. When it climbs high enough, the selling
pressure overwhelms the buying demand and sends the shares lower, but the
price will not drop far—not with everyone trying to buy at a good price. What
you have then are much higher highs from the unbridled buying enthusiasm
and higher, but more sane, lows as your conglomerate and the company itself
try to buy near a fixed low price. You never quite succeed and pay higher and
higher prices as the minor lows move up.
Soon, however, the stock is too pricey even for your tastes. You may even
decide it is time to sell some, or all, of your holdings. Meanwhile, the momen-
tum players send the stock coasting higher, but this time the price does not
come close to the upper trend line.

Broadening Wedges, Ascending

--- PAGE 108/1035 ---
Everyone has an ear to the ground listening, trying to figure out what all the
buying enthusiasm is about. In the distance, a rumble sounds. The same-store
sales numbers are going to be lower this quarter, the shorts say. This time the
rumor finds sympathetic ears. The rumble heard earlier is the stampede of the
smart money running for the exits. The price drops quickly. It may hover for a bit
around support zones while novice investors, who have not gotten the word, buy
the stock. When they finish placing their trades, the meager buying demand
abates and the stock crashes through the lower trend line and heads down further.
Identification Guidelines
There are a number of identification guidelines, outlined in Table 5.1, that
make this formation unique. As I discuss the different guidelines, consider the
ascending broadening wedge depicted in Figure 5.3. This formation is differ-
ent from Figures 5.1 and 5.2 in that it is born from a region of consolidation.
From the beginning of the study in July 1991, prices move generally horizon-
tally and do not fall much below the 15.38 level (Figure 5.3 shows only a por-
tion of the prior price action).
The situation changes just before the new year. Prices start moving up on
December 23. They reach a new high in mid-January but soon move down. At
that point, two tentative trend lines connect the highs and lows. Although it is
too early to form a definitive conclusion, a broadening wedge appears to be
taking shape. After prices move up and touch the upper trend line then pull
Identification Guidelines

Table 5.1
Identification Characteristics
Characteristic
Discussion
Shape
Looks like a megaphone, tilted up, with price action that
outlines two up-sloping trend lines.
Trend lines
The top trend line has a steeper upward slope than the lower
one and neither is horizontal.
Touches
There should be at least three distinct touches (or near
touches) of the trend lines on each side. This helps assure
proper identification and performance of the formation.
Volume
Irregular with a slight tendency to rise over the length of the
formation.
Premature breakouts
Very rare. A close below the lower trend line is usually a
genuine breakout.
Breakout
The breakout direction is downward the vast majority of
times, but an upward breakout is not unheard of.
Partial rise
Prices touch the lower trend line, climb toward the top trend
line, but fail to touch it. Prices reverse direction and break out
downward from the formation.

--- PAGE 109/1035 ---
back to the lower one again, the broadening wedge formation is clearly visible.
At the start of March, prices move higher but quickly stall, turn around, and
pierce the lower trend line. The partial rise and trend-line penetration suggest
a trend change is at hand.
It is a false breakout. Prices travel higher for 3 days in a tight, narrow pattern
then zoom upward and touch the upper trend line. The bottom trend line has to
be redrawn to accommodate the slight decline below the old trend line. Clearly,
prices have more work to do before declining below the lower trend line.
A month later, prices return to the lower trend line and move higher for
a few days. However, the rise stalls and prices pierce the lower trend line. Like
a replay of the price action a month earlier, prices pull back to the trend line
and start moving higher. However, this rise falters on low volume and prices
quickly return to the lower trend line. When prices gap down on April 16, the
genuine breakout occurs. In rapid fashion, prices plummet to below 12.75,
nearly a 50% decline from the high.
Shape and trend lines. Looking back at Figures 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3, there
are several characteristics that ascending broadening wedges have in common.
The overall shape appears as a megaphone, but this megaphone tilts upward:
both trend lines slope higher. The upper trend line has a higher slope than the
lower one, giving the formation a broadening appearance. 
Touches. In my studies of ascending broadening wedges, I select forma-
tions that have at least three touches of each trend line (or at least come close). The

Broadening Wedges, Ascending
Fleetwood Enterprises (Manuf. Housing/Rec. Veh., NYSE, FLE)
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Nov 91
Dec
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
 – 11
 – 10
 – 9
 – 8
Partial Rise
False Breakout 
Figure 5.3
A broadening formation that fails to continue moving down, requir-
ing a redraw of the formation boundaries. The internal partial rise is rare, occurring
in about 5% of the formations.

--- PAGE 110/1035 ---
three-touch minimum helps remove consideration given to normal price
action and helps identify reliable chart patterns.
Volume. The volume pattern is irregular but generally rises as prices move
up and recedes as prices decline. Although it is not clear from the charts, volume
tends to rise over time. However, this tendency is slight when considering all
ascending broadening wedges and is not a mandatory selection guideline.
Breakouts. Figure 5.3 shows an exceptional premature breakout. Usu-
ally, prices follow the lower trend line and do not penetrate it until very near
the breakout. When prices do break out, the price action can be messy, as
shown in the figure. Sometimes price runs straight through the lower trend
line without pausing, and sometimes it weaves around the trend line before
finally continuing down. In either case, the breakout is usually downward.
Partial rise. The partial rise, already mentioned, occurs in half of the
ascending broadening wedges. Since it usually occurs just before a breakout, it
is an important trend change indicator. In a partial rise, prices start moving up,
after having touched the lower trend line, then stop before touching (or com-
ing close to) the upper one. Prices return to the lower trend line and usually
head lower, staging a genuine breakout. Note that a partial rise must begin
from the lower trend line, not as an upward retrace from the top trend line.
Focus on Failures
Figure 5.4 shows what a failure looks like. Although prices break out down-
ward, they fail to continue moving down by more than 5%. The breakout
Focus on Failures

Eaton Corp. (Auto Parts (OEM), NYSE, ETN)
– 62
– 61
– 60
– 59
– 58
– 57
– 56
– 55
– 54
– 53
– 52
– 51
– 50
– 49
– 48
– 47
– 46
– 45
– 44
– 43
– 42
– 41
Jan 94
Feb
Mar
Jul 93
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Breakout 
Pullback
Figure 5.4
An ascending broadening wedge that fails to continue moving down.
Prices decline less than 5% below the breakout point before moving higher.

--- PAGE 111/1035 ---
occurs at a price of 50.13 and prices move to a low of 48.63 about 2 weeks later,
resulting in a 3% decline—too small to register as a success.
Only 22 out of 187, or 12%, of the formations breaking out downward
fail to continue moving down by more than 5%. However, failures do occur. A
friend of mine found out the hard way. She blindly shorted an ascending
broadening wedge, and, despite a 74% chance that the formation would break
out downward, she was stuck with a losing position when the probability went
against her. As with most chart patterns, it pays to wait for a confirmed break-
out before investing.
Statistics
Table 5.2 shows general statistics for ascending broadening wedges.
Number of formations. Despite searching through years of daily price
data, I did not find as many patterns as I wanted: 255. When you split them
into four categories and most of them bunch into a bull market with a down-
ward breakout, what is an author to do? I decided to leave the tables in the
standard format, hoping that even a little information is better than none.
Reversal or continuation. The vast majority of the time (64%, anyway),
the pattern acts as a reversal of the prevailing price trend. When the breakout
is upward, we find more acting as continuations of the trend than reversals.
When the breakout is in the direction of the prevailing market trend (upward
breakout, bull market or downward breakout, bear market), reversals outper-
form continuations.

Broadening Wedges, Ascending
Table 5.2
General Statistics
Bull 
Bear 
Bull 
Bear 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Number of formations




Reversal (R), continuation (C)
14 R, 44 C
1 R, 9 C
132 R, 34 C
17 R, 4 C
R/C performance
46% R, 
14% R, 
–17% R, 
–21% R,
36% C
19% C
–17% C
–19% C
Average rise or decline
38%
18%
–17%
–21%
Rises or declines over 45%
19 or 33%
0 or 0%
5 or 3%
1 or 5%
Change after trend ends
–31%
–30%
49%
37%
Busted pattern performance
45%a
30%a
–37%a
N/A
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
17%
–2%
3%
–7%
Days to ultimate high or low




Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means no samples available.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 112/1035 ---
Statistics

Average rise or decline. When the breakout goes against the prevailing
market trend, performance suffers. Thus, it is more profitable to trade with the
trend instead of against it.
Rises or declines over 45%. Only in a bull market with an upward
breakout does the pattern begin to shine. Thirty-three percent of the 58 pat-
terns rise more than 45%. For the other categories, do not expect a large gain.
Change after trend ends. Once price reaches the ultimate high or low,
what happens? After the high, prices tumble 30% on average. After the low,
they climb 37% in a bear market and 49% in a bull market. If you can tell when
the stock has topped out or bottomed, take appropriate action by selling short
or buying, respectively.
Busted pattern performance. When price moves less than 5% after the
breakout and reenters the chart pattern, trade the new direction. 
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. Table 5.2 shows the influence of the
general market on the average rise or decline. In a bull market, for example, the
rise was 17% and prices climbed 38%, the best of the upward breakouts. In a
bear market, the index dropped 7% and prices dropped 21%.
Days to ultimate high or low. How long does it take to reach the ulti-
mate high or low? It varies from 78 to 161 days to reach the ultimate high and
51 to 63 days to reach the ultimate low. The difference depends on market
conditions. Note that prices after an ABW breakout in a bear market drop at a
steeper slope than the rise in bull markets.
Table 5.3 shows failure rates. How do you make sense of the numbers?
Let me give you two examples. In a bull market with a downward breakout,
11% of the patterns failed to drop more than 5%. In a bull market with an
upward breakout, 10% failed to rise at least 10%.
Table 5.3
Failure Rates
Maximum 
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Price Rise
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market,
or Decline 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
(%)
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
5 (breakeven)
1 or 2%
0 or 0%
19 or 11%
3 or 14%

6 or 10%
2 or 20%
56 or 34%
4 or 19%

13 or 22%
5 or 50%
84 or 51%
7 or 33%

18 or 31%
5 or 50%
103 or 62%
10 or 48%

25 or 43%
6 or 60%
127 or 77%
13 or 62%

31 or 53%
7 or 70%
142 or 86%
18 or 86%

35 or 60%
8 or 80%
145 or 87%
18 or 86%

43 or 74%
10 or 100%
165 or 99%
21 or 100%

51 or 88%
10 or 100%
166 or 100%
21 or 100%
Over 75
58 or 100%
10 or 100%
166 or 100%
21 or 100%

--- PAGE 113/1035 ---
You can see how the failure rates start comparatively small then shoot up
as the maximum price rise or decline increases. Ignoring the small sample
counts for bear markets, the lowest failure rates occur in patterns with an
upward breakout in a bull market. Half the patterns fail to rise more than
about 27% under those conditions (bull/up). 
Table 5.4 shows breakout- and postbreakout-related statistics.
Formation end to breakout. It takes between 12 and 30 days before
price closes outside the trend-line boundary. That is an average, so your results
will vary. Upward breakouts take longer than downward ones to pierce the
trend line. This observation makes sense because the upper trend line has a
steeper slope and prices are rising along with the trend line. For downward
breakouts, the trend line slopes up but prices are falling.
Yearly position. Where in the yearly price range do ABWs occur? The
breakout usually happens near the yearly high except in a bear market with a
downward breakout, which shows more breakouts in the middle of the yearly
range.
Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance onto the yearly
price range, we find that the middle of the yearly price range performs better
than the other ranges. The exception is for ABWs with downward breakouts in
a bull market, but the sample size is small.
Throwbacks and pullbacks. Throwbacks and pullbacks occur about half
the time, and it takes the stock between 9 and 13 days to return to the break-
out price. However, when throwbacks and pullbacks occur, performance suf-
fers, as Table 5.4 shows (except for ABWs in a bear market with upward
breakouts). 
Gaps. Most of the time, when a breakout day gap occurs, performance
improves. The exception: the 51% rise in a bull market may come down with
additional samples.
Partial rises and declines. Consider the bull market, down breakout
column that has a good sample size. A partial rise correctly anticipated the
downward breakout 74% of the time. When a partial rise occurs, prices drop
17% after the breakout, on average, meeting the average decline for ABWs. 
Intraformation partial rises and declines. Intraformation partial rises
and declines—those that occur within the pattern but with prices that continue
crossing the pattern—occur, at most, 17% of the time. Thus, you should feel
safe trading a partial rise or decline. They get you into the trade before the
breakout and correctly predict the breakout direction (usually). Consult the
Glossary if you are unfamiliar with a partial rise or decline.
Table 5.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate high or
low. Since the bear market samples are few, look at the two bull market rows.
Over half (52%) of upward breakouts do not reach the ultimate high before 70
days. Half of all downward breakouts will bottom in the first month (20 + 10 +
14 + 7 = 51% in 28 days). If price reaches the ultimate high or low quickly, the
return is usually below those patterns that take longer. Thus, the key to this

Broadening Wedges, Ascending

--- PAGE 114/1035 ---

Table 5.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakouta
Down Breakout
Down Breakouta
aFormation end to breakout
30 days
16 days
14 days
12 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring 
near the 12-month low (L), 
center (C), or high (H)
L2%, C11%, H88%
L20%, C20%, H60%
L10%, C32%, H58%
L14%, C48%, H38%
Percentage rise/decline for each 
12-month lookback period
L37%a, C38%a, H38%
L10%, C26%, H20%
L20%a, C15%, H17%
L17%, C26%, H15%
Throwbacks/pullbacks
50%
70%
57%
52%
Average time to throwback/pullback 
ends
11 days
9 days
10 days
13 days
Average rise/decline for patterns 
with throwback/pullback
32%a
20%
–16%
–18%
Average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwback/pullback
42%a
13%
–19%
–24%
Performance with breakout gap
51%a
18%
–22%
–28%
Performance without breakout gap
37%
20%
–16%
–20%
Average gap size
$0.29
$0.24
$0.17
$1.77
Partial rise, downward breakout
N/A
N/A
97/131 or 74%
18/23 or 78%
Partial decline, upward breakout
7/20 or 35%
3/3 or 100%
N/A
N/A
Partial rise performance
N/A
N/A
–17%
–19%
Partial decline performance
43%a
13%
N/A
N/A
Intraformation partial rise failure
2/58 or 3%
1/10 or 10%
10/166 or 6%
0/21 or 0%
Intraformation partial decline failure
5/58 or 9%
0/10 or 0%
28/166 or 17%
2/21 or 10%
Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means not applicable.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 115/1035 ---
chart is selecting patterns that have long rises or declines. Those would be
upward breakouts in a bull market and downward breakouts in a bear market.
This pattern also plays into the “trade with the trend” theory.
Notice the slight up move in ABWs in a bull market (both breakout direc-
tions) at day 42. Look for a trend change to occur about 6 weeks after the
breakout.
Table 5.6 shows size-related statistics.

Broadening Wedges, Ascending
Table 5.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High or Low
Days:










>70
Bear market, 
up breakout
10%
0%
20%
10%
10%
10%
0%
0%
0%
0%
40%
Bull market, 
up breakout
5%
10%
3%
5%
0%
9%
3%
2%
7%
3%
52%
Bear market, 
down 
breakout
14%
24%
10%
5%
10%
0%
0%
0%
0%
10%
29%
Bull market, 
down 
breakout
20%
10%
14%
7%
4%
6%
3%
2%
4%
3%
27%
Table 5.6
Size Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakouta
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakouta
Tall pattern performance
50%
13%
–18%
–20%
Short pattern performance
30%
20%
–16%
–21%
Median height as a percentage 
18.60%
28.10%
23.31%
19.25%
of breakout price
Narrow pattern performance
35%
21%
–18%
–25%
Wide pattern performance
39%
15%
–16%
–15%
Median length
66 days
60 days
83 days
54 days
Average formation length
89 days
61 days
99 days
61 days
Short and narrow performance
27%
26%
–18%
–26%
Short and wide performance
33%
13%
–12%a
–8%
Tall and wide performance
45%
22%
–18%
–20%
Tall and narrow performance
73%
6%
–17%a
–20%
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 116/1035 ---
Height. Only bull markets with downward breakouts had enough sam-
ples to trust. Tall patterns perform better than short ones, by dropping 18%
versus 16%, respectively. How do you use this finding? Compute the price dif-
ference between the highest high and the lowest low and then divide by the
breakout price. If the result is higher than the median, the pattern is tall; lower
than the median, the pattern is short.
Width. Most of the time, narrow patterns perform better than wide ones.
I used the median length as the divider between wide and narrow.
Average formation length. The average ABW length varies from 61 to
99 days, or about 2 to 3 months long.
Height and width combinations. Even in a bull market with downward
breakouts, the sample size is small. What we can say is that ABWs that are both
short and wide have poor performance. Other combinations of height and
width show better performance.
Table 5.7 shows volume-related statistics. 
Volume trend. The volume trend shows little influence on postbreakout
performance, especially when you take the sample size into consideration
(large samples show no performance difference). 
Statistics

Table 5.7
Volume Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakout
Breakouta
Rising volume trend 
performance
38%
19%
–17%
–17%
Falling volume trend 
performance
38%a
18%
–17%
–26%
U-shaped volume 
pattern performance
48%a
18%
–17%
–19%
Dome-shaped volume pattern 
performance
39%a
20%
–17%
–23%
Neither U-shaped nor dome-
shaped volume pattern 
30%a
18%
–17%
–22%
performance
Heavy breakout volume 
performance
38%
18%
–18%
–22%
Light breakout volume 
performance
37%a
14%
–16%
–18%
Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 117/1035 ---
Volume shapes. Patterns in bull markets were either unchanged or per-
formed better with U-shaped volume. In a bear market, patterns with dome-
shaped volume did best.
Breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume helped performance across
the board.
Trading Tactics
Table 5.8 lists trading tactics. 
Measure rule. The measure rule for this formation is different from
most other formations in that it is based on the lowest low in the pattern, not
on the height of the formation (for downward breakouts only). Upward break-
outs use the height from highest high to lowest low added to the highest high.
The result is the target price. The Results Snapshot lists the “Percentage meet-
ing price target” results.
Figure 5.5 shows two ascending broadening wedges and application of the
measure rule. Both formations are well formed, but the first one has a tendency
to rise slightly above the top trend line before beginning its downhill run. The
chart marks the lowest low in each formation. The low serves as the expected
minimum price move. The formation on the left shows prices reaching the tar-
get in mid-November just as prices turn around and rebound. The formation
shown on the right has prices hitting the target when they plummet.
The reason for choosing the lowest low in the formation is simply for
performance. Using the formation low as the target price allows 58% to 86%
of the formations to achieve the target. I like to see performance numbers
above 80%, so the 58% value is poor. As you look at the formation on the
right, you can see how close the price target really is to the breakout price.

Broadening Wedges, Ascending
Table 5.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
For downward breakouts, use the lowest price in the
formation as the minimum price move to expect. For upward
breakouts, use the formation height added to the breakout
price.
Wait for confirmation
Although this formation breaks out downward 73% of the
time, it is best to wait for a downward breakout before
shorting the stock.
Partial rise
If a stock shows a partial rise and begins to head back toward
the lower trend line, consider selling short. A downward
breakout follows a partial rise.

--- PAGE 118/1035 ---
Wait for confirmation. This formation has a good track record of down-
ward breakouts. However, 27% of the time prices break out upward. If you
wait for a breakout before investing, you substantially increase your chances of
a profitable trade. Once prices decline below the lower trend line, sell the stock
short. Be prepared to cover the short as prices near the target, especially if the
price approaches an area of support.
In Figure 5.5, the lowest formation low on the left is also a support point.
Prices decline to the low in early August then head up and create the formation.
Several months later, prices decline to that level and turn around. As prices
decline after the second formation, the support level at 36 changes into resis-
tance. During March, prices try to rebound but turn away near the 36 level.
Partial rise. An exception to the wait for breakout-confirmation rule is if
a partial rise occurs. Looking again at Figure 5.5, you might conclude that
there is a partial rise in the right formation. Wrong. I define a partial rise as
when prices touch the lower trend line, move up, then return to the lower
trend line. The figure shows prices starting from the top trend line, not the
lower one. Figure 5.2 shows a properly identified partial rise.
If you detect a partial rise, consider shorting the stock. In 74% to 78% of
the cases, a downward breakout follows a partial rise. Since you are buying
before the breakout, your profits should be larger. When the stock declines to
the lower trend line, move your stop-loss order to break even. If the stock
should turn around at the trend line and head up, consider closing out your
position.
Trading Tactics

Centex Corp. (Homebuilding, NYSE, CTX)
 – 47
 – 46
 – 45
 – 44
 – 43
 – 42
 – 41
 – 40
 – 39
 – 38
 – 37
 – 36
 – 35
 – 34
 – 33
 – 32
 – 31
 – 30
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
Jan 94
Feb
Mar
Apr
Jul 93
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Not a Partial 
Rise
Stock Shorted
Target Price
Target Price
Covered
Lowest Formation 
Low
Lowest Formation 
Low
Double Top
Figure 5.5
The measure rule as it applies to two ascending broadening wedges.
Astute investors will recognize the twin peaks as a double top.

--- PAGE 119/1035 ---
Sample Trade
Curtis works the night shift at a large bakery near his home. Working at night
frees the daylight hours for other activities, such as sleep. Occasionally, he
spots a situation such as that shown in Figure 5.5, one that makes the morning
sun seem even brighter.
Each day before he hit the sack, he plotted the stock and watched with
amusement as the first broadening wedge formed. When the second one
appeared, he wiped the sleep from his eyes and took notice. It was not so much
the broadening wedge that excited him; it was the wedge coupled with the dou-
ble top. Together, they spelled an especially bearish situation, one that he was
willing to shell out his hard earned money to trade.
The day after the stock closed below the lower trend line, Curtis sold the
stock short and received a fill at 39.50. He used the double top measure rule to
estimate his target price. With a top at 45.75 and a valley low of 36.25, the target
turned out to be 26.75 (that is 45.75–36.25 subtracted from 36.25). He decided to
place an order to cover the short at 27.13, just above the whole number and just
above where everyone else was likely to place theirs. Then he went to bed.
Each day, before he closed the curtains to get some sleep, he would check
on his stock. To him, it was pleasing to see the stock begin moving down
immediately and sailing below the nearest broadening wedge target price
(38.88). He lost some sleep worrying about the upward retrace in March, and
wondered if the party were over.
Curtis hung in there and the stock eventually pierced the resistance zone
and kept moving down. He hoped that the March resistance was just the cor-
rective phase of a measured move down, which would place the target price at
22.50, well below his target at 27.13. He decided not to be greedy and lower 
his target. 
On April 18 he was rudely awakened from his REM state by a phone call
from his broker. The short was covered at his target price. He made about $12
a share. That put a smile on his face, and he went back to his dream of telling
his boss what he could do with the night shift.
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations to select patterns that perform
well. Refer to the associated table for more information.
• Use the identification guidelines to select a pattern—Table 5.1.
• Most broadening wedges breakout downward—Table 5.2.
• Trade with the market trend: Select wedges in a bear market with a
downward breakout or in a bull market with an upward breakout—
Table 5.2.

Broadening Wedges, Ascending

--- PAGE 120/1035 ---
• The lowest failure rates occur with patterns in a bull market and
upward breakout—Table 5.3.
• Throwbacks and pullbacks hurt performance. Look for overhead resis-
tance or underlying support before trading—Table 5.4.
• Breakout day gaps usually help performance—Table 5.4.
• A partial rise or decline allows you to enter a trade sooner and usually
predicts the breakout direction—Table 5.4.
• Look for a trend change 6 weeks after the breakout in a bull market—
Table 5.5.
• Select tall or narrow patterns—Table 5.6.
• Pick patterns with heavy breakout volume—Table 5.7.
For Best Performance

--- PAGE 121/1035 ---


Broadening Wedges,
Descending
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Price follows two down-sloping trend lines
that broaden out. Breakout is upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish reversal
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
12 out of 23
14 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
6%
11%
Average rise
33%
24%
Change after trend ends
–33%
–32%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Throwbacks
53%
61%
Percentage meeting price target
79%
58%
Surprising findings
Throwbacks hurt performance but breakout
day gaps help. Tall patterns perform better
than short ones. Patterns with a falling
volume trend perform better.

--- PAGE 122/1035 ---
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Same, but breakout is downward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish, evenly split between
reversal and continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
11 out of 21
6 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
9% 
2%
Average decline
20% 
25%
Change after trend ends
47% 
49%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Pullbacks
53%
66%
Percentage meeting price target
36% 
32%
Surprising findings
Breakout day gaps help performance. Tall or
narrow patterns perform better than short or
wide ones. Patterns with a rising volume
trend and U-shape do well.
“What’s going on?” I asked, and saw my dog’s ears perk up. She was nearby
when I started comparing the statistical results with the last edition. Everything
changed. With 117 samples, the descending broadening wedge (DBW) acted as
a consolidation, but no longer. The failure rate used to be 37%, but that included
patterns breaking out in the wrong direction. The average rise was 46%, but
with three times the number of samples and a different way of measuring, the
average rise is now lower. Even the measure rule changed (that is, the percent-
age meeting the predicted price target). I used the formation height and added it
to the breakout price to get the target. Now the formation top suffices.
I took my dog outside and played ball with her until I decided what to do.
Although I had 300 samples, I needed more. So, I scoured the three databases
I used for this book and found 464 patterns. Even so, splitting the numbers
into bull and bear markets with up and down breakouts made the sample
counts sometimes too small. The Results Snapshot shows the new numbers. 
Tour
What does the formation look like? Figure 6.1 shows a well-formed descend-
ing broadening wedge. The stock begins rising in June 1994 and rounds over
at the top a year later, in August. In September, the stock starts down in tight
oscillations that broaden over time. A month later, two trend lines drawn
across the highs and lows make the wedge shape clear.
Tour

--- PAGE 123/1035 ---
Volume at the start of the formation is well below normal. As the forma-
tion develops, volume is erratic, but trends higher. Computing the slope of the
volume line using linear regression confirms the result; the slope is positive,
which indicates volume is increasing.
In mid-October, prices gap up and shoot above the upper trend line. A
breakout occurs. Volume spikes upward and continues to be heavy for several
days as prices climb.
As you look at the chart, you may make an interesting observation. The
price trend has three stages: The first stage is the long bull-run from June 1994
to August 1995, leading to a consolidation or retrace for 2 months (second
stage), then prices move higher (third stage). In Figure 6.1, the broadening for-
mation is a consolidation of the upward trend. Taken as a whole, it looks like
the corrective phase of a measured move up chart pattern.
Contrast Figure 6.1 with Figure 6.2, where a descending broadening
wedge acts as a reversal of the intermediate-term price trend. Prices peak in
May 1992 and head lower. During August, prices begin to broaden out as they
continue their downward spiral. By mid-September, a descending broadening
wedge forms.
Volume is low at the start of the formation but does have a few spikes. Into
September, volume moves up and becomes even more irregular. At the start of
October, as prices begin moving up, volume recedes. Prices pierce the top trend
line on negligible volume and head higher. A trend reversal is at hand.

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
May 95
Jul
Jun
– 39
– 38
– 37
– 36
– 35
– 34
– 33
– 32
– 31
– 30
– 29
– 28
– 27
– 26
– 25
– 24
– 23
– 22
– 21
– 20
– 19
– 18
– 17
– 16
– 15
– 14
– 13
– 12
Cognex (Precision Instrument, NASDAQ, CGNX)
Price Trend
Figure 6.1
This descending broadening wedge acts as a consolidation of the
upward trend. Two down-sloping trend lines outline price action that broadens
out. Volume usually increases over time.

--- PAGE 124/1035 ---
Identification Guidelines
Table 6.1 outlines the identification guidelines for the formation, and Figure
6.3 shows another example of a descending broadening wedge.
Shape and trend lines. The figure shows two down-sloping trend lines
that encompass a series of oscillating prices. The two trend lines look like a
megaphone, tilted down. The chart pattern is narrow at the start but gets wider
Identification Guidelines

Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 93
Feb
May 92
Jul
Jun
Canandaigua Brands Inc. A (Beverage (Alcoholic), NASDAQ, CBRNA)
Volume Trend
Price Trend
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
 – 11
 – 10
 – 9
 – 8
Figure 6.2
This descending broadening wedge formation acts as a reversal of the
intermediate-term downward trend.
Table 6.1
Identification Characteristics
Characteristic
Discussion
Shape
The formation looks like a megaphone tilted down.
Down-sloping 
Both trend lines slope downward, with the lower trend line having 
trend lines
a steeper slope. Thus, the two lines broaden out over time. Neither
trend line is horizontal.
Touches
The formation requires at least two distinct touches of each trend line.
Volume
Usually rises over the length of the formation. However, the volume
pattern is not a prerequisite.
Breakout
Can be in any direction but 55% of the time, price breaks out
opposite the prevailing price trend.
Partial decline
For a partial decline, prices must touch the top trend line and move
down, turn around, then head higher without coming close to the
lower trend line. An upward breakout usually follows a partial decline.

--- PAGE 125/1035 ---
over time. Neither trend line is horizontal, which is a key consideration since
it differentiates this formation from other types of broadening formations.
Touches. There are a number of touches of the minor highs against the
top trend line and the minor lows against the bottom one. There should be at
least two distinct touches—two minor highs (top trend line) and two minor
lows (bottom trend line)—to correctly define a broadening formation.
Volume. The slope of the volume trend is usually upward, unlike forma-
tions from the narrowing wedge family. The increasing volume pattern seems
to catapult prices higher, sending them out the top of the formation. Volume
at the breakout is usually high but need not be. As long as demand exceeds sup-
ply, prices will rise.
Breakout. Just over half the time, the formation acts as a reversal of the
trend. Figure 6.2 shows an example. There is no easy way to differentiate a
budding consolidation from a reversal. Only the breakout direction decides
which is which.
Partial decline. The partial decline, such as that shown in Figure 6.3,
often indicates an impending upward breakout. This works quite well for con-
solidations or reversals. 
Why do these formations form? The chart pattern, as do many forma-
tions, illustrates the struggle between supply and demand. In Figure 6.3, after
attempting to close the September gap in early December, the stock stalls.
Buying enthusiasm dries up and the stock heads lower.

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Sep 95
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan 96
Feb
Mar
Apr
Alaska Air Group Inc. (Air Transport, NYSE, ALK)
Breakout Occurs Here
Partial Decline
Followed by
Upward Breakout
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
Figure 6.3
A descending broadening wedge as a consolidation of the rising
trend. Volume moves higher even as prices head down. A partial decline signals
that an upward breakout is coming.

--- PAGE 126/1035 ---
Volume sometimes rises as prices near whole dollar amounts and at 38%,
50%, or 62% retraces of the prior rise or fall. At those points, prices are some-
what more likely to stage a rebound. That is what occurs in Figure 6.3. Prices rise
from a low of 13.63 to a high of 18.88. A 38% retrace of this range takes prices
back to 16.88. This is quite close to 17, and you can see some hesitation in the
stock at that level. However, once the stock approaches the 62% retrace level
(15.63), the smart money knows the jig is up. They start buying heavily for the 5
days surrounding the new year. Prices halt their decline and move higher. How-
ever, sellers are not sitting by idly. They sell into the rally and prices eventually
stall then drift lower, forming the partial decline highlighted in Figure 6.3.
As it happens, volume dries up as prices trace a V-shaped pattern. Low
volume before an upward breakout reminds me of the calm before an
approaching storm. Formations such as ascending and descending triangles
commonly have low volume just before a breakout. Volume spikes upward the
day prices close above the prior minor high (where the top trend lines ends in
January). The momentum players take the upper hand, and prices surge higher
on very high volume.
Focus on Failures
Look at Figure 6.4. Before the formation begins, prices are rising. Immediately
after the breakout, prices are also rising. The breakout process starts on Sep-
tember 3 when prices punch through the top trend line. However, they do not
Focus on Failures

Aug
Sep
Oct
Jul
Jun 92
United Technology (Diversified Co., NYSE, UTX)
 – 59
 – 58
 – 57
 – 56
 – 55
 – 54
 – 53
 – 52
 – 51
 – 50
 – 49
 – 48
 – 47
 – 46
 – 45
 – 44
 – 43
 – 42
 – 41
 – 40
 – 39
 – 38
Breakout
Breakaway
Gap
Throwback
Figure 6.4
This formation is a failure according to the 5% rule. Prices fail to move
up from the formation by more than 5% before moving down.

--- PAGE 127/1035 ---
travel very far before returning to the trend line. I have extended the top trend
line in Figure 6.4 to make the throwback clear. You see that prices ride along
it until they gap down (a breakaway gap) on September 17.
This formation is what I call a 5% failure, that is, when prices breakout
and move less than 5% before reversing. This type of failure is rare, occurring
just 6% of the time.
Why these failures occur is unclear. Sometimes overhead resistance to an
up move or underlying support to a downward move will halt prices and cause
a failure. Traders change their minds about a stock and bolt for the exits, caus-
ing price to move in an unexpected direction.
Statistics
Table 6.2 shows general statistics for the descending broadening wedge.
Number of formations. I combed through the database searching for
this pattern and found 464 from 1991 to late 2003 in about 500 stocks. This is
not an easy pattern to find; it is somewhat rare. It appears most often in a bear
market if you prorate the numbers.
Reversal or continuation. If you total the reversals, 255, and continua-
tions, 209, we find that the chart pattern acts as a reversal 55% of the time.
That is just above a fair coin toss, so if you expect prices to reverse after a

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Table 6.2
General Statistics
Bull 
Bear 
Bull 
Bear 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Number of formations




Reversal (R), continuation (C)
157 R, 
52 R, 
21 R, 
25 R, 
113 C
45 C
26 C
25 C
R/C performance
30% R, 
20% R, 
–22% R, 
–25% R, 
38% C
28% C
–19% C
–25% C
Average rise or decline
33%
24%
–20%
–25%
Rises or declines over 45%
83 or 31%
16 or 16%
4 or 9%
2 or 4%
Change after trend ends
–33%
–32%
47%
49%
Busted pattern performance
24%a
43%a
–20%a
–25%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
9%
–5%
–5%
–16%
Days to ultimate high or low




Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 128/1035 ---
DBW, you may be mistaken. Always trade in the direction of the breakout and
use stops in case prices reverse.
DBWs with upward breakouts that acted as continuations of the trend
vastly outperformed those acting as reversals. For downward breakouts, rever-
sals did slightly better in a bull market, but performance was unchanged in a
bear market.
Average rise or decline. This pattern is a strong performer when the
breakout is downward (meaning the numbers beat the averages for all chart pat-
tern types). For the best performance, go long in a bull market with an upward
breakout and go short in a bear market with a downward breakout. Those
“trade with the trend” patterns have the lowest failures and highest gains.
Rises or declines over 45%. Upward breakouts do well in this category
but downward breakouts suffer. In both directions, the numbers are about
what one would expect.
Change after trend ends. Once prices reach the ultimate high or low,
what happens? On average, prices tumble 33% from the high and rise almost
50% from the low. Thus, if you can determine when the trend changes, you
can profit handsomely. Use whatever method floats your boat to spot the trend
change, and then be patient. Prices drop faster than they rise, so keep that 
in mind.
Busted pattern performance. Another way to look at performance is to
see how the pattern does after it fails to climb more than 5%. Unfortunately,
the sample counts are too small to make the numbers reliable. For example, the
43% rise in a bear market uses only one sample. Another way to look at the
numbers is to be thankful that the nonbusted patterns work so well.
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The index changes between rising 9%
to declining 16%. You can see how the general market supported the DBW’s
average rise or decline.
Days to ultimate high or low. How long does it take to reach the ulti-
mate high or low? The average varies from a high of 131 days to a short 23
days. If you consider that it takes 3 weeks to drop 25% and 4.5 months to rise
33%, you can guess that the decline is steeper. 
Table 6.3 shows failure rates for this pattern. The lowest failures begin
with a bear market and a downward breakout until the maximum price decline
reaches 20%. At that point, the bull market, up breakout takes over and shows
the lowest failure rate. Keep in mind that downward breakouts have compara-
tively few samples.
What do the numbers mean? Look at the bull market, upward breakout col-
umn. Six percent of the patterns fail to rise more than 5%. A quarter (26%) fail to
rise at least 15%. Half fail to make a 30% rise. Bull markets with downward
breakouts are the worst performers: Half of those fail to rise more than 15%. 
By matching the breakout direction and the general market condition
(bull/bear) to your DBW, you can get a sense of how your pattern will perform.
Remember that each failure occurs when prices reverse direction and move
Statistics

--- PAGE 129/1035 ---
more than 20%. Thus, if you buy a stock and it moves up 5% before reversing,
failure to sell may mean incurring a large loss or an extended recovery time.
Table 6.4 shows statistics related to breakout and postbreakout perfor-
mance of the DBW.
Formation end to breakout. It takes at least 2 weeks, and sometimes 3,
between the end of the pattern and the actual breakout. During that time,
prices may cross the pattern and approach the opposite trend line before
reversing. 
Yearly position. Dividing the yearly price range into thirds for each
DBW, where does the breakout occur most often? Upward breakouts appear
most often in the middle of the yearly price range, but downward breakouts
occur near the yearly low. 
Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance over the yearly
price range, we find that the results show no consistent trend. In a bear market,
we can say that the worst performance comes from patterns near the yearly high.
Throwbacks and pullbacks. Bear markets show a return to the breakout
price a bit more frequently than do patterns in a bull market. This finding sug-
gests that the breakout in a bull market is stronger than in a bear market.
When a throwback or pullback occurs, it takes between 9 and 11 days, on aver-
age, to complete the return to the breakout price. 
Most of the time, a throwback/pullback hurts performance. The excep-
tion is for patterns in bull markets with downward breakouts, but the sample
count is small.
Gaps. Breakout day gaps help performance under all market conditions
and breakout directions.

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Table 6.3
Failure Rates
Maximum 
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Price Rise
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Market,
or Decline 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down 
(%)
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
5 (breakeven)
15 or 6%
11 or 11%
4 or 9%
1 or 2%

46 or 17%
25 or 26%
12 or 26%
3 or 6%

70 or 26%
34 or 35%
24 or 51%
10 or 20%

95 or 35%
45 or 46%
31 or 66%
18 or 36%

120 or 44%
55 or 57%
34 or 72%
28 or 56%

141 or 52%
65 or 67%
37 or 79%
33 or 66%

161 or 60%
74 or 76%
40 or 85%
40 or 80%

196 or 73%
82 or 85%
43 or 91%
49 or 98%

228 or 84%
91 or 94%
47 or 100%
50 or 100%
Over 75
270 or 100%
97 or 100%
47 or 100%
50 or 100%

--- PAGE 130/1035 ---

Table 6.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Formation end to breakout
17 days
16 days
22 days
16 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring 
near the 12-month low (L), 
center (C), or high (H)
L35%, C37%, H28%
L36%, C41%, H23%
L47%, C42%, H11%
L66%, C32%, H2%
Percentage rise/decline for each 
12-month lookback period
L34%, C34%, H34%
L27%, C29%, H15%
L23%, C17%, H26%
L24%, C26%, H20%
Throwbacks/pullbacks
53%
62%
53%
66%
Average time to throwback/pullback 
ends
10 days
9 days
10 days
11 days
Average rise/decline for patterns 
with throwback/pullback
30%
20%
–24%a
–23%
Average rise/decline for patterns 
without throwback/pullback
37%
33%
–16%a
–29%
Performance with breakout gap
44%
38%a
–38%a
–32%a
Performance without breakout gap
32%
21%
–17%
–24%
Average gap size
$0.30
$0.37
$0.97
$1.39
Partial rise, downward breakout
N/A
N/A
5/35 or 14%
6/13 or 46%
Partial decline, upward breakout
168/193 or 87%
66/92 or 72%
N/A
N/A
Partial rise performance
N/A
N/A
–19%a
–13%a
Partial decline performance
35%
26%
N/A
N/A
Intraformation partial rise failure
27/270 or 10%
10/97 or 10%
9/47 or 19%
7/50 or 14%
Intraformation partial decline failure
12/270 or 4%
2/97 or 2%
2/47 or 4%
3/50 or 6%
Notes: Minus sign means decline. N/A means not applicable.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 131/1035 ---
Partial rises and declines. Figure 6.3 shows an example of a partial
decline. Prices touch the top trend line then head toward the lower trend line,
curl around, and stage an upward breakout. In a bull market, a partial decline
precedes an upward breakout 87% of the time. Partial rises do not fare as well
because of the low sample counts.
When a partial rise or decline happens, does performance suffer? Yes and
no. For upward breakouts, patterns having a partial decline show improved
performance. For downward breakouts, a partial rise hurts the postbreakout
decline, but that may change with more samples.
Intraformation partial rises and declines. Intraformation partial rises
and declines look like normal partial rises and declines, but prices continue
crossing the pattern instead of breaking out. They look like small loops
attached to the trend line. The good news is that they do not happen often.
Thus, you can trade on a partial rise or decline and get a better price (than the
breakout), without worrying about whether a breakout will follow immediately
(without prices crossing the formation again). It usually does, at least 80% 
of the time. 
Table 6.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate high or
low. Notice how often prices reverse trend in the first few weeks. DBWs in a
bull market with downward breakouts show 58% bottoming in the first 3
weeks. DBWs in a bull market with upward breakouts show the fewest trend
reversals: 27% in 3 weeks. They also show the most after 70 days: 49% are still
looking for the ultimate high.
Notice the slight rise in bear market patterns changing trend 35 to 42
days after the breakout. I have seen this rise in other bearish chart patterns, too
(and some bullish ones like downward breakouts at day 49). Be prepared to take
profits 5 to 6 weeks after the breakout.
Table 6.6 shows statistics related to DBW size. 

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Table 6.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High or Low
Days:










>70
Bear market, 
up breakout
29%
11%
7%
2%
6%
8%
3%
0%
3%
3%
27%
Bull market, 
up breakout
15%
6%
6%
7%
3%
3%
3%
3%
4%
2%
49%
Bear market, 
down 
breakout
36%
14%
12%
8%
4%
8%
4%
2%
4%
2%
6%
Bull market, 
down 
breakout
30%
17%
11%
4%
4%
4%
6%
0%
0%
4%
19%

--- PAGE 132/1035 ---
Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones across the board.
To use this finding, compute the pattern’s height from the highest high to the
lowest low in the pattern and divide by the breakout price. If the result is
higher than the median, then you have a tall pattern; lower than the median,
your pattern is short. Try to trade tall patterns for the best performance.
Width. Narrow patterns usually perform better than wide ones. The lone
exception is from DBWs in a bear market with upward breakouts. I used the
median length to separate narrow patterns from wide ones.
Average formation length. The average length ranged from 54 to 64 days.
Patterns in a bull market were slightly longer than were those in a bear market.
Height and width combinations. Combining the traits, we find that tall
and narrow patterns usually beat the other combinations. Look at the bull
market, up breakout statistics. Tall patterns climb 43% and narrow patterns
climb 34%. When you combine the results, we find that tall and narrow pat-
terns climb 49%— higher than they scored individually. 
Avoid short and wide patterns because they usually perform worse than
the other combinations.
Table 6.7 shows volume-related statistics. 
Volume trend. Does a rising or falling volume trend over the life of the
chart pattern suggest better or worse performance after the breakout? For
upward breakouts, performance improves when the pattern has a falling
Statistics

Table 6.6
Size Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market,
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakouta
Breakouta
Tall pattern performance
43%
30%
–21%
–28%
Short pattern performance
26%
20%
–20%
–23%
Median height as a percentage 
21.77%
31.23%
22.40%
35.49%
of breakout price
Narrow pattern performance
34%
21%
–25%
–26%
Wide pattern performance
33%
27%
–14%
–23%
Median length
52 days
47 days
55 days
52 days
Average formation length
64 days
54 days
62 days
56 days
Short and narrow performance
29%
19%
–25%
–24%
Short and wide performance
22%
22%a
–13%
–17%
Tall and wide performance
41%
30%
–16%
–26%
Tall and narrow performance
49%
29%a
–26%
–33%
Note: Minus sign means decline. 
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 133/1035 ---

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Table 6.7
Volume Statistics
Bull 
Bear
Bull
Bear
Market,
Market, 
Market, 
Market, 
Up 
Up 
Down 
Down
Description
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Breakout
Rising volume trend 
performance
33%
22%
–24%a
–26%a
Falling volume trend 
performance
35%
27%
–17%a
–22%a
U-shaped volume pattern 
performance
29%
27%
–27%a
–26%a
Dome-shaped volume pattern 
performance
35%
24%
–16%a
–25%a
Neither U-shaped nor dome-
shaped volume pattern 
38%
20%a
–20%a
–24%a
performance
Heavy breakout volume 
performance
38%
23%
–22%
–25%
Light breakout volume 
performance
28%
25%
–14%a
–27%a
Note: Minus sign means decline. 
aFewer than 30 samples.
volume trend. After a downward breakout (beware: low sample counts), pat-
terns with a rising volume trend outperformed. 
Volume shapes. DBWs with U-shaped volume tended to outperform
the other volume shapes. The one exception is for DBWs with upward break-
outs in a bull market. They did better with a random volume shape.
Breakout volume. Performance split according to market direction. In a
bull market, DBWs with heavy breakout volume performed substantially bet-
ter. In a bear market, DBWs with light breakout volume performed marginally
better.
Trading Tactics
Table 6.8 outlines trading tactics for descending broadening wedges. 
Measure rule. For upward breakouts, the price target is the top of the
pattern. That sounds like it would be easy to reach, but only 79% reach it in a
bull market and 58% in a bear market. Downward breakouts do not have a
measure rule that works. You might try taking the height of the pattern (high-
est high minus lowest low) and subtracting the difference from the lowest low.
That only works about a third of the time (see the Results Snapshot, “Per-

--- PAGE 134/1035 ---
centage meeting price target”). Perhaps a better method is to look for under-
lying support and assume prices will stop there.
Wait for confirmation. If you are considering buying the stock shown in
Figure 6.5, it is not obvious at first that a broadening wedge is forming. Over
time, once enough minor highs and lows appear, draw the two trend lines.
Then, it becomes a matter of waiting for a breakout. Since most descending
broadening wedges break out upward, that is the way to trade it. Wait for
prices to close above the top trend line before buying.
Partial decline. An exception to the rule about waiting for confirmation
is the partial decline. As prices move down from the top trend line, watch them
closely. If prices reach a support zone and begin moving up, buy because that
is a partial decline, and it usually signals an impending upward breakout. Place
a stop 0.15 below the curl low, just in case.
Trade the trend lines; stops. If the formation is especially wide, try an
intraformation trade. Buy at the lower trend line and sell at the top one, or sell
short at the top and cover near the bottom. With the trend lines sloping down-
ward, a short sale will be more profitable. Use a stop 0.15 beyond the appro-
priate trend line in case of an adverse breakout. Adjust your stop as prices
move in your favor. Place them 0.15 below a support zone (long trades) or
above a resistance area (short trades).
Trading Tactics

Table 6.8
Trading Tactics
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
For upward breakouts, use the highest high. For down-
ward breakouts, use the pattern height subtracted from
the lowest low in the pattern. However, that strategy
works only 32% to 36% of the time.
Wait for confirmation
Wait for prices to close beyond the trend lines before
placing a trade.
Partial decline
If a stock shows a partial decline from the top trend line
and begins to head back up, consider going long. An
upside breakout most often follows a partial decline.
Trade the trend lines
If the formation is especially broad, buy at the lower
trend line and sell at the top. If the stock executes a
partial rise and begins falling, close out the position as
it may break out downward. Alternatively, sell short at
the top trend line once prices are heading down and
close the position after it rebounds off the lower trend
line.
Stops
For intraformation trading, place a stop on the other
side of the trend line, just to catch an adverse breakout.
Move the stop as prices cross the formation. Pick areas
showing support or resistance.

--- PAGE 135/1035 ---
Sample Trade
“Do you feel lucky, punk?” Mary says as she looks at her computer screen (Fig-
ure 6.5). She just finished watching a Dirty Harry movie and is feeling ornery.
She decides to buy the stock as an intraformation trade once it rebounds
off the lower trend line. When it is clear the stock is climbing again, she pulls
the trigger and receives a fill at 43. Immediately, she places a stop-loss order
0.15 below the lower trend line, at a price of 42. If things go wrong, she only
will lose 3%. Then she waits.
The stock cooperates by moving higher each day. Soon it is at the top
trend line, and she waits for it to ricochet off the line and begin heading down.
It does not. Prices close above the top trend line, signaling an upward break-
out. She calculates the price target, 49.63, using the formation height added to
the breakout price, and that is where she places her sell order. She raises her
stop-loss point to 44, slightly below the minor low in mid-April.
As the stock advances each day, she keeps wondering why it has not
paused. She shrugs her shoulders and does not worry about it. When the stock
makes a new high at 47.38, she raises her stop to 45.25, slightly below the two
minor highs in late April and mid-May.

Broadening Wedges, Descending
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Feb 95
Mar
Apr
May
Jul
Jun
Gatx Corp. (Diversified Co., NYSE, GMT)
Minimum Price
Move
Sold Here
Bought Here
Low
High
 – 54
 – 53
 – 52
 – 51
 – 50
 – 49
 – 48
 – 47
 – 46
 – 45
 – 44
 – 43
 – 42
 – 41
 – 40
Figure 6.5
As described in the Sample Trade, Mary used the formation height
projected upward as a price target. For maximum profit, she should have raised
her stop-loss price until the stock triggered a sale.

--- PAGE 136/1035 ---
In a burst of energy, the stock zooms up over a 2-day period and reaches
her sell point. The stock sells at the high for the day, 49.63. She has cleared
over $6 a share on her trade. Even better, the stock moves lower for several
days, reinforcing her sell decision.
It turns out that she sold too soon, but she does not care. She spots
another promising formation in a stock she has been following for quite some
time. She leans back in her chair, smiles and mumbles something about luck,
then runs to the VCR and plugs in another Dirty Harry movie.
This trade shows the problem with placing a sell order at the price target.
Yes, Mary sold at a good price, but if she had used the stop-loss order to take
her out, she probably would have made more. To let your profits run, raise the
stop price, placing it slightly below the prior minor low, and raise it to the next
higher minor low when prices climb to a new high. Eventually, prices will
decline and your position will be sold. However, this gives the stock every
opportunity to continue making new highs.
For sophisticated traders, compute the average daily trading range of the
stock over the prior month and set a stop no closer than 1.5 times the average.
For example, if the stock has a daily trading range of $2, set the stop no closer
than $3 below the current daily low. If a minor low is $2.25 below the current
low, it is too close to use as a stop-loss point. Select one farther away. This
technique allows the stock room to fluctuate without you being stopped out. 
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations on selecting patterns for bet-
ter performance. Refer to the associated table for more information.
• Use the identification guidelines to select your pattern—Table 6.1.
• Trade with the trend: Select patterns with upward breakouts in a bull
market, downward breakout in a bear market—Table 6.2.
• Patterns in a bull market with an upward breakout have the lowest fail-
ure rates for extended moves—Table 6.3.
• Bull markets throw back/pull back less often than do bear markets—
Table 6.4.
• Throwback or pullbacks hurt performance—Table 6.4.
• Breakout day gaps help performance—Table 6.4.
• A partial decline in a bull market correctly predicts an upward break-
out 87% of the time and performance improves, too—Table 6.4.
• In a bear market, look for a trend change 5 or 6 weeks after the break-
out, 7 weeks in a bull market—Table 6.5.
For Best Performance

--- PAGE 137/1035 ---
• Select patterns that are both tall and narrow. Avoid those that are short
and wide—Table 6.6.
• Patterns with a falling volume trend perform best when the breakout is
upward. A rising volume trend does well for downward breakouts—
Table 6.7
• Patterns with U-shaped volume usually perform best postbreakout—
Table 6.7.

Broadening Wedges, Descending

--- PAGE 138/1035 ---


Bump-and-Run 
Reversal Bottoms
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Looks like a frying pan with the handle on
the left following a trend line down until a
large decline ensues. The breakout is upward.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish reversal or continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
8 out of 23
3 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
2%
1%
Average rise
38%
31%
Change after trend ends
–29%
–34%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Throwbacks
59%
73%
Percentage meeting price target
68%
64%
Surprising findings
Throwbacks hurt performance. Tall and
wide patterns perform better than short and
narrow ones. 
See also
Cup with Handle; Rounding Bottoms

--- PAGE 139/1035 ---
More than a year after I discovered the bump-and-run reversal (BARR) top, I
decided to look for its complement: the BARR bottom. The reasoning is sim-
ple. Many formations, such as double tops, ascending triangles, and triple tops
all have bottom versions. Why not the bump-and-run reversal? It never
dawned on me to look for the formation before then. As I searched through the
data looking for candidates, I was skeptical that the formation added real value.
Some looked like cup-with-handle formations with the handle coming first,
whereas others looked like rounding bottoms. Only after I compiled the sta-
tistics did my thoughts change.
The pattern is a strong performer with postbreakout gains between 31%
and 38%. The break-even failure rate is small, coming in at 2% or less. The
pattern also has a few surprises but ones we have seen before: A throwback
hurts postbreakout performance, and patterns both tall and wide perform bet-
ter than short and narrow ones. 
Tour
What is a bump-and-run reversal, anyway? If I had to name this formation
independent of all others, I would probably call it the frying pan or spoon for-
mation because that is what it looks like. However, the formation is just a
BARR top flipped upside down, so I call it a BARR bottom. I guess a more
accurate description is an inverted BARR. 
Why do BARR bottoms occur? Like the top version, the BARR bottom
is a study of momentum. Consider the chart shown in Figure 7.1 on a weekly
scale. Since late 1991, the stock was moving sideways—a trading range between
6.50 and 11. However, that changed during the last week of October 1993,
when the stock moved up and closed higher than the prior week. At first, this
did not seem unusual since many weeks close higher than the prior week, but
this one was different. It initiated a long climb to the highs of early January. On
the highest volume that the stock had seen in years, the stock hit a new high of
14.38 during the week of January 14, 1994. Volume began tapering off, although
it was still high, and prices tagged a much smaller peak during the week of
March 25, at 14. The two minor highs, one in mid-January and another in late
March, formed the basis of a down-sloping trend line.
As weekly volume trended lower, so did enthusiasm for the stock. Eventu-
ally, bullish sentiment could not sustain the high price and the stock collapsed.
As it headed down, volume continued to taper off. The upward momentum
experienced during the rise to the highs in January was now working against the
stock. Over the course of a year, the stock gave back all its gains and, by mid-
February 1995, it started sinking to new lows.
High volume a month later was key as it signaled a turning point. A week
later, again on high volume, the stock closed higher by over 10%. The upward
move had begun but soon stalled out. The stock moved sideways for another 2

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms

--- PAGE 140/1035 ---
months, gathering strength for the uphill run. Then it took off, not jumping
up, but slowly moving higher, almost week after week. When the stock reached
the trend line in mid-August, it was clear that it had executed a massive round-
ing bottom—a turn in the trend that signaled higher prices.
The stock pushed through the trend line on relatively high volume, then
paused for a month, and formed a falling wedge or pennant. Following that, on
very high volume, prices jumped up to new highs, but this did not last very
long as the stock entered a consolidation phase just below 18. There it stayed
for many months before the stock jumped up and ran still higher. By late June,
the stock had touched 28.75, a rise of about 140% from the breakout, and
350% from the low.
Many would recognize this formation as a cup-with-handle, and indeed it
is. But it is also a BARR bottom, as a cup does not depend on a down-sloping
trend line and a larger handle on the left such as that shown in Figure 7.1.
Whatever you call the formation, the result is still the same: Prices move higher.
Identification Guidelines
Table 7.1 shows a host of characteristics that correctly identify a BARR bot-
tom. Figure 7.2 illustrates the various characteristics outlined in Table 7.1. 
Identification Guidelines

CKE Restaurants, Inc. (Restaurant, NYSE, CKR)
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
 – 11
 – 10
 – 9
 – 8
 – 7
 – 6
 – 5
 – 4
 – 3
 – 2
 – 1
 – 0
Falling Wedge
or Pennant
Channel
Figure 7.1
Bump-and-run reversal bottom. Upward momentum propels prices
higher during late 1993 then stalls at the start of the new year. Volume tapers off
and prices follow. A cup-with-handle formation or rounding bottom takes shape
and prices climb 350% from the 1995 lows. A channel appears in late 1993 and a
falling wedge in late 1995.

--- PAGE 141/1035 ---
Arithmetic scale. Use the arithmetic scale, not a semilogarithmic one,
because the semilog scale distorts vertical distances. 
Frying pan shape. Overall, the formation appears as a frying pan. The
handle, or lead-in phase, forms a trend line that slopes downward at an angle
of about 30 degrees to 45 degrees, more or less. Draw the trend line along the
daily high prices as the line signals a buying opportunity once pierced.
Unlike BARR tops, sometimes horizontal trend lines in the lead-in phase
contain valid BARR bottoms. Such situations are rare, though, and should be
avoided. The trend lines in this study are higher on the left and slope down-
ward—these give the best performance.
Down-sloping top trend line, lead-in height. Calculate the lead-in
height once a trend line forms. Do this by finding the widest distance from the

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Table 7.1
Identification Characteristics 
Characteristic
Discussion
Arithmetic scale
Use the arithmetic chart, not a semilogarithmic one.
Frying pan shape
The formation looks like a frying pan with the handle on the
left sloping downward to the pan. After a deepening decline
that takes prices into the pan base, prices level out and
eventually soar out the right side.
Down-sloping 
The handle forms a down-sloping trend line that approximates
top trend line,
0–45 degrees (but this varies with scaling). The handle portion 
lead-in height
of the formation is called the lead-in as it leads in to the bump
phase. The lead-in height measures from the trend line drawn
across the highs to the low (not necessarily the lowest low) of
the formation. Select the widest distance from the trend line to
the low, measured vertically, in the first quarter of the
formation. The duration of the lead-in should be at least a
month, but varies depending on the situation.
Bump phase
The bump is analogous to the frying pan base. The down-
sloping trend line deepens to 60 degrees or more. Prices drop
rapidly then level out and turn around, usually forming a
rounded turn. After the turn, prices move up and sometimes
pause at the 30-degree trend line before moving higher. The
bump height, as measured from the trend line to the lowest
low, should be at least twice the lead-in height. Strict
adherence to this rule is not required, but it serves as a good
general guideline.
Uphill run
Once prices lift out of the bump phase, they begin an uphill
run that carries prices higher.
Volume
Volume is typically high during the three critical parts of the
formation: formation start, bump start, and upward breakout.
However, high volume is not a prerequisite.

--- PAGE 142/1035 ---
trend line to the daily low, measured vertically, in the first quarter of the for-
mation. In Figure 7.2, the lead-in height calculation uses prices on June 16
(point A). On that day, the low is 17.63 and the trend line has a value of about
20.38. Thus, the lead-in height is the difference between these two, or 2.75.
The minimum bump height uses the lead-in height, so the calculation is
important.
Bump phase. After the lead-in phase comes the bump phase. Prices
decline rapidly, although not as rapidly as that shown in Figure 7.2, and form
a new trend line that slopes down at about 45 degrees to 60 degrees or more.
Volume is noticeably higher at the start of the bump, but selling pressure over-
takes buying demand and the truth finally comes out: There are problems with
the company. The stock continues down as the smart money and the momen-
tum players leave the stock in droves.
Eventually, downward pressure abates allowing the stock to recover. It
rounds over and touches the original 30-degree trend line. Here, it may move
lower for a while or it may sail right through the trend line. Over half of the
time, prices start moving higher, then throw back to the trend line before con-
tinuing up.
Uphill run; volume. Volume picks up as prices break out of the forma-
tion and move higher. Rising prices characterize the uphill run phase. 
Identification Guidelines

Bethlehem Steel Corp. (Steel (Integrated), NYSE, BS)
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
Jan 94
Feb
Mar
May 93
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Throwback to 
Trend Line
Bump Phase
Lead-in Phase
A
Uphill Run
Figure 7.2
Various components of a bump-and-run reversal bottom. A price
drop-off follows the lead-in phase where prices move in a narrow range. The bump
forms, then rounds upward as prices leave the bowl and move higher on the uphill
run to new highs.

--- PAGE 143/1035 ---
Focus on Failures
Figure 7.3 shows what a BARR bottom failure looks like. The stock starts its
ascent in June 1994 when it hits a low of 24.50 (not shown). Although the rise
is not a straight-line path, prices reach a new high a year later (the highest peak
on the left). Then it is downhill from there. The decline is quite orderly with
peaks that follow the trend line down. During early September, however,
prices drop rapidly on high volume as the bump forms. Prices quickly reach a
low of 33.63 before rebounding. Having sliced through the trend line and
moving just a bit higher, prices throw back and follow the trend line lower.
Prices following a trend line lower are not unusual, but what is unusual is that
prices do not continue their climb. Instead, they drop off the end of the trend
line and plummet. By late June, they slip to under $20 a share, less than half
what they were at the high.
Why did the BARR fail? This formation is not a perfect example of a
BARR bottom, but few formations are. In this case, the bump height is less
than twice the lead-in height. However, the height depends on how the trend
line is drawn. Drawing a trend line beginning from the peak at point A, the
bump to lead-in height is about 2 to 1. The new trend line also touches the
peak at B. So, if you wait for prices to move above the new trend line before

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Apple Computer Inc. (Computers & Peripherals, NASDAQ, AAPL)
Throwback
Bump Phase
Lead-in Phase
Jan 96
Feb
Jun 95
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
A
B
– 51
 – 50
 – 49
 – 48
 – 47
 – 46
 – 45
 – 44
 – 43
 – 42
 – 41
 – 40
 – 39
 – 38
 – 37
 – 36
 – 35
 – 34
 – 33
 – 32
 – 31
 – 30
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
Figure 7.3
A bump-and-run reversal bottom failure. The bump height is less than
twice the lead-in height, a clue that the pattern is not worth investing in. A trend
line drawn from point A to B (not shown) satisfies the bump to lead-in height
guideline. An investor waiting for prices to move above the new trend line would
not buy this stock.

--- PAGE 144/1035 ---
investing, you would not purchase this stock. Sometimes it is wise to draw
alternative views just to see how the chart pattern behaves. 
Statistics
Table 7.2 shows general statistics for BARR bottoms. 
Number of formations. I found 532 patterns in the stocks I looked at
using 500 stocks from mid-1991 to mid-1996 and another batch surrounding
the 2000 to 2002 bear market with a few others sprinkled between those
ranges. Most were found in a bull market because the duration was several
times the length of the bear market.
Reversal or continuation. Technically the pattern acts as a reversal, but
that is because six more patterns reverse than consolidate. Reversals perform
better than continuations, however.
Average rise. The average rise is a strong 38% in a bull market and 31%
in a bear market, beating the average rise of 36% and 25%, respectively, of
other chart pattern types. 
Rises over 45%. Continuing the strong showing, 25% to 34% of the
patterns I looked at posted rises over 45%. As you would expect, the BARR
pattern performs better in a bull market than a bear one.
Change after trend ends. What happens after the uptrend ends? Prices
decline between 29% and 34%, giving back most of the gain from the way up.
The larger decline is in a bear market, as one might guess.
Statistics

Table 7.2
General Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Number of formations


Reversal (R), continuation (C)
203 R, 209 C
66 R, 54 C
R/C performance
40% R, 36% C
31% R, 30% C
Average rise
38%
31%
Rises over 45%
142 or 34%
30 or 25%
Change after trend ends
–29%
–34%
Busted pattern performance
–28%a
–24%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
14%
–7%
Days to ultimate high 


Note: Minus sign means decline.
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 145/1035 ---
Busted pattern performance. Few busted patterns occur, so the perfor-
mance numbers are not solid. Still, they show decent declines. The problem
with trading a busted pattern is that a short throwback looks like a busted pat-
tern. Should prices rebound, as they do in most cases, your short position will
end in a loss. Trade busted patterns carefully.
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. The index had average gains of 14% in
a bull market, and it lost 7% in a bear market. The influence of the general
market on the average rise is less than what I would have expected. Between the
two markets, there was a 21 percentage point swing in the S&P but only a 7%
difference between the average rises.
Days to ultimate high. Patterns in a bull market take more than 6
months (186 days) to reach the ultimate high but about 3.5 months in a bear
market. This timeline means the rises in a bear market are steeper but they do
not climb as far.
Failure rates appear in Table 7.3 and they show respectable results. Few
patterns flame out before climbing at least 5%—in a bull market 2% fail and
in a bear market 1% fail. The failure rate increases as the maximum price rises.
Half the patterns in a bull market will climb less than 35%, and half in a bear
market will top out before rising 30%. For larger moves (over 10%), bull mar-
ket patterns show lower failures. 
How do you use this table? Let me give you an example. Say your cost of
trading is 5% and you want to make a 30% profit for a total of 35%. How
many patterns will fail to rise at least 35%? Answer: 54% in a bull market and
66% in a bear market. Between half and two-thirds of the trades you make will
fail to meet your goal. That means your winners will have to perform dramat-
ically to compensate for all the losers you will have.
Table 7.4 shows breakout- and postbreakout-related statistics. 

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Table 7.3
Failure Rates
Maximum Price 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market,
Rise (%)
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
5 (breakeven)
8 or 2%
1 or 1%

42 or 10%
7 or 6%

84 or 20%
26 or 22%

124 or 30%
39 or 33%

169 or 41%
54 or 45%

193 or 47%
69 or 58%

223 or 54%
79 or 66%

289 or 70%
95 or 79%

339 or 82%
108 or 90%
Over 75
412 or 100%
120 or 100%

--- PAGE 146/1035 ---
Formation end to breakout. Piercing the trend line is quick with this
pattern, taking between 3 and 4 days from the end of the pattern to a close
above the trend line. 
Yearly position. Where in the yearly price range does this pattern break-
out? Most of the time, the breakout is in the middle or low end of the yearly
price range. 
Yearly position, performance. Mapping performance over the yearly
price range, we find that the best performing BARRs are those with breakouts
far from the yearly high (meaning the low or middle). Those are the ones in
which you want to trade.
Throwbacks. Over half the patterns (59%) in a bull market and 73% in a
bear market throw back. The stocks return to the breakout price in a quick 7
days in a bear market and a more normal 11 days in a bull market. As with many
other chart patterns types, a throwback hurts performance, as Table 7.4 shows. 
Gaps. Gaps help performance in a bull market, but hurt it in a bear mar-
ket. With additional samples, the results might change.
Number of dual bumps. About 20% of the time, the BARR bottom has
a second bump. Prices touch the trend line on their way to the breakout then,
instead of continuing higher, they decline and form a second bump. 
Figure 7.4 shows a good example of a multiple bump BARR. The first
bump completes in mid-August 1993 when prices touch the down-sloping
trend line. If you purchased the stock at any time during the first bump, you
Statistics

Table 7.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market,
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Formation end to breakout
4 days
3 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring 
near the 12 month low (L), 
L40%, C41%, 
L36%, C53%, 
center (C), or high (H)
H19%
H12%
Percentage rise for each 12-month 
L41%, C41%, 
L39%, C27%,
lookback period
H29%
H32%a
Throwbacks
59%
73%
Average time to throwback ends
11 days
7 days
Average rise for patterns with throwback
37%
28%
Average rise for patterns without throwback
40%
39%
Performance with breakout gap
46%
25%a
Performance without breakout gap
37%
33%
Average gap size
$0.26
$0.18
Number of dual bumps
20%
21%a
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 147/1035 ---
would have been toast. From the high of 22.75 on August 19, the stock
declined to 17.38 on October 1, nearly a 25% fall.
After that, it is all uphill. The stock moves up smartly and crests at 28.50
in mid-January 1994. From the bump low, that is a 64% move and a 33% rise
from the breakout. Figure 7.4 imparts a valuable lesson: Consider waiting for
the upward breakout before buying into a situation. Not surprisingly, this les-
son applies to many formations, not just the BARR bottom.
The dual bump is unusual in that the second bump is lower than the first.
As mentioned, dual bumps are a rarity, occurring only 20% of the time. Of
course, that is scant comfort if you already bought into a situation and it begins
declining again.
Table 7.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate high.
Patterns in both markets perform similarly. They both have large numbers in
the over-70 column. At the other end of the scale, few patterns flame out in the
first week or two. Generally, the longer it takes to reach the ultimate high, the
larger the gain, so the table shows good news.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Inco Ltd (Metals & Mining (Div.), NYSE, N)
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
First Bump
Second Bump
Jan 94
Feb
May 93
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Figure 7.4
A dual bump-and-run reversal bottom. Consider waiting to buy the
stock until after it breaks out upward. Had you bought into this situation during
July, you would have lost money in the short term.
Table 7.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate High
Days:










>70
Bear market
9%
10%
6%
4%
6%
5%
5%
3%
6%
0%
47%
Bull market
7%
7%
5%
4%
3%
5%
2%
3%
3%
3%
59%

--- PAGE 148/1035 ---
Notice how the bear market patterns show a slight blip 35 days after a
breakout and, in a bull market, at 42 days. I have seen this blip in other pat-
terns. A month or so after the breakout and the uptrend weakens. Be prepared
for a trend change then (and another one 2 months after the breakout in a 
bear market).
How often does price rise to the level at the start of the pattern? The
answer depends on market conditions. In a bull market, 48% of the time the
ultimate high occurs within 15% of the starting price. In a bear market, 63%
stop within 15% of the old high. Figure 7.5 shows an example. Prices begin the
pattern at 32.88 and then form a descending triangle. In June, parts began
falling off the semiconductor stock. It plummeted over $4 to close at 23.75 on
June 7, then continued lower, reaching a low in June in the middle of the
bump phase. From the low, prices recovered and moved higher until reaching
a high just 25 cents below the price at the start of the BARR pattern.
Table 7.6 shows size statistics for the BARR bottom pattern.
Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. To use this infor-
mation, measure your pattern from the highest high to the lowest low and
divide by the breakout price (where price closes above the down-sloping trend
line). Compare the result with the median in Table 7.6. If your value is higher
than the median, then consider your pattern a tall one; lower than the median
means it is a short one. Trade tall patterns for the best performance.
Width. Wide patterns perform better than narrow ones. I used the
median length as the separator between narrow and wide.
Statistics

Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. (Semiconductor, NYSE, AMD)
– 34
 – 33
 – 32
 – 31
 – 30
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
Feb 93
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Lead-in
Bump
Uphill
Run
Descending
 
Triangle
Measure Rule
Sell Point
Figure 7.5
Bump-and-run reversal that stopped rising within 15% of its old highs.
Between 48% and 63% of bump-and-run reversal bottoms perform this way.

--- PAGE 149/1035 ---
Average formation length. BARRs are long patterns, averaging between
110 and 143 days or about 4 to 5 months long.
Height and width combinations. Patterns that are both tall and wide do
better than other combinations in a bull market. In a bear market, BARRs that
are both tall and narrow perform well. The worst performance comes from
patterns that are short and narrow, so avoid trading those.
Table 7.7 shows volume-related statistics, and it is as disappointing as
watching a helium-filled party balloon getting caught in the trees instead of
playing chicken with airplanes.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Table 7.7
Volume Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Rising volume trend performance
38%
31%
Falling volume trend performance
38%
31%
U-shaped volume pattern performance
40%
35%a
Dome-shaped volume pattern performance
38%
30%
Neither U-shaped nor dome-shaped 
32%
51%a
volume pattern performance
Heavy breakout volume performance
40%
27%
Light breakout volume performance
34%
35%
aFewer than 30 samples.
Table 7.6
Size Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Up Breakout
Up Breakout
Tall pattern performance
44%
39%
Short pattern performance
34%
25%
Median height as a percentage of breakout price
35.87%
46.95%
Narrow pattern performance
34%
29%
Wide pattern performance
42%
33%
Median length
120 days
98 days
Average formation length
143 days
110 days
Short and narrow performance
31%
24%
Short and wide performance
39%
28%a
Tall and wide performance
45%
38%
Tall and narrow performance
44%
41%a
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 150/1035 ---
Volume trend. The volume trend shows no performance difference 
for BARRs. 
Volume shapes. In a bull market, BARRs with U-shaped volume per-
formed best. In a bear market, BARRs with random-shaped volume did well,
but the samples are few.
Breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume helps performance in a bull
market, but hurts it in a bear market. 
Trading Tactics
Table 7.8 outlines trading tactics for BARR bottoms.
Measure rule. After properly identifying a BARR bottom, you will want
to determine how profitable is a trade likely to be. You do that using the mea-
sure rule. I changed the measure rule from a computation to simply the top of
the chart pattern. The highest high is the target, and prices reach the high 64%
to 68% of the time.
Wait for confirmation. The confirmation point is when price closes
above the trend line formed during the lead-in phase. Should the price close
above the trend line, buy the stock.
Sell at old high. I have discussed how often a stock showing a BARR bot-
tom stops near the old high (which is the start of the formation). Place a sell
order near the price level of the old high. That will keep your profits intact
should the stock then turn down. If you are reluctant to sell your holdings, why
not sell half when the stock reaches the old high, then see what happens?
Stops. As always, place a stop-loss order 0.15 below the nearest support
zone. Move the stop upward as the stock advances. That way, when prices turn
down, you will not lose too much. Only paying taxes is worse than riding a
stock up and following it all the way back down.
Trading Tactics

Table 7.8
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
The highest high in the pattern is the target.
Wait for confirmation
Waiting for the breakout improves investment performance.
The close should be above the down-sloping trend line
before you buy the stock.
Sell at old high
When prices rise to the old high, consider selling if the stock
shows weakness.
Stops
Place a stop 0.15 below prior resistance. As prices rise, raise
the stop.

--- PAGE 151/1035 ---
Sample Trade
Perhaps the most interesting way to illustrate trading tactics is by example.
John is new to investing, and he did not take the time to learn thoroughly
about BARR bottoms. As he flipped through his stock charts one day, he
noticed an intriguing situation developing in the stock depicted in Figure 7.6.
During August, the stock peaked, declined a bit, then formed a second minor
high. As the stock declined from the second high, John drew a tentative trend
line down connecting them. Soon, he noticed that the stock was descending in
a sort of channel. He drew a second trend line, parallel to the first, that con-
nected the lows.
However, the stock soon pierced through the second trend line and
moved lower. When it declined even further, John thought he recognized a
BARR bottom forming. He drew a third trend line, parallel to the other two
and lead-in height apart.
As the stock dipped below the lowest trend line, he believed that the
decline was at an end. So, the following day he pulled the trigger and bought
100 shares at 18.25. He was pleased to acquire the stock a bit below the clos-
ing price for the day.
For the next week, the stock shot upward and pierced the second trend
line. John was brimming with enthusiasm and believed that picking stocks was
an easy game, as he put it. As the stock moved into a consolidation period, John
showed no concern. Flat periods of trading often follow quick rises.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT)
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
 – 11
 – 10
 – 9
 – 8
 – 7
 – 6
 – 5
Jan 92
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Aug 91
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
BARR Trend Line
Stock Bought
Stock Sold
Parallel Trend Lines, Lead-in Height Apart
Figure 7.6
A bump-and-run reversal bottom failure in which John invested. He
finally sold the stock just 2 days before it reached its low.

--- PAGE 152/1035 ---
When the stock neared the top trend line, John calculated the target
price, using the old method instead of the highest high in the pattern. He
computed the lead-in height by subtracting the daily low from the trend line at
its widest part in the first quarter of the formation. He used the low of August
20, at 24, and subtracted this from the trend line value of 26, measured verti-
cally. This left him with a lead-in height of $2. John believed that the stock
would likely break out at about 21.25, so this gave him a target price of 23.25,
which is the lead-in height added to the breakout price.
John was confident that he could hold out for larger gains. From his pur-
chase point, he calculated that he would receive at least a 25% return if every-
thing worked out as planned.
For about a month, the stock moved sideways, but this did not alarm him.
He even expected the stock to decline a bit and recapture some of its quick
gains. Secretly he hoped that the stock would soon break out of its trading
range and head higher. He was confident that it would move up—it was only a
question of when.
He was wrong. Indeed, the stock did break out of its trading range, but it
headed lower, not higher. After it approached the top trend line, the stock con-
tinued down and touched the middle trend line. John knew that a stock often
retraces 38% to 62% of its gains. He grabbed his calculator and computed the
retrace value.
The stock reached a high of 21.43 in a straight-line run from the low at
18, a rise of about 3.50 points. Now the stock was retracing the gains and had
moved down to 18.75, a 78% retrace. Clearly, this was out of the realm of a
simple retrace. John suspected that a trend change had occurred, but hoped
that the pause he was seeing as it touched the middle trend line would give the
stock support and call an end to the decline. For a while, it did. The stock
paused for 3 days at the trend line then started moving lower again. It quickly
fell below the purchase price and headed down.
Although John had purchased the stock as a short-term play, he con-
vinced himself that he really liked the company and would not mind holding it
for the long term. Now, at least, that is what it would take for him to recoup
his losses and get out at breakeven.
The stock moved through the third trend line, heading lower. The easy
game was now turning into a disaster. John first considered selling on Decem-
ber 11, when the stock reached 12.75, for a 30% loss. He delayed the selling
decision by saying that the holding was a long-term one and he should expect
to come across such declines in the short term.
The next day, the stock closed higher, and it gave him renewed hope.
Indeed, it closed even higher the following day. But the 2-day recovery was an
illusion and the stock declined again. As it plunged below 12.75, John threw up
his hands and told his broker to dump the dog. He received a fill at 12.25, the
low for the day. Two days later, the stock bottomed out at about 10.75. From
the buy point, John lost 35%.
Sample Trade

--- PAGE 153/1035 ---
As upset as this made John, the stock was not finished tormenting him.
He continued to follow the stock and watched it move higher. He extended the
BARR trend line downward (Figure 7.7) and noticed that a new, larger BARR
had formed. After suffering through the large bump, the stock moved higher
until it touched the BARR trend line. Then, the stock followed it lower, unable
to pierce the resistance line.
During the week of March 27, 1992, the stock closed above the trend line
for the first time in months. The BARR was complete and a confirmed break-
out was occurring. Did John buy the stock? No. For several months, he
watched its progress as it moved higher almost week after week. Disgusted, he
quit following the stock.
In April 1994, John took another look at the stock and was surprised to
see that it continued moving higher. It had just reached a high of 50.13, a
climb of almost 370%. He grabbed his calculator and realized that his mistake
cost him over $3,000.
What did he do wrong? Several things. He did not wait for the BARR to
pierce the trend line and move higher. If he had, he would have purchased
closer to the low, saving him precious capital. Next, he did not cut his losses
short. After he bought the stock, he should have determined his sell point. The
middle trend line would have been a good place for a stop-loss order. In this
case, it would have taken him out of the stock at about 17.88, a small decline
from the purchase price of 18.25. Instead, he followed the stock down and
changed his investment philosophy from a short-term trade to a long-term
holding.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottoms
Varity Corp. (Machinery, NYSE, VAT)
 – 48
 – 46
 – 44
 – 42
 – 40
 – 38
 – 36
 – 34
 – 32
 – 30
 – 28
 – 26
 – 24
 – 22
 – 20
 – 18
 – 16
 – 14
 – 12
 – 10
 – 8
New, Larger BARR Bottom
Figure 7.7
A bump-and-run reversal bottom on a weekly scale. After the break-
out, the stock climbed over 350%.

--- PAGE 154/1035 ---
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations on selecting BARR bottoms
that perform well. Consult the associated table for more information.
• Use the identification guidelines to help select the pattern—Table 7.1.
• Select reversals in a bull market. They rise higher than in a bear mar-
ket—Table 7.2.
• Bear market failure rates start small, but bull markets do better for
gains over 10%—Table 7.3.
• Pick patterns with breakouts near the yearly low—Table 7.4.
• Throwbacks hurt performance. Look for overhead resistance before
trading—Table 7.4.
• Look for price weakness 5 to 6 weeks after the breakout—Table 7.5.
• Select patterns that are tall or wide. Avoid those that are both short and
narrow—Table 7.6.
• Heavy breakout volume helps bull market patterns, but light breakout
volume helps bear market BARRs—Table 7.7.
For Best Performance

--- PAGE 155/1035 ---


Bump-and-Run 
Reversal Tops
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Downward Breakouts
Appearance
Prices rise steadily along a trend line, bump
up, round over, then decline through the
trend line and continue down.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bearish reversal 
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
3 out of 21
4 out of 21
Break-even failure rate
5% 
1%
Average decline
19% 
27%
Change after trend ends
53% 
48%
Volume trend
Upward
Upward
Pullbacks
62% 
65%
Percentage meeting price target
78% 
90%
Surprising findings
The best performing patterns have breakouts
in the middle of the yearly price range.
Pullbacks hurt performance but breakout day
gaps help. Tall patterns perform better than
short ones.

--- PAGE 156/1035 ---
If you were thinking of buying stock in a company, wouldn’t it be wonderful if
you knew the purchase price would be less tomorrow? Of course! But how do
you predict tomorrow’s price? That is the problem I was researching when I
discovered the bump-and-run reversal top formation. I was trying to figure out
a reliable way to determine if tomorrow’s price would be higher or lower than
today’s and by how much.
I tried all sorts of mathematical games to boost the accuracy of the pre-
diction with only limited success. Then I moved to the visual world. I drew a
trend line along a stock chart and wondered if I could determine how far prices
would decline below the line. I looked at many stock charts and trend lines try-
ing to see if there was a relationship between a trend line and the breakdown
of the trend. That is when I discovered it: the bump-and-run formation—
BARF for short. I toyed with the idea of leaving the name as is but decided that
the investment community would not believe the veracity of the new forma-
tion. So, I changed the name to bump-and-run reversal (BARR), a slightly
more descriptive and palatable acronym.
Tour
As I looked at the various trend lines, I discovered that pronounced break-
downs share several characteristics. Look at Figure 8.1, a good BARR example.
The overall formation reminds me of a mountain range. The foothills at the
start of the formation are low and subdued, not venturing too far above the up-
sloping plain. Volume at the start of the formation is high but quickly recedes.
The mountains themselves rise well above the foothills on high volume.
Investor enthusiasm continues as prices round over at the top, then diminishes
on the far side. When the mountains end, prices decline sharply and continue
moving down. That is a BARR. Prices bump-up, round over, and run back
down again. The formation is the visual representation of momentum. The
base of the formation follows a trend line that always slopes upward. It signals
investors’ eagerness to acquire the stock. As each day goes by, investors bid
higher to reluctant sellers and the price rises.
Other momentum players eventually notice the rise in the stock price.
Many jump on the bandwagon the day after a surprisingly good earnings
announcement. That is when the bump begins. Volume spikes upward along
with the stock price. Quickly rising prices entice others to join the fray 
and that, in turn, sends the stock even higher. As momentum increases, 
prices jump to form a new, higher-sloping trend line. Then things start go-
ing wrong.
Supply catches up with demand. As that happens, the rise slows and the
smart money turns cautious. Investor enthusiasm wanes and the war between
supply and demand turns. The stock rounds over and starts heading down.
Tour

--- PAGE 157/1035 ---
When the smart money sees prices falling, they sell and the decline picks up
speed. Downward momentum increases and returns prices to the trend line.
At this point, buying enthusiasm may increase and send prices back up for 
one last try at a new peak. Usually, however, prices do not bounce off the
trend line but continue moving down. Sometimes there is a pause and some-
times prices just plunge straight through the resistance line, as illustrated 
in Figure 8.1.
Once prices pierce the trend line, volume increases as investors dump the
stock. This selling alarms more investors and the downward trend feeds on
itself. Eventually, after several months of declining prices, the selling pressure
abates and buying enthusiasm halts the downward slide. Prices tentatively level
out and perhaps even rebound a bit. Once the cause of the reversal fades from
memory, prices start rising again and the process begins anew.
Identification Guidelines
Table 8.1 outlines the various parts of the formation that are illustrated in
Figure 8.1.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. (Textile, NYSE, FLD)
 – 35
 – 34
 – 33
 – 32
 – 31
 – 30
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
Jan 94
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Nov 93
Dec
Lead-in 
Phase
Bump
Begins
Trend Line
Bump 
Phase
Downhill 
Run
Figure 8.1
Good example of a bump-and-run reversal. Prices move up along the
trend line in the lead-in phase, jump up during the bump phase, then crash down
through the trend line during the downhill run. Volume at the start of the forma-
tion and again at the start of the bump is usually high but tapers off as the bump
rounds over. About half the time volume picks up as prices pierce the trend line.

--- PAGE 158/1035 ---
Arithmetic scale. Use the arithmetic scale not a semilogarithmic one
because the semilog scale distorts vertical distance. 
Rising trend lines. In the figure, a trend line drawn below the lows in the
stock extends until it intersects prices as they decline in May. Volume is high
at the start of the pattern and the trend is up. That is a key consideration:
Prices must be rising. The trend line should be approximately 30 degrees, but
the degree of slope depends on the scaling used to view the chart. If the trend
line is flat or nearly so, it is not a good BARR candidate. A rising trend line shows
investor enthusiasm for the stock. However, the trend line should not be too
steep either. Steep trend lines (over 60 degrees or so) do not allow enough
room for the bump to complete properly.
Lead-in, lead-in height. The first part of the formation, called the lead-
in phase, leads to the bump phase. The lead-in phase should be at least 1 month
long and usually falls in the 2- to 3-month range, but can be considerably
longer. Prices oscillate up and down in this phase and have a range of at least $1
as measured from the highest high to the trend line. This range, called the lead-
in height, is calculated using prices from the first quarter of the formation.
Figure 8.1, for example, shows that the highest high during the first quar-
ter of the formation occurs on January 12, 1994, at 25.63. The trend line
Identification Guidelines

Table 8.1
Identification Characteristics 
Characteristic
Discussion
Arithmetic scale
Do not use a semilogarithmic scale; instead us an arithmetic one.
Rising trend line
A trend line connecting the lows rises steadily: no horizontal or
near-horizontal trend lines. The trend line usually rises at about
30–45 degrees (although this varies with scaling). Avoid trend
lines that are too steep (over 60 degrees): There is not enough
room for the bump.
Lead-in, lead-in height
The lead-in is the section just before prices move up sharply in
the bump phase. Lead-in prices should have a range of at least
$1 (preferably $2 or more), as measured from the highest high
to the trend line, vertically, during the first quarter of the
overall formation length. Minimum lead-in length is 1 month
with no maximum value.
Rounded bump
Prices rise up (trend line slope is 45–60 degrees or more) on
high volume usually after a favorable event (unexpectedly good
earnings, an analyst recommends or upgrades the stock, higher
store sales, that sort of thing). Prices eventually round over and
decline back to the 30 degree trend line. The bump must be at
least twice the lead-in height, measured from highest high to
the trend line, vertically.
Downhill run
After returning to the trend line, prices may bounce back up
and form additional bumps or slide along the trend line. Even-
tually prices drop through the trend line and continue down.

--- PAGE 159/1035 ---
directly below this date has a value of about 24.25, giving a lead-in height of
1.38. The height is important because the minimum bump height and target
price, calculated later, use this value. A more accurate approach is to use the
largest distance from the trend line to the high, which is not necessarily found
between the highest high and the trend line. Use whatever method makes you
feel comfortable.
During the lead-in phase, subdued price action looks as if the stock is
gathering strength for the bump phase. Prices do not move very far away from
the trend line and usually appear rounded. If you visualize the formation as a
mountain range, the lead-in phase represents the foothills.
Volume during the lead-in phase is high at the start. Often this is due to
events that occur just before the formation begins. Volume drops off until the
start of the bump, when it suddenly rises. The higher share turnover and
expanding enthusiasm for the stock forces prices up. In Figure 8.1, this price
rise occurs on February 17 and is accompanied by volume that is the highest in
half a year.
Rounded bump. Prices jump up at the bump start and quickly rise from
a low of 26.50 to a high of 34.38 during late March. Volume remains high
throughout this period then quickly tapers off as prices round over at the top.
Many times, the top takes on the appearance of a head-and-shoulders forma-
tion or a double or triple top. If you recognize any of these formations on your
chart, ignore the BARR top formation and obey the implications of the indi-
vidual formations.
The bump height, as measured from the highest high to the trend line,
should be at least twice the lead-in height. In this example, the bump height is
8 (that is, 34.38–26.38). This is more than twice the lead-in height of 1.38.
The reason for the minimum two-to-one ratio is arbitrary. The idea is to
make sure that investor enthusiasm and, hence, momentum are getting carried
away. An up-sloping trend line that turns into a bump with a higher sloping
trend line emphasizes the rising momentum. Sustaining such unbounded
enthusiasm for too long is difficult and the stock price eventually declines. In
Figure 8.1, that is exactly what happens. Prices round over and start heading
down. Sometimes the decline is orderly and sometimes it is choppy. In nearly
all cases, prices return to the trend line. Once there, the stock may do several
things. Fairly often prices bump up again, and that is called a BARR with a dual
bump or a dual BARR. Occasionally, a dual BARR consists of several bumps
but the result is still the same. Prices eventually fall below the trend line.
Downhill run. Sometimes prices slide up along the trend line for a
month or so before continuing down. At other times, prices drop straight
through the trend line, turn around and climb again, before ultimately drop-
ping. In a few rare cases, prices descend from the bump high and never make
it back to the trend line before moving higher. These cases commonly appear
on weekly or monthly price charts.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops

--- PAGE 160/1035 ---
Focus on Failures
In Figure 8.2, a weekly chart, the first BARR on the left shows high volume dur-
ing the initial stages of the bump, as you would expect. The bump height to lead-
in height ratio looks good (over 2:1), and clearly investor enthusiasm is high.
However, prices continue climbing instead of rounding over and heading down.
Contrast the failed BARR with the one in the center. The middle BARR
has a nicely rounded appearance. The volume pattern is what you would
expect: high at the start, at the start of the bump, and when prices cross the
trend line. However, prices drop below the trend line by just 4%. Any forma-
tion recovering after moving less than 5% below the breakout point is called a
5% failure.
The BARR on the right is a dual BARR. Prices near the trend line in late
March 1994, then just as quickly climb again forming a second peak before
dropping through the trend line. Often the peak of the second bump is below
the first.
On weekly and monthly price charts, you often see prices moving up steadily
over time. However, without the sharp bump-up of prices, the rising trend should
Focus on Failures

Caterpillar (Machinery (const/mining), NYSE, CAT)
 – 60
 – 58
 – 56
 – 54
 – 52
 – 50
 – 48
 – 46
 – 44
 – 42
 – 40
 – 38
 – 36
 – 34
 – 32
 – 30
 – 28
 – 26
 – 24
 – 22
 – 20
Failed BARR
5% Failure
Dual BARR
Figure 8.2
A bump-and-run reversal on a weekly chart. The formation on the left
fails as prices climb away instead of moving below the trend line. The rounded-
appearing center bump-and-run reversal has good volume characteristics—high vol-
ume at the formation start, bump start, and trend line crossing. However, prices
decline below the trend line just 4%. That is called a 5% failure. The right bump-and-
run reversal is a dual bump-and-run reversal formation because prices approach the
trend line in March, form a second peak, then drop below the trend line.

--- PAGE 161/1035 ---
not be labeled a budding BARR. The slope of the price trend line should rise from
about 30% at the start to 60% or higher during the bump phase.
To reduce the failure rate, wait for prices to close below the trend line.
Waiting boosts the success rate but reduces the profit that you would make if
you sold near the top. In the Trading Tactics section of this chapter, I show
you how to sell near the top before the decline really begins. That way you can
keep more of your profits or make even more by shorting.
Statistics
Table 8.2 shows general statistics for BARR tops.
Number of formations. BARR tops are plentiful. I found nearly 800 of
them with most occurring in a bull market (because it was longer than the
bear market). 
Reversal or continuation. Most of the patterns acted as a reversal of the
prevailing price trend, not as a consolidation. This occurence is even truer in a
bear market, where nearly all acted as reversals. Reversals perform better than
continuations in a bull market but worse in a bear market. This may not be an
accurate comparison because of the small sample size for continuations in a
bear market.
Average decline. As you would expect, the average decline in a bull mar-
ket (19%) is less than the superb results in a bear market (27%). Both are bet-
ter than the average decline for all chart pattern types.
Declines over 45%. Rarely does a bearish pattern have many samples
showing declines over 45%, and BARR tops are no exception. 

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Table 8.2
General Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Number of formations


Reversal (R), continuation (C)
556 R, 117 C
94 R, 10 C
R/C performance
–20% R, –13% C
–26% R, –32% C
Average decline
19%
27%
Declines over 45%
20 or 3%
7 or 7%
Change after trend ends
53%
48%
Busted pattern performance
39%a
31%a
Standard & Poor’s 500 change
8%
–11%
Days to ultimate low


Note: Minus sign means decline. 
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 162/1035 ---
Change after trend ends. If you can tell when the downward trend ends
(that is, when it reaches the ultimate low), buy the stock. The rise off the bot-
tom is huge: 53% in a bull market and 48% in a bear market.
Busted pattern performance. Table 8.2 shows the performance num-
bers for busted patterns, but few occur, so the numbers are likely to change.
Standard & Poor’s 500 change. In a bull market, the S&P 500 index
climbed 8%, and in a bear market, the index dropped 11%. Notice how a
strong bear market helped the average BARR decline 27%.
Days to ultimate low. In a bull market, it takes just over 2 months (68
days) to reach the ultimate low, but in a bear market, the drop takes 39 days.
Thus, patterns in a bear market have prices that drop farther in less time, mean-
ing a steeper decline. This finding suggests that if you own a stock with a BARR
top and prices confirm by closing below the trend line, sell immediately. Oth-
erwise, the price riptide may drag your profitable position into a losing one.
Table 8.3 lists failure rates for BARR tops. The failures start small, espe-
cially in a bear market. Just one pattern, or 1%, fails to drop at least 5%. As one
might expect, the failure rates in a bear market are below those of the bull mar-
ket. Half the patterns in a bear market will fail to drop at least 25%. In a bull
market, the halfway mark passes at about 18%, meaning half the patterns will
fail to decline more than 18%. Compared to other bearish chart patterns, these
failure rates are small.
One way to use the table is with the measure rule. Later, in Trading Tac-
tics I discuss the rule, but suppose it predicts a decline from 20 to 15, or 25%.
How likely is it that prices will actually decline that far? Table 8.3 shows the
answer. In a bull market, 73% will fail to drop at least 25% and in a bear mar-
ket, 59% will fail. Thus, in both markets, price is unlikely to make a 25% drop.
Table 8.4 shows breakout- and postbreakout-related statistics for 
BARR tops.
Statistics

Table 8.3
Failure Rates
Maximum Price 
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Decline (%)
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
5 (breakeven)
34 or 5%
1 or 1%

134 or 20%
6 or 6%

275 or 41%
27 or 26%

386 or 57%
45 or 43%

490 or 73%
61 or 59%

569 or 85%
72 or 69%

610 or 91%
85 or 82%

662 or 98%
99 or 95%

673 or 100%
104 or 100%
Over 75
673 or 100%
104 or 100%

--- PAGE 163/1035 ---
Formation end to breakout. The breakout happens quickly in BARR
tops, taking between 2 and 3 days. 
Yearly position. Most of the BARR tops I looked at had the breakout
near the yearly high. This makes sense as we are dealing with an up-sloping
trend line after a price run up.
Yearly position, performance. Where do the best performing BARR
tops breakout? The star performers have breakouts in the middle of the yearly
price range. 
Pullbacks. A pullback occurs between 62% and 65% of the time, and it
takes 10 days for the stock to return to the breakout price. When a pullback
happens, performance suffers.
Check for underlying nearby support—anything that might send prices
higher. If you short a stock and prices head back up, it may be a temporary sit-
uation caused by a pullback. Prices should return to the breakout price then,
eventually, resume their downward trip. If they continue moving higher, close
out your short position. If they continue down, consider adding to your short
position or opening a new one.
Gaps. Breakout day gaps help performance. Notice that the bear market
gap size is double the bull market size.
Number of dual bumps. Sometimes prices will bounce off the trendline
and form another bump. That is what I call a dual bump. Compare Figure 8.3
with Figure 8.4. The stock in Figure 8.3 has a bump with a rounded appear-
ance, giving investors plenty of time to sell the stock near the high. Figure 8.4

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Table 8.4
Breakout and Postbreakout Statistics
Bull Market,
Bear Market, 
Description
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Formation end to breakout
3 days
2 days
Percentage of breakouts occurring near the
L11%, C41%, 
L7%, C41%,
12-month low (L), center (C), or high (H)
H48%
H52%
Percentage decline for each 12-month 
L18%, C20%, 
L29%a, C32%,
lookback period
H18%
H23%
Pullbacks
62%
65%
Average time to pullback ends
10 days
10 days
Average decline for patterns with pullback
18%
24%
Average decline for patterns without pullback
21%
32%
Performance with breakout gap
20%
33%a
Performance without breakout gap
19%
26%
Average gap size
$0.40
$0.90
Number of dual bumps
28%
38%
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 164/1035 ---
Statistics

MagneTek, Inc. (Electrical Equipment, NYSE, MAG)
– 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
 – 13
 – 12
 – 11
Generally Rounded Bump
Jan 93
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Oct 92
Nov
Dec
Figure 8.3
A bump-and-run reversal with a rounded bump occurs 76% of the
time, on average. Notice the premature downward breakouts in mid-April, a week
or two before the actual breakout. The ultimate low reached in October is at a
price of 12.25, a decline of over 50%.
Micron Technology (Semiconductor, NYSE, MU)
 – 100
 – 96
 – 92
 – 88
 – 84
 – 80
 – 76
 – 72
 – 68
 – 64
 – 60
 – 56
 – 52
 – 48
 – 44
 – 40
 – 36
 – 32
 – 28
 – 24
 – 20
 – 16
 – 12
Feb 95
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
First Bump
Second Bump
Figure 8.4
A bump-and-run reversal with a pointed-looking first bump, leaving
investors precious little time to get out of the stock. Many semiconductor stocks
showed similar price patterns in late 1995, setting the stage for an industry-wide
downturn. The ultimate low reached in mid-January 1996 comes after a decline of
nearly 70%.

--- PAGE 165/1035 ---
shows a chart pattern with a much narrower peak. Investors had only a few days
to catch the top before prices moved down quickly. The chart in Figure 8.4 is
also a dual BARR. There is a second smaller bump just before prices head
below the trend line. Dual or multiple bump BARRs occur 38% of the time
with only 8% of second or additional bumps having peaks that rise above the
first bump.
Table 8.5 shows a frequency distribution of time to the ultimate low. As
with other bearish chart patterns, we find that many flame out early. By that, I
mean it does not take a long time to reach the ultimate low. Almost half (24 +
14 + 11 = 49%) of the bear market patterns bottom in less than 3 weeks.
BARRs in bull markets do better, but 39% reach the ultimate low in 3 weeks.
At the other end of the scale, where large declines come into play, we find that
17% of bear market patterns have not found the ultimate low in less than 70
days. For bull markets, 30% have not bottomed by day 70. 
Notice the slight rise in patterns bottoming out around day 35 (bear mar-
ket) and day 56. If you short a stock in a bear market, the trend may change a
month after the breakout, so be on the lookout for that.
Table 8.6 shows size statistics. 

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Table 8.5
Frequency Distribution of Days to Ultimate Low
Days:










>70
Bear market 
24%
14%
11%
6%
9%
4%
5%
6%
2%
3%
17%
Bull market 
22%
9%
8%
8%
7%
4%
3%
4%
2%
3%
30%
Table 8.6
Size Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Tall pattern performance
21%
29%
Short pattern performance
18%
25%
Median height as a percentage of breakout price
43.48%
45.47%
Narrow pattern performance
20%
25%
Wide pattern performance
18%
29%
Median length
161 days
127 days
Average formation length
192 days
131 days
Short and narrow performance
18%
25%
Short and wide performance
16%
25%a
Tall and wide performance
20%
31%
Tall and narrow performance
24%
25%a
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 166/1035 ---
Height. Tall patterns perform better than short ones. I computed the dif-
ference between the highest high in the pattern and the lowest low and then
divided by the breakout price. Values above the median I considered tall; val-
ues below the median, short. Do the computation for your pattern, and trade
only tall ones.
Width. Narrow patterns perform better than tall ones in a bull market,
but do worse in a bear market. I used the median length as the divider between
narrow and wide.
Average formation length. The average pattern length measures
between 4 months (bear market) and 6 months (bull market).
Height and width combinations. The best combination in a bull mar-
ket associates with patterns both tall and narrow. In a bear market, tall and
wide ones do well. Avoid BARRs that are short and wide; they perform worst.
Table 8.7 shows volume-related statistics. Judging from the numbers,
downward breakouts in a bull market are not influenced by volume. The fol-
lowing analysis pertains to bear markets.
Volume trend. BARRs with a falling volume trend performed better
than did those with a rising volume trend. 
Volume shapes. BARRs with U-shaped volume performed best. BARRs
with a random shape performed worst.
Breakout volume. Heavy breakout volume helped propel BARRs in a
bear market to outsized gains.
Trading Tactics
Table 8.8 lists tools to help judge when to sell a stock that contains a BARR as
well as the minimum price decline (the measure rule—discussed later) to expect
Trading Tactics

Table 8.7
Volume Statistics
Bull Market, 
Bear Market, 
Description
Down Breakout
Down Breakout
Rising volume trend performance
19%
25%
Falling volume trend performance
19%
30%a
U-shaped volume pattern performance
19%
29%a
Dome-shaped volume pattern performance
19%
27%
Neither U-shaped nor dome-shaped volume 
19%
23%a
pattern performance
Heavy breakout volume performance
19%
28%
Light breakout volume performance
19%
25%
aFewer than 30 samples.

--- PAGE 167/1035 ---
from such a formation. As you view your stock charts periodically, some stocks
will follow trend lines upward. These are the ones to monitor closely. Occa-
sionally, one will begin a rapid climb on high volume and enter the bump phase.
Warning and sell lines. By definition, a BARR is only valid when the
bump height, as measured from the highest high to the trend line, is at least
twice the lead-in height. Two lines parallel to the trend line assist in that deter-
mination. The first line, called the warning line, is lead-in height above the
trend line. A second trend line, parallel to the first two and lead-in height
above the warning line, is the sell line.
The warning line serves as a signal that a BARR may be forming. Once
prices move solidly above the line, consider doing any fundamental or techni-
cal research on the stock to prepare yourself for a sale.
By the time prices touch the sell line, you should have a firm grasp of the
company, industry, and market outlook. The sell line is not an automatic sell
trigger, but it does confirm that a BARR is present. The sell line touch indi-
cates that the momentum players have the upper hand. The game could con-
tinue for several weeks or months before the downhill run phase sets in, so do
not be in too much of a rush to sell. Since most bumps appear rounded, there
is ample time to sell the stock. By waiting, you are giving the momentum play-
ers additional time to push the stock even higher.
However, there are situations when you will want to pull the trigger
quickly. If the company, industry, or market look dicey, then perhaps it is time
to take profits. You might not be selling at the exact top, but you never go
broke taking a profit. Also, if the bump does not appear rounded, then consider
selling. A quick decline often follows a quick rise.
Figure 8.5 shows the BARR trend line and the parallel warning and sell
lines, each line lead-in height from the other. The chart is on a weekly scale

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Table 8.8
Trading Tactics 
Trading Tactic
Explanation
Measure rule
Compute the lead-in height (see Table 8.1 for the definition) and
subtract the result from the breakout price. The result is the
minimum price move to expect. About 8 out of 10 stocks meet
their price targets.
Warning line
Drawn parallel to the trend line and lead-in height above it. The
line warns that the stock is making a move and is entering the
sell zone, an area between the warning and sell lines.
Sell line
A second trend line parallel to the warning line and lead-in
height above it. Consider selling when prices touch the sell line,
especially if the bump is narrow. Delay selling if prices continue
moving up. Draw additional lines parallel to the original trend
line and lead-in height above the prior line. When the stock
rounds over and touches the lower trend line, sell it.

--- PAGE 168/1035 ---
and emphasizes the relaxed nature of some BARRs. If you owned the stock
depicted in Figure 8.5 and sold it when prices pierced the sell line moving
down, you would not have sold at the top. However, you would have avoided
the 40% decline that followed. The decline also points out that it can be easy
to make money, on paper, in the stock market but difficult to keep it.
Measure rule. Figure 8.5 also shows the measure rule in action. The
measure rule is a method used to predict the minimum price decline of the
stock. For BARRs in this study, about 8 out of 10 stocks decline below the pre-
dicted price.
To compute the predicted minimum decline, calculate the lead-in height
by splitting the formation along the trend line into four equal parts. In the first
quarter of the formation, compute the height from the highest high to the
trend line, measured vertically (or use the widest distance between the two).
Subtract the result from where the trend line is pierced, heading down (the
breakout). In Figure 8.5, the lead-in height is 3.50 (that is, 21.50–18). The tar-
get price is thus 21.63 (25.13–3.50), reached during the week of the breakout.
After the breakout, the stock rises back up to meet the trend line before
resuming its decline. Since a trend line denotes a resistance area when
approached from below, it is no surprise prices turn away. Prices form a dou-
ble top in the July to September period and plunge downward.
Trading Tactics

Comsat Corp. (Telecom. Services, NYSE, CQ)
 – 35
 – 34
 – 33
 – 32
 – 31
 – 30
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
 – 18
– 17
 – 16
 – 15
 – 14
92 F M A M J J
A S O N D 93

F
M
95 F
F
M
A M J
J A
M A M
J J
A
S O N D
S O
N D
Sell Line
Warning Line
BARR Trend Line
Sell Here When Prices 
Move Down and 
Touch the Sell Line
A Double Top 
Forms After 
Meeting Resistance 
from the Trend Line
Predicted 
Minimum Price 
Target
Double Top
Figure 8.5
Bump-and-run reversal trend line and two parallel warning and sell
lines. There is plenty of time to take profits in this bump-and-run reversal. The stock
reached a low of 17.50 in December, a 40% decline from the sell point in July. Also
shown in the July to September period is a double top.

--- PAGE 169/1035 ---
Sample Trade
Jenny is a librarian. Before she goes home at the end of each day, she logs onto
the Internet and checks her stock portfolio. She did not notice it at first, but by
mid-September, Jenny spotted a BARR forming in a stock she owned (Figure
8.6). She spent an hour searching the Internet for anything she could find
about the company. She checked the fundamentals, analysts’ recommenda-
tions, insider buying and selling patterns, and anything else she could think of.
She reviewed the reasons she bought the stock. Using the Peter Lynch
style of investing—that of buying a stock one is familiar with—held a special
appeal to her. She liked shopping at the grocery store chain and the products
they sold were something she could really sink her teeth into. She felt com-
fortable owning the stock.
Jenny printed out the price chart and examined the BARR in detail. She
drew the trend line along the bottom, divided the length of it into four equal
parts, and computed the lead-in height. Then she drew the warning and sell
lines parallel to the trend line, each separated by the lead-in height. She com-
puted the minimum target price to which the stock was likely to decline. From
the current price of 30, the target price was 23, a decline of almost 25%. Even
though she still liked the stock, such a large decline made her nervous.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops
Winn Dixie Stores Inc. (Grocery, NYSE, WIN)
– 42
 – 41
 – 40
 – 39
 – 38
 – 37
 – 36
 – 35
 – 34
 – 33
 – 32
 – 31
 – 30
 – 29
 – 28
 – 27
 – 26
 – 25
 – 24
 – 23
 – 22
 – 21
 – 20
 – 19
Sell Lines
Sell Lines
BARR Trend Line
Stock Sold Here
Predicted 
Minimum 
Price Decline
Jan 93
Feb
Mar
Apr
Jun 92
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Figure 8.6
Detailed bump-and-run reversal with sell lines. As described in the
Sample Trade, Jenny raised her sell point as the stock climbed. Eventually, she sold
the stock the day after it pierced a lower sell line.

--- PAGE 170/1035 ---
She looked back through the chart price history and searched for support
zones so she could better gauge the area where any decline might stop. The
first support area was in the 23 to 24 zone, where a prior advance had paused.
Interestingly, that was also the predicted decline point for the stock. If the
stock fell below the support point, she noticed a second, more robust support
area between 20 and 22.
What of the possible reward? How high could she expect the stock to
rise? Long-term price charts were no help as the stock was making new highs
almost daily. Jenny shrugged her shoulders as there was no way to determine
where the rise would stop. Her only guess was that it might pause at 35, 40, or
45, price points where investors might decide to sell. Any one of those points
could turn the stock downward, she decided. Even the current 30 level might
be the highest price the stock sees.
After her analysis was complete, she was still confident that the stock held
promise of additional gains. As with any stock caught by upward momentum,
there was no telling how high the stock would climb before it stopped. She
decided to hang onto the stock. If the stock declined to the warning line, 
she would sell it. She placed a stop-loss order at 27.50, the current value of the
warning line.
During late September and into the start of October, the stock followed
the sell line upward. On October 12, the stock jumped upward again. After a
week or so, Jenny was able to draw another sell line parallel to the original
BARR trend line that intersected stock prices. She decided that should the
stock fall to the lower sell line, she would dump the stock. She raised her stop-
loss point to 31. But the stock did not return to the lower sell line.
The stock reached a minor high of 34.38 on October 19, then retraced
some of its prior gains. It curled around and reached a low of 32.88 before
turning around. Jenny printed out another price chart and drew a new trend
line. This line had a slope of about 60 degrees. She smiled as the BARR was
performing exactly as predicted.
During the first part of December, prices pierced the 60 degree trend line
when the stock began moving sideways. Jenny suspected that the rise was nearly
over, but one could never tell for sure until it was too late. She decided that should
the stock decline below the latest sell line, she would close out her position.
The stock moved up again. A few days after Christmas, the stock reached
a new high of 39.75 and Jenny was able to draw another sell line. During the
next 2 weeks, the stock declined to the lower sell line, then rebounded to chal-
lenge its recent high. On January 15, it peaked at 39.88, a smidgen below the
40 resistance number she estimated earlier.
To Jenny, the day looked like a one-day reversal, but she could not be sure.
Taken together, the two highest points looked like a double top, but the reces-
sion between them was not deep enough to qualify and the two peaks were a bit
too close together. Still, it was a warning sign and it made her nervous.
Sample Trade

--- PAGE 171/1035 ---
Less than a week later, the stock declined below the lower sell line.
Should she sell or hold on for additional gains? She looked back at the profit
she had made so far and decided not to be greedy. She sold the stock at 36.75
on January 22. The next trading day, the stock closed up 1.25 at 38, and she
was crestfallen.
She continued to monitor the stock and watched it hesitantly move
higher over the next 2 weeks. She tried to take solace in the large profit she
achieved, but it was little comfort in the face of missed gains. Did she sell too
soon? On February 23, her question was answered when the stock dropped
below her sell point, heading down.
Jenny watched the stock drop to 35 and find support at that level. Then,
it continued moving down. In early April, the stock declined below the origi-
nal trend line and she calculated the minimum target price of 31. This was
reached within the week and the stock continued falling.
She turned her attention to other interesting situations and forgot her
trade until July 1994. By chance, she pulled up a chart of the company and was
horrified to see that the stock had declined to a low of about 21, almost a 50%
decline from the high.
For Best Performance
The following list includes tips and observations to help select better perform-
ing BARR tops. Consult the associated table for more information.
• Follow the identification guidelines to select BARR tops—Table 8.1.
• Select BARRs in a bear market for the largest average decline—Table 8.2.
• The decline in a bear market is steeper than in a bull market—Table 8.2.
• Pick BARRs in a bear market for the lowest failure rate—Table 8.3.
• Select patterns with breakouts in the middle of the yearly price range—
Table 8.4.
• Pullbacks hurt performance. Look for underlying support before trad-
ing—Table 8.4.
• Breakout day gaps help performance—Table 8.4.
• Almost half of the bear market patterns reach the ultimate low in fewer
than 3 weeks. Look for a trend change a month after the breakout—
Table 8.5.
• Pick tall patterns and avoid those that are both short and wide—
Table 8.6.
• A falling volume trend may suggest better postbreakout performance
in a bear market—Table 8.7.

Bump-and-Run Reversal Tops

--- PAGE 172/1035 ---


Cup with Handle
RESULTS SNAPSHOT
Upward Breakouts
Appearance
Looks like a cup profile with the handle on
the right.
Reversal or continuation
Short-term bullish continuation
Bull Market
Bear Market
Performance rank
13 out of 23
9 out of 19
Break-even failure rate
5%
7%
Average rise
34%
23%
Change after trend ends
–30%
–34%
Volume trend
Downward
Upward
Throwbacks
58%
42%
Percentage meeting price target
50%
27%
Surprising findings
Patterns that are tall, have short handles, and
a higher left cup lip perform better.
See also
Bump-and-Run Reversal Bottom; Rounded
Bottom
